


Results at a glance: Evaluation of the Consumer Product Safety Program


Program context 
In Canada,  consumer products and cosmetics are not subject to pre-market approval.  Industry is responsible for ensuring that the consumer products and cosmetics it  makes, imports, advertises, or sells are safe. The Consumer Product Safety  Program (CPSP), co-delivered by the Healthy Environments and Consumer Safety  Branch and Regulatory Operations and Enforcement Branch at Health Canada  promotes, monitors, verifies, and enforces compliance with relevant  legislations and regulations to help mitigate any health or safety risked posed  by consumer products and cosmetics.
Evaluation approach 
OAE collected  information from various sources, including interviews with internal and  external key informants, a survey of industry representatives, case studies,  and a review of internal and public documents.
The  following elements made up the evaluation approach: 

document  and file review
key  informant interviews
financial  data review
performance  data review
case  studies
survey

What the Evaluation Found 
CPSP’s  activities have had various positive impacts, including enhanced surveillance  capacity to detect emerging issues and high levels of voluntary compliance on  the part of industry. Consumers have some awareness of Health Canada’s role,  but there are opportunities to further expand consumer awareness in partnership  with other organizations and empower consumers to make safe choices –  particularly in the area of online shopping, where changing trends in consumer  behaviour introduce new risks.
The CPSP design  and delivery is seen as efficient, supported by robust governance and directed  effort in high-impact or high-risk areas. The Program efficiently selects tools  to address emerging issues and challenges, with a focus on industry co-operation  as a first course of action. Flexible features of the Acts and Regulations for  consumer products, cosmetics, and vaping products, including general  prohibitions, allow CPSP to respond to health or safety risks in a timely  manner. It will be important to continue to revisit supporting legislation and  regulations as they age, as to ensure they continue to respond to a rapidly  evolving consumer marketplace. 
There were many  examples of innovation and experimentation in Program delivery, though for many  of these initiatives, quantifiable evidence of the efficiency gained through  these approaches was not yet available. Measuring impacts on efficiency will be  important to identify and advance successful practices in the future.
  Partnership  with a variety of stakeholders has supported effectiveness by amplifying  messaging, expanding intelligence, and expediting responses to safety issues.  While information sharing certainly takes place, external organizations that  collaborate with Health Canada in the area of product safety (including  industry and consumer organizations) would appreciate more transparency around  processes and factors informing decision making in areas such as risk  assessment and risk management.
Recommendations

Given  the relevance and increasing importance of e-commerce as an issue in consumer  product safety, consider ways to expand current efforts in this area to help  address key issues.
Examine ways to increase transparency on  CPSP processes to respond to consumer product safety issues, for example by  providing more information on how risk assessments are conducted and increased  detail on the process for instrument choice during risk management.
As the program continues to introduce  innovative practices, develop and implement performance metrics to determine  the success and scalability of projects.






Report a problem or mistake on this page












Please select all that apply:

A link, button or video is not working



It has a spelling mistake



Information is missing



Information is outdated or wrong



Login error when trying to access an account




I can't find what I'm looking for



Other issue not in this list



Submit



Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries, contact us.










Date modified:
2022-11-10


