


Business Registration Evaluation Report


Final Report
Corporate Audit and Evaluation Branch October 2012 




Table of Contents

 Executive Summary 
 1. Introduction 
 2. Background 
 3. Evaluation Scope and Constraints 
 4. Methodologies 
 5. Evaluation Findings

 5.1 Efficiency and effectiveness of registration 
 5.2 Coordination of business registration within the CRA 
 
 6. Conclusion 
 7. Recommendations 
 8. ABSB Management Response 



 Executive Summary 
Introduction  In June 2011, the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) Management Audit and Evaluation Committee approved the Business Registration Evaluation Framework. The framework identified two issues to be pursued as part of the evaluation study: (1) is business registration administered effectively and efficiently; and (2) is business registration adequately coordinated within the CRA? Background  The business number (BN) was implemented in 1994 to provide businesses with a single identifier to use when interacting with federal and provincial governments. The BN process was designed to allow businesses to provide information once to be used often by different participating government organizations thereby decreasing the administrative burden on businesses and reducing duplication across government programs. To date, 6 federal departments and agencies and numerous provincial government organizations have adopted the BN to deliver over 100 programs. The CRA is the registrar for all those that have adopted the BN. The Business Number Division (BND), Business Returns Directorate (BRD), Assessment and Benefit Services Branch (ABSB) is functionally accountable for ensuring that businesses are accurately and efficiently registered. However, a number of other areas across the CRA have been delegated the authority to register business accounts as part of their operations in an effort to provide efficient and timely service. In 2010-2011, a total of 339,647 new businesses were registered for 398,010 business accounts using various registration methods. Currently, there are just over 7.7 million accounts with a BN. Methodology  Various methodologies were employed to address the evaluation issues including interviews of CRA staff and management, data analysis, examination of the practices of and interviews with other tax administrations, and literature reviews. Findings and Conclusions  While the CRA efficiently processes applications, program costs vary significantly depending on the method of registration chosen.  Registration through the online option appears to be the most cost efficient and effective registration method. There are inconsistencies in obtaining information and incomplete registration data can adversely affect risk assessment and other compliance activities. Lastly, the CRA has not provided BRD with a comprehensive compliance and verification mandate with corresponding oversight responsibilities for business registration. Without clearly defined roles and responsibilities there are risks to the effective administration of the business registration process. Recommendations  
A committee should be struck to examine policies and procedures and any legislation in support of or implicated by BN registration to ensure the CRA is obtaining and has the authority to obtain information at the time of registration to assist it in carrying out its compliance efforts. 
Whether by committee or through other means, an examination should be conducted of the current methods of registration to ensure that the CRA is offering the most cost efficient and effective methods that take full advantage of technology, existing data, and verification/validation processes. 
The mandate, roles, responsibilities and resource base of the BND should be examined to ensure it has the means, accountability and authority to deliver a comprehensive and effective business registration program.



 1. Introduction 
The Management Audit and Evaluation Committee approved the framework for an evaluation of business registration in June 2011. The evaluation study focused on the issues of registration efficiency, effectiveness, and coordination within the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA). This report presents the findings, conclusions, and recommendations of the evaluation.


 2. Background 


2.1 What is a BN?
A business number (BN) is a nine digit number followed by a two letter four digit program account identifier.  For example, a business that wants to register with the CRA for a BN, one GST/HST account, and two payroll accounts would receive a BN and account identifiers as follows: 
Business Number:  123456789 
GST/HST program account:  123456789 RT 0001 
1st payroll program account:  123456789 RP 0001 
2nd payroll program account: 123456789 RP 0002
 The BN was implemented in 1994 to provide businesses with a single identifier to use when interacting with federal and provincial governments. The BN process was designed to allow businesses to provide information once to be used often by different participating government organizations thereby decreasing the administrative burden on businesses and reducing duplication across government programs. To date, 6 federal departments and agencies and numerous provincial government organizations have adopted the BN to deliver over 100 programs. The CRA is the registrar for all those that have adopted the BN.


2.2 Program Description
Prior to the introduction of the BN, businesses were required to register with and obtain identifiers from a variety of different program areas within the CRA, i.e. payroll, goods and services tax/harmonized sales tax (GST/HST), import-export, and/or income tax. Since its implementation, businesses can register through multiple sources by a variety of means to obtain a BN for CRA purposes - by mail or fax, telephone, online through the CRA's website, or automatically if an entity is incorporated through a BN partner. These multiple options were introduced to make it easier and faster for businesses to register accounts with an expectation that it would maximize the number of businesses who would voluntarily register and assist in minimizing taxpayer burden.  A number of areas have the authority to register business accounts across the CRA, however the Business Number Division (BND), Business Returns Directorate (BRD), Assessment and Benefit Services Branch (ABSB) is functionally accountable for ensuring that businesses are accurately and efficiently registered. In 2010-2011, a total of 339,647 businesses were registered for 398,010 business accounts using various registration methods. At the end of 2010-2011 the CRA reported that there were 5.8 million businessesFootnote 1 registered with the CRA representing 7.7 million business accounts. Approximately 15% of total registrations were processed by Business Number Services (BNS) sections within the seven Tax Centres (TCs) across the country. The BNS units are responsible for registering businesses that apply by mail and fax and are identified in the Canada GazetteFootnote 2. ABSB has functional authority for the BNS units.  Almost 18% of total registrations were processed through the Business Registration Online (BRO) portal available on the CRA website. BRO is tailor-made for small and medium-sized businesses that do not have complex registration requirements. Telephone registrations are processed by agents located in 4 Business Enquiries Call Centres across the country and account for just over 30% of registrations. Roughly 3% of new registrations are processed at local Tax Service Offices (TSOs). And, about 1% of businesses are registered by the Non-Filer/Non-Registrant programs in local TSOs and through the Registration Identification Project (RIP) operating out of the Summerside TC. These registration functions fall within the responsibility of the Taxpayer Services and Debt Management Branch (TSDMB).  Finally, just under 31% of BN registrants are automatically provided with a corporate BN account upon incorporation with federal and provincial partners. Industry Canada and the partner provinces provide the CRA with information obtained at the point of incorporation pursuant to the terms and conditions of a number of Memoranda of Understanding. The CRA agreed to accept this information in order to facilitate registration of corporate accounts. Figure 1 provides a breakdown of the total number of accounts registered in 2010-2011 by the various methods of registration. Figure 1   Business Accounts Registered in 2010-2011 by Method of Registration 







Source: CAEB BN data analysisFootnote 3 


2.3 Legislative authority
There is no legislation that governs BN registration; nothing that stipulates how information should be provided or what standardized information is required. Depending on the source from which registration is being sought (i.e. a provincial government, Industry Canada or the CRA) registration requirements differ from source to source. Of the various Acts that the CRA is responsible for administering, BN is referenced in the Income Tax Act (ITA) and Excise Tax Act (ETA). Section 248(1) of the ITA defines business number as the number (other than the social insurance number) used by the Minister to identify: 
a corporation or partnership, or
any other association or taxpayer that carries on a business or is required by this Act to deduct or withhold an amount from an amount paid or credited or deemed to be paid or credited under this Act and of which the Minister has notified the corporation, partnership, association or taxpayer.
 Section 240(1) of the ETA requires every person who makes a taxable supply in Canada to register for the purposes of the act and Section 241(1) allows the Minister to register any person applying and assign a registration number.


2.4 Registration and compliance
Business registration is one of the CRA's four compliance pillars. The sole purpose of business registration as it relates to tax administration is to obtain information that supports compliance activities. It provides the CRA with the opportunity to obtain the necessary information to ensure that businesses are appropriately notified of obligations, are sent forms and reminders, and to address compliance issues as they arise. Business registration is not only the entry point to CRA programs but, as shown in Figure 2, BN information is at the core of all subsequent assessing, accounting, and compliance activities. Figure 2   Impact of BN InformationFootnote 4  







Source: Modified graphic from the BNS Training Manual Businesses requesting a BN from the CRA are asked to provide certain information regardless of business lineFootnote 5 or business typeFootnote 6 or business registration methodFootnote 7. The nature of the requested information is predominantly tombstone type information (e.g. name, address, phone number and proof of identification in the form of a social insurance number (SIN) of the owner, partners, corporate directors or officers) as well as information about the business including a description of the major business activity.  Business registration information is uploaded to the majority of the CRA's operational data systems. The information assists CRA compliance efforts such as risk assessment of tax non‑compliance, identifying compliance workloads within various branches and facilitating the work of auditors, collectors, and investigators. Ensuring that business registration information is both complete and accurate is crucial to the success of these tax compliance activities - the single purpose of business registration for tax administration is to facilitate compliance with tax obligations. 


 3. Evaluation Scope and Constraints 
The scope of this evaluation was limited to an examination of registration processing for CRA business accounts. The focus does not extend to the CRA's relationship with external partners.  Based on consultations and research conducted in preparation of the evaluation framework, the Program Evaluation Division (PED) identified two issues as follows.  Issue 1: Is business registration administered effectively and efficiently?  To answer this issue our examination included an assessment of the completeness and, to the extent possible, accuracy of registration information, as well as a review of the validation and authentication processes. We also explored the effect registration data quality may have on downstream compliance activities. And, we conducted a review of the efficiency of registration processes across all responsible areas within the CRA.  Issue 2: Is business registration adequately coordinated within the CRA?  To answer this issue we examined the extent to which roles and responsibilities governing registration were clear and appropriately assigned and whether collaboration is resulting in enhancements to business registration processes. We also assessed the extent to which collaboration exists both across all parties, within the CRA, responsible for registration processes and between registration processing units and the users of the registration information.  Constraints  Although we identified accuracy as one of the attributes of program effectiveness, we were unable, except in very limited circumstances, to examine the accuracy of registration data due to time constraints.


 4. Methodologies 
The following data collection and analysis methodologies were used in the conduct of this evaluation: 
Document and File Review  A review of files and documentation associated with the administration and management of the program was conducted. 
Literature Review  A review of literature related to registration processes and registration vis-à-vis compliance was conducted.
Data Analysis  Program data was analyzed to assess the completeness and, where possible, accuracy of registration data and the efficiency of the registration process. Five years of BN data was extracted from the BN system (fiscal year 2006-2007 to fiscal year 2010-2011) provided by the BND for analytical purposes.
Interviews (internal)  25 individual and group interviews were carried out with over 150 CRA staff and management in both headquarters and the regions.
Interviews with other Tax Administrations  Telephone conference calls were conducted with representatives of the Australian Taxation Office (ATO), New Zealand Inland Revenue Department (IRD), and the United Kingdom Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs (HMRC).



 5. Evaluation Findings 


 5.1 Efficiency and effectiveness of registration 
Registrations are processed in a timely manner, however, costs vary depending on the method of registration.  Telephone registrations represent the majority of all CRA processed registrations accounting for approximately 44% of registered accounts. CRA data indicates that roughly 5% of the 3.5 million business enquiries received in 2010-2011 were to register or open an account. Using the average of 6.3 minutes and a cost of $8.14 per enquiryFootnote 8, the CRA resource cost to process 120,000 telephone requests for registration is approximately $1 million. BNS processed applications (e.g. mail and fax) account for 22% of CRA registered accounts in 2010-2011.  Based on an average of 8 minutes to process an application for registration at a cost of $4.20, the annual cost to process 60,740 accounts is just over $255,000. The bulk of the 70,542 accounts registered in 2010-2011 using BRO (26% of CRA registered accounts) bear negligible incremental costs to the CRA as most of the information is verified and processed using system logic and requires little human intervention. Overall, this is the most efficient method of registration. In almost all cases, businesses seeking registration through BRO or by way of telephone receive a business number immediately upon completing the process. Applications received by fax or mail exceed the CRA's service standard of 95% of registrations processed in 10 days (in 2011-2012, 98% of registrations were processed within 10 days). There are inconsistencies in obtaining information and differing information requirements for the purpose of registration.   There is no legislation governing the use of or which stipulates what information is required to be provided in order to obtain a BN. Depending on the source from which registration is sought (i.e. a provincial government, Industry Canada, or the CRA) registration information requirements differ from source to source and vary depending on circumstances.  The CRA's application for a BN form (RC1), requests all applicants to provide a Social Insurance Number (SIN) for the owner, partner(s), corporate director(s) or officer(s) of the business.  The SIN is a universal identifier used to access many government programs and is required to be presented under specific circumstances. Those circumstances are dictated by legislation.  The CRA uses the SIN as a means to authenticate the identity of applicants. PROTECTED Partner organizations obtain information relevant to the administration of their own programs and assign BNs that are exclusive to those programs. Businesses incorporated by provincial or federal partners are also automatically registered for a corporate income tax BN based on the information provided to partner organizations forwarded to the CRA under MOU agreements. PROTECTED. Of the 191,770 businesses registered for CRA corporate tax accounts, 64% (122,109) were automatically assigned corporate BNs as a result of their incorporation by provincial or federal partners. These registered accounts would not have a SIN or a major business activity description. Overall, for fiscal year 2010-2011, 43% of registered accounts had no SIN, 39% lacked a major business activity description, 20% had no owner identification and 24% had no contact phone number.  See Figure 3 for a breakdown of missing information by registration method.  Figure 3   Missing Information at Initial Point of Registration by Registration Method (2010-2011)   Percentage of Registration Totals 





Method
Missing SIN
Missing MBA
Missing Phone Number
Missing Owner Name
Registration Totals


External Partner Requests
100%
99%
53%
50%
122,109


Telephone
6%
6%
1%
0%
120,673


Business Registration Online
0%
0%
0%
0%
70,542


"Other" Method
62%
40%
58%
47%
39,787


Fax
44%
26%
8%
0%
26,311


Mail
35%
15%
17%
3%
18,588


 Total 
 43% 
 39% 
 24% 
 20% 
 398,010 





The presentation of the percentage of missing information under external partner requests in Figure 3 should not be seen as a criticism of CRA partners. This information is not requested by partners. The ABSB indicates that they review these accounts within 30 days of registration and attempt to obtain the missing information (see section 5.2). Although data was not available to indicate the extent to which the 2010/11 missing information was obtained as a result of post-registration review, ABSB provided data to indicate that, for all registered businesses in the system (4.8 million), the overall percentage of missing information was as follows: 
1.44% of businesses have no owner name;
24% of businesses have at least one owner with no SIN; and
16% of businesses have no major business activity indicated.
 Online registrations result in the most complete information being obtained.   As indicated above, businesses can register through a variety of methods and depending on the method chosen, information requirements and completeness of fields varies considerably.  However, applicants seeking registration through the CRA BRO portal must provide all requested information in order to be eligible for a BN. Mandatory information includes SIN and major business activity description. In addition, BRO applicants that are sole proprietors must have filed an income tax return in order to be eligible for a BN. Rates of non-compliance within the small and medium enterprises (SMEs) population demonstrate a need for complete and accurate data.  CRA data shows that small and medium enterprises (SMEs), representing 99% of the BN population, have higher levels of non-compliance than individual tax filers and, depending on the nature or type of business, compliance risks vary significantly across sectors. As CRA data reveals, SMEs are a high risk group for non-compliance because there is generally no third party data against which their reported information can be comparedFootnote 9.  The Compliance Programs Branch (CPB) publishes a Compliance Monitoring Report that provides the compliance results of the main taxpayer segments (individuals, unincorporated businesses, corporations, GST/HST registrants and employers). CPB uses a series of compliance indicators to determine compliance rates for each population segment, covering all relevant compliance requirements including filing, reporting, and payment.  Reporting non-compliance indicators under the Core Audit Program (CAP)Footnote 10 indicate a reporting non-compliance rate as high as 25% for corporate and 30% for GST/HST accountsFootnote 11. These same groups have a late filing non-compliance rate of 28% and 44% respectively. And, although the report is silent on payment non-compliance rates for GST/HST registrants, just under 34% of corporate accounts fail to pay on time.  PROTECTED Incomplete registration data can adversely affect risk assessment and other compliance activities.  The singular purpose for registering businesses for tax purposes is to support subsequent compliance activities (voluntary, enhanced, and enforced). The Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) in its March 2011 report titled “Tax Administration in OECD and Selected Non-OECD Countries: Comparative Information Series (2010)” commented that:  “Comprehensive systems of taxpayer registration and numbering are a critical feature of the tax administration arrangements in most countries, underpinning all return filing, collection, assessment and verification activities.”   “For some revenue bodies, registration involves the maintenance of basic taxpayer identifying information (e.g. for individuals—full name and address, date of birth and for businesses—full name, business and postal addresses) using a citizen or business identification number that is used generally across government and which, for tax administration purposes, permits the routine identification of taxpayers for a range of administrative functions (e.g. issue of notices, detection of non-filers and follow-up enforcement actions).”  The CRA has finite resources to address compliance issues and must, therefore, use intelligence and risk assessment in directing its compliance activities. Risk assessment and intelligence processes are dependent on information – information gathered by the CRA that must be, to the extent possible, complete, accurate, and relevant. We interviewed a cross section of compliance staff Footnote 12 in both the field and in headquarters and examined risk scoring and intelligence processes to better understand how registration data plays a role in subsequent compliance activities.  Compliance staff unanimously indicated that complete and accurate registration information is essential to their work. Lack of or incorrect PROTECTED. Lack of or incorrect “major business activity” can detrimentally affect risk scoring or sector analysis used in identifying compliance trends.  The CRA captures major business activity at the point of registration and subsequently sends this information to Statistics Canada. Statistics Canada then determines the appropriate North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) codeFootnote 13 to assign. CRA then uses these codes to assist compliance programs. The CPB reports that it is able to provide statistically valid compliance levels across industry sectors using the (NAICS) code with its new Research Audit Program (RAP). The CPB reports that the CRA will benefit from the RAP by having: 
a statistically valid rationale for ranking sectors by compliance and directing resources to address the top non-compliant industries;
the data required to continue validating and refining the CRA's risk assessment models;
increased accuracy of regional non-compliance estimates;
the ability to monitor compliance trends over time; and
additional intelligence that will help in selecting the appropriate compliance instruments for addressing specific compliance issues.Footnote 14 
 Statistics Canada identified Footnote 15 that over half (55%) of the 400,000 businesses registered by the CRA in 2008 did not have a sufficient business description to allow for the assignment of a NAICS code. Statistics Canada further identified that of the 5 million businesses registered with the CRA, 13.2% had an incorrect NAICS code, ranging from 3.5% within the health care and social assistance sectors to 33.5% within the management of companies and enterprises sector.  These errors would likely have an impact on the accuracy of sector analysis and consequently on the accuracy of audit selectionFootnote 16. Our analysis shows that 39% of businesses registered in 2010-2011 have no major business activity description.  ABSB management has indicated that, in recent years, the CRA has worked with both Statistics Canada and with Finance Canada on a number of initiatives designed to improve the data quality of NAICS codes, including the establishment of a NAICS Code Working Group with Finance Canada. Australia's administration of its single business number.  Australia adopted a single business number (ABN) with the enactment of The New Tax System (Australian Business Number) Act 1999. The main objective of the Act is: (1) … to make it easier for businesses to conduct their dealings with the Australian Government. This is done by establishing a system for registering businesses and issuing them with unique identifying numbers so that they can identify themselves reliably: (a) in all their dealings with the Australian Government; and (b) for all other Commonwealth purposes. (2) Without limiting paragraph (1)(b), the main object of this Act includes allowing businesses to identify themselves reliably for the purposes of taxation laws. Registration and number issuance is administered by the Australia Business Register (ABR), an independent body that reports to the Commissioner of the Australia Tax Office. The legislation requires that standardized information is collected at the point of registration. The ABR must register an applicant if satisfied that the applicant: 
is entitled to have an ABN or is likely to be entitled to have an ABN by the date specified in his/her application (a test for eligibility);
has established his/her identity (a test for existence); and
is not already registered in the ABR (a test for duplication).
 The ABR clearly states on its website that “if a high level of confidence cannot be obtained about an entity's identity from the data supplied, then authentication and therefore issuing of an ABN will be denied'.  This is largely because the ABR believes that it has responsibility to ensure the integrity of information in its registry in order to maintain the credibility of the registrar. As a means to control consistency, registration for an ABN is limited to two service channels i.e. either online or in writing by completing a prescribed form. The ABR encourages the use of online registration and has successfully transitioned most applicants to the online registration portal – approximately 90% of registrations are processed online. The Act does not prescribe how the Registrar is to maintain the ABR; it does, however, require registrants to keep their details accurate and current. The legislation states registrants must notify the Registrar within 28 days where information that they have previously provided is no longer correct. Not to comply with this requirement is an offence under s.8C of the Taxation Administration Act 1953, which could lead to the registrant being subject to prosecution and penalties. Figure 4   Australian Business Number Registration Process 







Source:  Australian National Audit Office - Administration of Australian Business Number Registrations - Australian Taxation Office, June 2003


 5.2 Coordination of business registration within the CRA 
As the custodian of the BN, the BND has taken measures to assess and improve data quality and to ensure the completeness of registration data.  BND has recognized that incomplete registration data is problematic to the conduct of CRA compliance efforts and has taken steps in conjunction with CPB to assess the impact. A pilot, centred in the Southern Interior of British Columbia, commenced in November 2011 to determine the extent to which incomplete registration data impacts audit selection and audit resultsFootnote 17.  At the time of the evaluation the results were not yet known. A Business Number Review team was established in Whitby, Ontario in 2010 with the primary purpose of contacting all new and existing business owners or legal entity authorized representatives to validate/update all BN identification information such as: 
owner's information (name, phone number, SIN);
business address (physical, mailing and books and records); 
major business activity; and 
operating/trading name.
 Additionally, a GST/HST enhanced registration review program (GERR) has been operating out of the St. John's and Winnipeg TCs since 2000 with a mandate to review all new GST/HST registrations for missing or incomplete information and also, based on criteria provided by CPB and NF/NR, refer accounts for further investigation. Although these initiatives will attempt to gather incomplete information post registration it runs contrary to one of the original objectives of the BN which was to obtain all necessary information once at the time of registration. Additionally, post registration functions designed to obtain missing or incorrect information that could have been obtained at the time of registration adds additional program costs. There is evidence of collaboration between BND and other areas responsible for registration and between BRD and users of the information.  We reviewed agendas and minutes of meetings between BRD and areas responsible for activities relating to registration and/or compliance issues. These meetings dealt with issues ranging from identity theft, validity of GST/HST registrants, enhancement of post registration review of GST/HST registrants, deregistration, and impact of incomplete registration information. The minutes of meetings reviewed indicate a strong awareness of the compliance impact of business registration and a commitment to improving registration processes. Similarly, we reviewed agendas and minutes of meetings, e-mails, and communiqués between BND and other areas within the CRA responsible for registration. Again, there appears to be a high level of communication between all relevant areas responsible for registration. BND has become the de facto business registrar without a full and complete mandate. Canada's tax system is based on “self-assessment”, and in this regard the CRA appears to place the onus on applicants to determine whether they ought to be registered. Registration is a processing function relying largely on the applicant to make a self-informed determination. The evaluation found that the CRA processes application information and provides a registration number with little upfront risk assessment or compliance scrutiny. Program managers within the BND have acknowledged that their registration mandate was originally established to be a processing function (reflected in the mandate of the Business Number Operations Section), designed to process applications and issue BNs based on information provided.  The role and responsibility of the BND was not envisioned to encompass a more robust compliance role (i.e. interpretation of legislation, determination of eligibility based on interpretation of legislation and verification of information vis à vis compliance implications). The BND is limited in its enforcement of policy and procedures and in providing direction to the various disparate areas that undertake business registration. With direct responsibility over only 15% of all business registrations processed yearly and with no legislative support, BND is limited to providing general direction on registration requirements and/or accepting incomplete registration data to be addressed post registration. BND, over time, became the de facto business registrar without full authority or a complete mandate that encompasses all aspects of registration processing and compliance.


 6. Conclusion 
Voluntary compliance and self-assessment, which form the basis of the CRA tax administration, is facilitated by assisting businesses in complying with their registration requirements with limited administrative burden, through easily accessible means at little cost. The premise on which the BN is based is to obtain necessary information once that could be used often by the CRA and other participating levels of government. The sole purpose of business registration as it relates to tax administration is to obtain information that supports compliance activities.  By not obtaining complete data there is a risk that the integrity of the system may be compromised and subsequent compliance activities jeopardized. The CRA efficiently processes applications either by providing BNs upon the completion of the application process or by processing applications within 10 days of being provided with a paper application. Program costs vary significantly depending on the method of registration chosen, ranging from $1 million per annum for telephone registrations to virtually no human resource costs associated with BRO. The CRA continues to invest in electronic technology including its newest e-services initiatives. BRO is the only means of registration that forces the applicant to provide all requested information and lends itself to being the most reliable method of registration in terms of ensuring completeness. The system currently validates identities based on SIN and offers a reject feature based on filing history of sole proprietors. There are costs and compliance risks associated with providing many different registration options. Lastly, BRD has not been provided with a comprehensive compliance and verification mandate with corresponding oversight responsibilities for business registration. Without clearly defined roles and responsibilities there are risks to the effective administration of the business registration process. There are potential lessons learned from the Australia experience. The ABR provides only two registration options for the ABN with an emphasis on online registration. It also requires standardized information (supported by legislation) to be provided in support of business applications. Registration responsibilities and corresponding authority falls exclusively to the ABR. Failure to provide sufficient information to determine eligibility and identity will result in failure to register.


 7. Recommendations 

A committee should be struck to examine policies and procedures and any legislation in support of or implicated by BN registration to ensure the CRA is obtaining and has the authority to obtain information at the time of registration to assist it in carrying out its compliance efforts.
Whether by committee or through other means, an examination should be conducted of the current methods of registration to ensure that the CRA is offering the most cost efficient and effective methods that take full advantage of technology, existing data, and verification/validation processes.
The mandate, roles, responsibilities and resource base of the BND should be examined to ensure it has the means, accountability and authority to deliver a comprehensive and effective business registration program.



 8. ABSB Management Response 
The following management response and action plan has been prepared by ABSB. Information contained in the response has not been validated by CAEB. Management Response  The Assessment and Benefit Services Branch (ABSB) appreciates that Program Evaluation secured approval for the focused scope of the evaluation and as an independent and objective organization they have a professional obligation to present the evidence they see as most relevant to report. Action Plans   Recommendation 1:   To fully appreciate the recommendations put forward by program evaluation and the ABSB action plans, one needs to consider certain elements relating to business registration that provide important context: CRA programs rely on voluntary compliance to yield the vast majority of the $377B in annual revenue.  This means quality service like providing BNs quickly and without undue burden is critical to advancing CRA's mandate. Controls are also required to balance the risk of non-compliance. Business registration has a key data integrity control that is applied after the initial issuance of the BN. This is similar to CRAs approach to assessing personal income tax returns or its audit programs. Our post issuance validation checks greatly enhance data integrity through an investment of $8M annually and more than 100 FTEs; the report does not focus on these data integrity efforts or that they have been subject to continuous expansion and improvement since a 2008 evaluation of GST-HST compliance. PROTECTED. Also, the CRA does not collect or issue the North American Industrial Classification Standard code, instead the Agency provides information to Statistics Canada who, in their role as owners of the NAICS, then provides the correct code to CRA. The Agency's use of the NAICS is subject to explicit controls from Statistics Canada and the consequence of incorrect coding can have significant repercussions on economic forecasts. The evaluation focuses on one aspect of the BN's compliance role, providing data to support risk assessment; however, there are other important compliance contributions provided by the BN including: referrals to the non-filer program that generate $5M a year in tax revenue, enabling refund allocations that automatically pay down $1.6B in debt each year, and data matching by provincial partners which has produced more than $100M in revenue for the Workplace and Safety Insurance Board alone. Finally, the key conclusion of the report is that incomplete data might impact the CRA's ability to risk assess business taxpayers.  Taking social insurance number data as an example, this broad statement only applies to the GST-HST revenue line (annual revenue of $30B) but does not impact payroll deductions ($204B annually), corporate income tax ($46B annually), or Other Levies ($10B), because the audit programs for these revenue lines do not rely on SIN data. ABSB will form an executive level committee by December 2012 that will pursue potential enhancements to registration policies and procedures, and any additional legislative proposals in addition to those already in development.   Aspects relating to the timing of data validation will be held out of scope until the results of recommendation two are finalized.  A report on the work of this Committee will be presented to the Policy Committee by June 2013.  Recommendation 2:   ABSB will examine the costs and benefits to the current registration approach in comparison to options that would obtain and validate more information at the time of registration.  The results of this analysis and any proposed changes will be documented in the Problem Opportunity Proposal template established by Resource Management Directorate, and a copy of this report will be provided to the Commissioner of the CRA by March 31, 2013.  Recommendation 3:   ABSB will consult with branches on appropriate mandates, roles and responsibilities and submit a report with recommendations to the Policy Committee by September 2013.
Footnote 1 The true number of active businesses may be less. Statistics Canada estimates indicate that the number of active businesses is 57% of this number of businesses registered with the CRA.  CRA does not actively deregister accounts.  Footnote 2 BNS no longer registers businesses using the Canada Gazette.  Footnote 3 Other includes non-filer/non-reg registered accounts, registrations based on returns filed, along with other administrative registrations.  Footnote 4 Legend: SR&ED - Scientific Research and Experimental Development; T1 - Individual Income Tax; T2 - Corporate Income Tax; T3 - Trust Income; T5 - Investment Income  Footnote 5 GST/HST, Payroll, Corporate tax, Import/Export  Footnote 6 Corporation, Individual, Partnership, Trust  Footnote 7 Telephone, Fax, Mail, Business Registration Online  Footnote 8 TSDMB Business Enquiries Telephone Enquiry Data – 2010-2011  Footnote 9 ITD Global Conference on Taxation of Small and Medium Enterprises SME Audit and Verification Strategies and Techniques Based on Risk Detection and Risk Selection  Footnote 10 An annual random audit program that rotates between SME business lines since 1999, are also used for producing reliable reporting non-compliance estimates for the small and medium  Footnote 11 Refers to reporting non-compliance greater than $1,000  Footnote 12 50 TSO auditors, collectors and investigators and 15 senior staff with HQ compliance related programs (audit, collections, research)  Footnote 13 Statistics Canada, in conjunction with statistical agencies in the United States and Mexico, has created a common industry classification called the NAICS.  Footnote 14 Canada Revenue Agency, Tax Compliance Digest Issue 8, Spring 2011  Footnote 15 Statistics Canada - The implementation of tools to support the data quality of the Business Register at Statistics Canada,  Mario Ménard, November 2008  Footnote 16 ITD Global Conference on Taxation of Small and Medium Enterprises - SME Audit and Verification Strategies and Techniques Based on Risk Detection and Risk Selection - Jim Gauvreau, Director General, Small and Medium Enterprises Directorate, Compliance Programs Branch  Footnote 17 Tax Centre Clean-up of Business Number in support of Compliance Programs – June 2011 





Report a problem or mistake on this page












Please select all that apply:

A link, button or video is not working



It has a spelling mistake



Information is missing



Information is outdated or wrong



Login error when trying to access an account




I can't find what I'm looking for



Other issue not in this list



Submit



Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries, contact us.










Date modified:
2013-01-10





Charities Partnership & Outreach Program Summative Evaluation Report


Final Report
Corporate Audit and Evaluation Branch January 2011 




Table of Contents
 Executive Summary  
 Introduction 
 Purpose of the Evaluation 
 Evaluation Context 
 Methodology 
 Findings

 5.1 Relevance 
 5.2 Program Design and Delivery 
 5.3 Achievement of Expected Results 
 
 Conclusion 
 Recommendations 
 Management Response 
 
 Appendix A: Glossary of Terms 
 Appendix B: Registered Charity versus Non-profit organization 
 Appendix C: Contribution Recipients and Projects 
 Appendix D: Map of Contribution Recipients 



  Executive Summary 
Introduction  The subject of this evaluation is the Charities Partnership and Outreach Program (CPOP) which is administered and managed by the Client Interface and Services Division (CISD), Charities Directorate, Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs Branch (LPRAB). The overall objective of CPOP is to increase compliance and build a responsive charitable sector. The main objectives of the program are to: (1) raise awareness among the sector of regulatory obligations under the Income Tax Act (ITA); (2) increase the capacity of the charitable sector in meeting regulatory compliance requirements in a sustainable fashion; and (3) improve the capacity of the sector to develop and deliver sustainable compliance-based education programs.  CPOP provides funding, in the form of contribution payments, to eligible registered charities and non-profit organizations serving the charitable sector. In March 2005, Treasury Board Secretariat approved the terms and conditions for CPOP and released funding of $1 million in 2005‑2006, $1 million in 2006‑2007, $2 million in 2007-2008 and $3 million in subsequent years to the Canada Revenue Agency. The recipients of the contribution funding are responsible for developing and delivering training and education to registered charities on how to comply with the ITA. Currently, 2.5 full-time equivalents (FTEs), consisting of 2 program officers (SP-08) and .5 of a manager (MG‑05) are allocated to the program. Program costs for 2010-2011 are projected to be approximately $196,000 in salaries and $11,700 in operating and maintenance costs. Purpose   The evaluation was conducted to assess the extent to which the CPOP has achieved its expected results. The following issues were examined: 
Is the program still relevant?
Is the design and delivery model the most effective way to achieve the objectives of the program?
To what extent has the program achieved expected results?
 Methodology   A range of data collection and analysis methodologies were used in the conduct of this evaluation. These included: internal and external interviews; document, literature and file reviews; data analysis; a survey of 500 registered charities; and a high-level review of foreign charity/tax administrations. Conclusion   Ensuring the integrity of the charitable sector is important not only because of the tax benefits associated with being or contributing to a registered charity but because of the larger role the sector plays in the day to day lives of Canadians. The CPOP's objective of raising awareness of the charitable sector and of the regulatory obligations under the ITA is clearly aligned with the Charities Directorate's mission "to  promote compliance with the income tax legislation and regulations relating to charities through education… thereby contributing to the integrity of the charitable sector and the social well-being of Canadians."   There is a variety of data which suggests that, although compliance by registered charities has improved over the past several years, there is still an ongoing need for assistance to registered charities in understanding the requirements of the ITA. The majority of representatives from the voluntary sector strongly felt that the CPOP was meeting a need by making a variety of resources available to assist registered charities. The feedback data collected by contribution recipients from participants and/or users of the training and education has been overwhelmingly positive. The CPOP has made progress, particularly in terms of the number of contribution projects that have been developed and delivered on compliance-based training and education, since the formative evaluation report was approved by the Agency Management Committee in April 2008. Although there are gaps in operating procedures, these deficiencies can be overcome especially in light of what has been learned by the program over the past several years. However, there are still considerable gaps in performance measurement, which may, in part, be due to program objectives not being well-defined and, not easily measured. Additionally, the terms and conditions for this program require clarification in order to ensure that they are implemented in a manner that is well understood by all stakeholders. The CPOP is also not aligned with an overall Charities Directorate outreach strategy. The need to renew the terms and conditions in March 2011 provides an excellent opportunity for the Charities Directorate to reassess the program and determine how it aligns with the strategic direction of the Charities Directorate.  Recommendations   Based on the findings of this evaluation, program management should: 
in light of the program experience over the last five years and the findings of this evaluation, review the terms and conditions including the current objectives to ensure that they are more realistic and measurable;
Once the terms and conditions and objectives are clarified, focus on developing and implementing a performance measurement strategy;
Ensure that the CPOP is aligned with an outreach strategy for the Charities Directorate; and
Continue to make improvements to internal operating procedures and guidance for program participants.



 1. Introduction 
The subject of this evaluation is the Charities Partnership and Outreach Program (CPOP) which is administered and managed by the Client Interface and Services Division (CISD), Charities Directorate, Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs Branch (LPRAB). The overall objective of CPOP is to increase compliance and build a responsive charitable sector. The main objectives of the program are to: 
Raise awareness among the sector of regulatory obligations under the Income Tax Act (ITA);
Increase the capacity of the charitable sector in meeting regulatory compliance requirements in a sustainable fashion; and
Improve the capacity of the sector to develop and deliver sustainable compliance-based education programs. 
 CPOP provides funding, in the form of contribution payments, to eligible registered charities and non-profit organizations serving the charitable sector. Refer to Appendix B for an overview of the differences between a registered charity and a non-profit organization. In March 2005, Treasury Board Secretariat approved the terms and conditions for CPOP and released funding of $1 million in 2005‑2006, $1 million in 2006‑2007, $2 million in 2007-2008 and $3 million in subsequent years to the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA). The recipients of the contribution funding are responsible for developing and delivering training and education to registered charities on how to comply with the ITA. Priorities for funding are established on an annual basis. To be eligible for funding, projects must be linked to at least one of the CPOP's objectives and to one of the funding priorities. The CISD solicits funding submissions through a national call for applications. All applications are assessed and selected by the CISD with the assistance of an Application Review Committee (ARC). Currently, 2.5 full-time equivalents (FTEs), consisting of 2 program officers (SP-08) and .5 of a manager (MG‑05) are allocated to the program. Program costs for 2010-2011 are projected to be approximately $196,000 in salaries and $11,700 in operating and maintenance costs.


 2. Purpose of the Evaluation 
The purpose of the evaluation was to provide an evidence-based assessment to senior management on the extent to which the CPOP has achieved its expected results. The following issues were examined as part of the evaluation: 
Is the program still relevant?
Is the design and delivery model the most effective way to achieve the objectives of the program?
To what extent has the program achieved expected results?
 The evaluation framework was approved by the Management Audit and Evaluation Committee in January 2010. The timeframe covered by this evaluation was October 2007 to October 2010.


 3. Evaluation Context 
In February 2005, the Charities Directorate committed to the Treasury Board Secretariat to conduct a formative and summative evaluation of CPOP before its terms and conditions expired in March 2010. In December 2009, the Commissioner requested that the Minister of National Revenue extend the terms and conditions for one year to allow for more contribution agreements to be put in place and additional data to be gathered in support of the summative evaluation. The Corporate Audit and Evaluation Branch initiated a formative evaluation of the CPOP in February 2007 to provide information and advice to senior management on whether the program was well positioned to meet its objectives. The formative evaluation focused on program relevance; program design, implementation and delivery; and possible program modifications. The timeframe covered by the formative evaluation was from March 31, 2004, to September 30, 2007. The formative evaluation report, approved by the Agency Management Committee in April 2008, made the following recommendations: 
 Revisit the original program design to reassess the feasibility of implementing the program in terms of what was planned as detailed in the Treasury Board Submission that was used to obtain funding for this program;  
 Focus on developing and implementing a performance measurement strategy that will identify the baseline data that is required to measure performance and report on the success of this program; 
 Develop and implement a communication strategy that clearly identifies the steps that will be taken, both in terms of collaboration and promotion, to help achieve the program objectives; and  
 Implement the policies, procedures and information system(s) necessary to ensure that quality information is available to support decision-making, the measurement of performance as well as accountability and transparency of the program. 



 4. Methodology 
The following data collection and analysis methodologies were used in the conduct of this evaluation: 
 Interviews (internal to the CRA) – 20 interviews were carried out with 21 representatives of the Charities Directorate, Public Affairs Branch, Finance and Administration Branch, and Training and Learning Directorate of the Human Resources Branch. 
 Interviews (external to the CRA) – interviews were carried out with 48 representatives from the voluntary sector in Canada (the majority of which were applicants and contribution recipients), 7 representatives of other federal and provincial government organizations, and 3 representatives of foreign charity and/or tax administrations.
 Document and File Review – A review of files and documentation associated with the administration and management of the program was conducted. 
 Literature Review – A review of literature related to registered charities, non-profit organizations, the voluntary sector in Canada and other countries, grant and contribution programs, and various types of training – including the use of social media – was also conducted.
 Data Analysis – Program data was analyzed to assess the extent to which registered charities are non-compliant with the ITA and information reported on the Registered Charity Information Return (T3010) is accurate and complete.
 Survey – A survey of 500 registered charities was conducted by an independent consulting firm in October 2010. The purpose of the survey was to determine the extent to which registered charities were aware of the regulator and the information and assistance that is available to them – including CPOP – and the extent to which the information and assistance has been utilized.
 Review of Foreign Charity/Tax Administrations – A high-level comparative analysis was conducted to determine the extent to which Australia, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and the United States regulate – and educate – the charitable sector.
 Use of Methodologies   Each methodology is not necessarily designed to address all evaluation issues. A specific methodology may be used to address only one issue or a series of research questions applicable to one or more issues. A survey, for example, may be used to assess awareness of a program and its relevance but may not assess program effectiveness or the program delivery model. Conflicting Information  In most cases findings are determined based on the results of multiple sources of information derived from multiple methodologies. However, in some cases information from one source may or may not be consistent with information from other sources. In these circumstances the evaluation team must examine the various sources of information to assess the discrepancy and to determine which source of information is most valid. In this evaluation, the survey of representatives from the charitable sector provided information that was inconsistent with the views expressed in external interviews and from the literature review. In this instance, the evaluation team had to consider biases and the veracity of other sources of information vis-à-vis the survey results. Since the survey sought information directly from a random sample of the sector and the results are accurate to within plus or minus 4.4 percentage points in 19 out of 20 samples we consider the survey to be more representative of officials in the broader charitable sector.


  5. Findings 


 5.1 Relevance 
The CPOP is clearly aligned with the mission of the Charities Directorate  The Charities Directorate is responsible for administering the provisions of the ITA related to registered charities. Its mission is to "promote compliance with the income tax legislation and regulations relating to charities through education, quality service, and responsible enforcement, thereby contributing to the integrity of the charitable sector and the social well-being of Canadians". The CPOP is clearly aligned with the mission and responsibilities of the Charities Directorate. It provides, through the contribution recipients, training and education on a variety of topics to assist charities in complying with the ITA. This is consistent with the Charities Directorate's education-first approach to ensuring registered charities are compliant with the ITA. The CPOP is one of several activities implemented by the Charities Directorate as part of the Charities Regulatory Reform Initiative (CRRI). The Charities Directorate received $12 million annually for five years in the March 2004 Budget to implement the CRRI which was aimed at modernizing the regulator and working differently, and more closely, with the charitable sector. The CRRI was largely based on recommendations made by the Joint Regulatory Table (JRT) entitled "Strengthening Canada's Charitable Sector: Regulatory Reform" published in May 2003. The JRT was a key element of the Voluntary Sector Initiative, a joint initiative launched in June 2000, to strengthen the relationship between the federal government and voluntary sector. The integrity of the charitable sector is important to Canadians  Substantial federal government support is provided to the over 85,000 (as of January 2010) registered charities in Canada. Registration allows a charity to issue official donation receipts for gifts it receives. These receipts can be used to reduce the income tax payable of an individual donor or the taxable income of a corporate donor. Once registered, a charity is exempt from paying income tax under Part I of the ITA. Many goods and services provided by registered charities are exempt from goods and services tax/harmonized sales tax (GST/HST). Also, in many situations, registered charities can claim a partial rebate for the GST/HST they pay.  In 2008, donors claimed approximately $8.2 billion in donation credits. This works out to approximately $3.9 billion in foregone revenue for the federal and provincial governments [Footnote 1]. According to one survey [Footnote 2], almost 23 million Canadians – 84% of the population aged 15 and over – made a financial donation to a charitable or other non‑profit organization in the 12‑month period covered by the survey. The same survey found that Canadians also donated a total of $10 billion in 2007 and almost half (46%) said that someone in their household would be claiming an income tax credit for donations made over the previous 12 months. Maintaining the integrity of the charitable sector is not only important in terms of tax credits and exemptions. The charitable sector is a significant contributor to the Canadian economy and is a major employer in Canada. Non-profit organizations, including registered charities, make a significant contribution to the economic and social well‑being of Canadians [Footnote 3]. In 2007, the gross domestic product of the core non‑profit sector amounted to $35.6 billion, accounting for 2.5% of the total Canadian economy [Footnote 4]. This share increases to 7.0% when hospitals, universities and colleges are included, reaching $100.7 billion in 2007 [Footnote 5]. In addition, almost 12.5 million Canadians or 46% of the population aged 15 and over, volunteered during the one-year period preceding the survey. Canadians volunteered almost 2.1 billion hours in 2007 – the equivalent of close to 1.1 million full‑time jobs [Footnote 6]. Compliance by registered charities has improved but there is an ongoing need for assistance  The number of registered charities continues to grow. There was an average of 2,520 new registrations in each year from 2004-2005 to 2008‑2009. Registered charities must file a properly completed T3010 and financial statements within six months of their fiscal period end. The evaluation team conducted an independent analysis of the return and financial data to assess the extent to which registered charities are non-compliant with the requirements of the ITA. The filing non-compliance trend indicated that the percentage of charities that file late has been dropping fairly steadily from 48.3% in 2000 to 35.4% in 2008. Given that the Charities Directorate may revoke a charity's registration as a result of filing non‑compliance, there is still room for improvement. The percentages of charities having their charitable status revoked for non-filing is relatively small and has also been on a decreasing trend since reaching a peak of 4.1% in 2000. By 2008 this percentage had dropped to 0.9%. Revocation of a charity's registration has serious consequences. The charity will have its name and the reason for its revocation posted in the Canada Gazette and online on the CRA website; it cannot issue official donation receipts for gifts it receives; no longer qualifies for tax exemptions, and must transfer all its remaining property to an eligible donee or be subject to a revocation tax equal to the property's full value.  Audit results also suggest the ongoing need for education and training. The CRA conducted an average of 801 audits per year from 2006-2007 to 2009-2010. This data indicates that approximately 50% of audited charities require an education letter explaining the rules and suggesting corrective actions. We do acknowledge that audits may be targeted, rather than purely random, thereby skewing results in favour of the identification of non-compliance.  Research by the Charities Directorate has also identified a number of unique challenges that small and rural charities face in meeting their administrative and legislative responsibilities [Footnote 7]. The report found that small and rural charities have few, if any, full-time or paid staff; rely almost solely on volunteers to deliver their programs, and many are located in isolated areas with limited access to the Internet and few community resources. Not surprisingly, the report noted that volunteers want to be involved in the delivery of their charity's core programs rather than its administration. In effect, small and rural charities have little time, resources, and expertise available to interpret information or keep up‑to‑date with the requirements of the ITA. The research resulted in an action plan, developed jointly by the Charities Directorate and a panel of individuals from small and rural charities, committed to providing educational tools for the charitable sector. Research conducted by the voluntary sector raised concern with the quality of information reported by registered charities [Footnote 8]. It identified that there was a very high frequency of problems that include mistakes in simple arithmetic (i.e., the sums of individual items not adding to reported totals), errors of omission (e.g., the failure to itemize expenditures) and logical inconsistencies (e.g., active charities reporting that there have been no charitable expenditures). It found that over one-third of charities had at least one readily identifiable problem of these types in their returns. The report also found that only 27% of charities report fundraising costs despite the fact that 84% report receiving dollars from tax-receipted gifts or fundraising revenues. The independent analysis of the T3010 data conducted by the evaluation team also identified issues regarding the quality of information reported by registered charities. Many interviewees believe that CPOP is meeting a need  The evaluation team conducted interviews with 48 representatives from the voluntary sector. These interviewees were either applicants, contribution recipients, or others working in or on behalf of the voluntary sector. The majority of these interviewees felt that the CPOP was meeting a need by making a variety of resources available to assist registered charities in complying with the ITA. Most interviewees felt it was important for charities to have the option of receiving training and education from someone else in the voluntary sector other than the regulator. It was strongly believed that there may be a hesitation amongst registered charities to draw attention to themselves and any compliance issues they may have by asking questions directly to the regulator. The majority of those interviewed within the Charities Directorate also felt that there was validity to the perception that some registered charities would be hesitant to approach the regulator.  Despite this hesitation, most interviewees strongly felt that training and education developed and delivered by contribution recipients should supplement and not replace what was provided by the regulator and that both were required to meet the needs of charities. In several instances, contribution recipients reminded the evaluation team that the information they provided was of a general nature. If questions were asked of contribution recipients that should be directed to the Charities Directorate - as the regulatory authority – the questions should have been redirected as such. The majority of all interviewees, internal and external to the Charities Directorate, felt that the turnover of staff and volunteers was an issue for registered charities and contributed to the ongoing need for compliance-based training and education. The Charities Directorate has initiated several outreach activities to address non‑compliance  The CISD is responsible for the management and administration of the CPOP. The program, through the contribution recipients, has developed and implemented a variety of outreach that provides compliance-based training and education to registered charities. This includes the development and delivery of information sessions and webinars on a variety of topics. CISD also develops information sessions and webinars that are delivered by employees of the Charities Directorate directly to registered charities. CISD is also responsible for maintaining the "Charities and Giving" web pages on the CRA website and provides assistance to registered charities in the form of telephone and written enquires. In 2009-2010, the Charities Directorate received 10,671 written requests for service from registered charities and 111,136 telephone enquiries [Footnote 9]. Although not the subject of the evaluation, the CISD provided the evaluation team with data on the information sessions and webinars that are delivered directly to registered charities. The information sessions are free of charge and delivered across the country. Even though some data was missing, the number of participants ranged from a high of 4,579 in 2002 to a low of 2,021 in 2009. The CISD has not consistently collected data over the years as to whether participants were satisfied with what was learned at information sessions or if they found the information useful. However, when this type of question was asked in feedback surveys, the response was positive with the majority of participants being satisfied or finding the information useful.  The CISD began piloting Internet-based webinars in February 2009 as another way to educate registered charities. In 2010, the CISD delivered 21 interactive webinars in English and French, with an average of 138 participants for each session. Webinars have been delivered on a variety of compliance-based topics (e.g., GST/HST, financial statements, books and records, fundraising, gifting and receipting, etc). The live webinars are recorded and made available for viewing on the CRA website. CISD has received limited feedback on the webinars but it has been primarily positive. The majority of interviewees from the voluntary sector praised the Charities Directorate for the improvements made in relation to the availability and accessibility of information for registered charities. Positive comments were received with respect to the quality of the information sessions delivered directly by the CISD to registered charities and, in particular, with respect to changes to the CRA website. Our survey found that the majority of registered charities are satisfied with outreach activities that are provided directly to them by the Charities Directorate  The survey of 500 registered charities that was conducted as part of this evaluation found that 71% of respondents indicated that if they or others in their charity looked for information or assistance in the past two years, they would go to the CRA for assistance. This is compared to the 7% of respondents that indicated they would go to another charity or non‑profit organization. In addition, of those that went to the Charities Directorate for assistance, 76% got the information they needed and 70% found it useful. Finally, when asked their preference, 85% of respondents said they would prefer to obtain information on how to comply with the ITA directly from the CRA essentially because it is the authority. The survey data indicates that turnover may not be a significant issue within the charitable sector. When asked how long they have been involved with their charity, 54% of respondents stated eight years or more and 25% stated four to less than eight years.


 5.2 Program Design and Delivery 
Considerable progress has been made on funding projects  The original program design anticipated that a total of 4 FTEs would be dedicated to this program. Although the number of FTEs allocated to the CPOP has changed over the years, it has ranged from 2.2 to 2.5 FTEs. The amount allocated for operating and maintenance costs has also fluctuated over the years. In certain instances, the CPOP has had to limit program activities (e.g., monitoring visits) due to budget restrictions. The CPOP is still in its infancy in terms of program delivery (19 of the 21 completed contribution projects ended on March 31, 2010, and 7 are still ongoing).   At the end of the formative evaluation in September 2007, CISD had conducted two calls for applications that resulted in 3 multi-year contribution agreements and the delivery of education had just begun. As of October 4, 2010, a total of 28 contribution agreements had been entered into with a total of 16 contribution recipients - 15 registered charities and 1 non‑profit organization. The CPOP has also made significant improvements in the last two calls for applications in terms of allocating the contribution funding and avoiding the lapsing of funds at the program level. There have been a total of five calls for applications. The fifth call for applications resulted in 7 contribution agreements that are currently underway but are planned for completion by March 31, 2011. Each call for application has focused on different funding – or compliance - priorities. Other than the first call for applications, each call has had more than one funding priority. As indicated in Figure 1, the second call had 2 funding priorities, the third and fifth calls had 3 funding priorities, and the fourth call had 4 funding priorities. Compliance-based education and training has now been developed by contribution recipients on a variety of topics and delivered in a variety of formats – from in-person workshops to web-based information and tools – to registered charities and potential registered charities across the country. Contribution recipients are spread across the country and training and education has been delivered and, in the case of web-based information and tools, made available to charities across the country. Refer to Appendix C for a complete list of contribution recipients and their projects. The feedback data collected by contribution recipients from participants and/or users of the training and education has been overwhelmingly positive. In some instances, contribution recipients hired consultants to conduct an independent evaluation of their contribution project. Depending on the project, contribution recipients used a variety of methods to obtain feedback and assess the extent to which participants were satisfied with the training and education and/or whether they found it useful. For the most part contribution recipients have developed and delivered the training and education in accordance with their agreements. In certain instances, adjustments had to be made due to time constraints and the changes were managed accordingly. Time constraints were particularly evident in single year - as opposed to multi-year - contribution projects. For example, the evaluation team found that some contribution recipients did not have enough time to implement the evaluation plan and collect the required data within the timeframe of the project. Of the 28 contribution projects, 22 have been single-year – in some cases less than a year - as opposed to multi-year projects. In the case of single-year projects, the evaluation report was due a month after completion of the project. This does not, realistically, give the contribution recipient much time to collect and assess data. It should be acknowledged that the CPOP is the only contribution program administered by the CRA. As a result, employees had a significant learning curve not only in terms of understanding the many aspects of non‑compliance – as identified in the funding priorities – but also in terms of learning how best to manage and administer a contribution program. This combined with the turnover in employees has resulted in the CPOP essentially being in a continuous learning environment with little opportunity to apply what has been learned based on previous experience. Figure 1: Funding Priorities  Call 1 2005-2006  Registered Charity Information Return (T3010) Call 2 2006-2008  (1) Conducting foreign activities in a manner that is compliant with a charity's regulatory obligations under the ITA. (2) Raising funds, issuing receipts, and maintaining books and records in a manner that is compliant with the charity's obligations under the ITA. Call 3 2008-2009  (1) Projects that focus on the development of tools designed to assist small and rural charities in locating and/or accessing local, regional, and/or provincial information/ resources intended to support charities in meeting their regulatory obligations under the ITA.  (2) Projects with broad national application designed to raise the awareness and capacity of boards of directors regarding their compliance obligations under the ITA. (3) Projects that foster collaboration with other registered charities to increase the ability of small and rural charities to meet their obligations under the ITA. Call 4 2009-2010  (1) Explaining the requirements and obligations of charitable registration to organizations that are considering registration.  (2) Teaching registered charities how to avoid making gifts to non qualified donees. (3) Researching best practices for charities to safeguard against terrorism. (4) Providing small and rural charities with access to resources. Call 5 2010-2011  (1) Educating charities on compliant fundraising practices. (2) Educating charities and/or donors about tax shelter donation arrangements and false receipting. (3) Promoting transparency and accountability in the sector. Improvements have been made to operating procedures but additional guidance is required to support the CPOP  The CPOP has made progress in terms of its internal operating procedures. The program has now established both an electronic and hard-copy filing system where all program information is stored. Templates are in place for use by program officers; however, there are still gaps in the operating procedures that need to be addressed (e.g., dispute resolution). The CPOP has developed templates and a document entitled "Guidelines for Recipients" for use by contribution recipients and these have been amended to reflect some of what has been learned to date. The CPOP has also taken steps to provide applicants with better information as to why they were not successful in order to improve transparency and accountability. In reviewing other grant and contribution programs, the evaluation team found several federal and provincial government organizations that had information that could be useful to the CPOP from a program improvement perspective. For example, the Ontario Trillium Foundation has a webpage entitled "About Unsuccessful Applications". It provides resource material pertaining to some of the reasons why applications are declined. Others have developed guides for applicants and/or contribution recipients that also serve as guidance for program officers in the administration of the program. The Department of Justice Canada has developed "How to Apply for Funding" and Human Resources and Skills Development Canada has developed "A Guide to Managing Your Contribution Funds".  Most of the contribution recipients and applicants interviewed were generally satisfied with the Funding Guide and Application. Alternatively, some ARC members found that there was duplication in the content of the applications that were referred to them for review. It was felt that this may have been due to a lack of clarity in the Funding Guide and Application. The evaluation team also found some inconsistencies in the Funding Guide and Application and other documentation that is available to applicants on the program's webpage (e.g., terms and conditions and eligibility criteria). Contribution recipients' biggest concern was the amount of detailed financial information and, in some cases the frequency of data, which was required by the CPOP to administer the program. Although improvements have been made by the CPOP, concern was also expressed in terms of delays in the signing-off of contribution agreements and the impact on the timing of the start-up of some projects.  The CPOP requires contribution recipients to develop and implement an evaluation framework that describes, at a high level, the type of information that should be included (e.g., goals, objectives, activities, outputs, outcomes, etc.). The evaluation framework must be submitted within one month for single-year projects and within six months for multi-year projects. Contribution recipients must also provide progress reports and a final evaluation report. For multi-year projects, contribution recipients are also required to submit a mid-term evaluation report. The evaluation found that limited direction has been provided to contribution recipients on what should be included in an evaluation report in terms of performance measurement. As a result, the information collected by contribution recipients to date has not been consistent. Consistency may not be possible in all cases; however, it is important that performance measurement data be collected in a manner that can feed into an overall program performance measurement strategy. Many interviewees in both the formative and summative evaluations noted that the use of the ARC was a positive feature of the program and it was noted as a best practice. All interviewees strongly felt that the ARC added value and credibility to the selection process and improved the quality of applicants selected for funding. However, the evaluation team found that there is currently limited information available to ARC members with respect to their roles and responsibilities (e.g., terms of reference, conflict of interest policy, confidentiality policy, history of contribution projects to date, etc.). Terms and conditions need to be reviewed  The terms and conditions for the management of the CPOP were approved by the Treasury Board Secretariat in March 2005. Some aspects of the terms and conditions were not well defined which has lead to difficulties in managing and administering the CPOP. "Innovation"  The CPOP is the mechanism, as stated in the terms and conditions, by which the Charities Directorate chose to implement the JRT recommendation that "The regulator should find new, innovative ways of delivering education to charities by building partnerships with the sector." The terms and conditions do not; however, make any reference to innovation in the list of application requirements which outline what must be included in applications for funding. On the other hand, the Funding Guide and Application refers to the terms "innovative" or "innovation" throughout the document and identifies "the innovative nature of the project and its cost-effective aspects" as one factor that will be considered when reviewing and recommending applications for funding. The assessment criteria that is published on the CPOP webpage and the assessment sheets used by the ARC also make reference to the innovative nature of the project in one form or another. The Funding Guide and Application, in its glossary of terms, defines innovation as "The characteristics that make the proposed project different from other projects. Innovations may include adopting new approaches, dimensions, methods or technologies that will affect the effectiveness and efficiency of a project." Nevertheless, the evaluation team found that the concept of innovation and how it was applied as part of the review and approval process was not well understood by many of those interviewed. It was also unclear as to whether interviewees had a good understanding as to what would be considered innovative in terms of "training and education". The whole concept of innovation also raises the question as to the level of risk the program is willing to take in terms of failure. For example, is the CPOP willing to undertake a project that utilizes new technology to develop and deliver training and education and, if it fails, use it as a learning experience for future projects? "Partnerships"  The same JRT recommendation makes reference to the regulator finding ways to deliver education to charities by building partnerships with the sector. Most of the interviews with representatives from the voluntary sector felt that the program was having a positive impact on the relationship between the Charities Directorate and the voluntary sector. Contribution recipients have implemented a number of activities (e.g., in-person meetings, teleconferences, etc.) to improve information sharing amongst all of the projects. Contribution recipients were positive with respect to the CPOP's increased participation in these activities. Contribution recipients were also positive with respect to the increased emphasis the CPOP was placing on meeting with contribution recipients much earlier in the lifecycle of the agreement as part of the monitoring process. The majority of contribution recipients indicated that their relationship with the program had improved significantly over time but that there was still some hesitation on the part of CPOP to fully engage contribution recipients. This may be in part due to some confusion regarding the extent to which the CRA considers contribution agreements to be partnerships. For example, the CRA report entitled Small and Rural Charities: Making a Difference for Canadians (June 2008) refers to the contribution recipients as partners: "In addition, the CRA will partner with registered charities and non‑profit organizations serving the charitable sector, through the Contribution Program, to deliver educational programs including community based, in-person service for small and rural charities, where feasible." However, Clause 12.0 of the most recent contribution agreements clearly states that recipients should not represent themselves as a partner of the Crown. "No Employee or Agency Relationship: Neither the Recipient nor anyone else who is asked by the Recipient to help with this Project is an employee of the CRA. The Recipient understands that this Contribution Agreement does not make it a partner of the CRA or an agent of the CRA. The Recipient agrees not to represent itself, including in any agreement with a third party, as a partner or agent of the Crown." The evaluation team realizes this is a legal document and that the CRA must ensure that no employee or agency relationship is established with contribution recipients but it raises the question as to what constitutes a partnership in terms of this program.  Other federal and provincial grant and contribution programs are focused on partnerships; however, it appears that additional emphasis is placed on the partnerships entered into among applicants. The Justice Partnership and Innovation Program (JPIP), Department of Justice (DOJ) Canada, strongly promotes partnerships and consortia as part of the application process. Applicants are encouraged to identify potential funding partnerships in their applications. JPIP even offers to help applicants identify potential partners for their projects. DOJ also strongly encourages applicants to form partnerships and receive associated in-kind and financial support to leverage the funding that is being requested from JPIP. Similarly, the Ontario Trillium Foundation (OTF), Ontario Ministry of Culture, supports projects that help young people navigate and shape their economic future. The Call for Proposal, Economic Opportunities for Ontario Youth, Future Fund 2010‑2011, states that the OTF "…encourages collaborative applications from organizations representing diverse communities ..." and that "Applications should describe the nature of the collaboration and outline the strengths of the partnership." Perhaps even more importantly than what is considered a partnership, is the risk associated with relying on a third-party to deliver training and education on what many representatives of the Charities Directorate perceive as an important aspect of their mandate. Concerns were raised in particular with respect to the quality control aspect of the training and education and the impact on the Charities Directorate if information was not accurately interpreted by contribution recipients. The CPOP has implemented a quality review process to mitigate this risk. "Eligible Recipients"  In order to be eligible to receive project funding from the CPOP, applicants must be a registered charity as defined by the ITA or a non-profit organization serving the charitable sector. Most interviewees from the voluntary sector did not feel that the eligible recipients should be changed in any way. The majority did feel; however, that, if there was a change, eligible recipients should not be expanded to include for‑profit organizations.  Some concerns were raised by representatives of the Charities Directorate and the evaluation team with regards to the inclusion of "non‑profit organization serving the charitable sector". The evaluation was unable to find a clear explanation as to why non‑profit organizations were identified as eligible recipients. The Charities Directorate is responsible for administering the provisions of the ITA related to registered charities; however, it does not have the same responsibility for non-profit organizations. Consequently, the Charities Directorate does not have a mechanism in place to verify the compliance history of a non-profit organization in the same manner as it does a registered charity. Similarly, the Charities Directorate does not maintain a list that could be used to reach non-profit organizations to collaborate with them in the same way it does registered charities. The lack of contact information may be the reason why the number of non‑profit organizations that have applied for funding is 29 compared with the 193 registered charities (the remaining 8 did not fall into either category) since the start-up of the program. "Collaboration"  The terms and conditions for the program state that "Collaboration with the sector will be a defining feature of the planning and implementation of the projects under the Charities Partnership and Outreach Program. Ongoing communication and consultation with the Charities Advisory Committee, the sector, and other partners will be key to effective implementation of the funding program and the projects themselves." Treasury Board supports collaboration with applicants and recipients as a key element of any grants and contribution program. In fact, the Treasury Board Policy on Transfer Payments, which became effective in October 2008, includes significant new responsibilities with respect to ensuring that applicants and recipients are engaged when appropriate. The evaluation team found that two of the three funding priorities for the third call for applications and one of four priorities for the fourth call were based on collaboration with small and rural charities undertaken by the Charities Directorate as part of the small and rural charities initiative. Although not conducted by the CPOP itself, the results of the collaboration were used by the Charities Directorate to select funding priorities as well as inform contribution recipients in the development and delivery of contribution projects. The same level of research, analysis, and/or collaboration with the charitable sector was not evident for the remainder of the funding priorities. It is likely that data, such as audit findings, were used by the Charities Directorate to inform the selection of funding priorities; however, the evaluation team was unable to determine the extent to which it had been validated through collaboration with the charitable sector. Some collaboration with the charitable sector may be undertaken by other areas within the Charities Directorate; however, the evaluation team was unable to find evidence that this collaboration had been documented and then used to help identify and select funding priorities. Five of the 16 contribution recipients are categorized as medium-sized registered charities and 10 as large-sized based on the total revenue reported on their T3010 [Footnote 10]. The remaining contribution recipient is a non-profit organization and similar criteria have not been established in order to classify it as small, medium or large. The criteria used to assess applications for funding makes it less likely for small or medium-sized registered charities to receive funding. Some applicants expressed concern that some of those contribution recipients did not have the reach into certain communities (e.g., multicultural, faith-based, etc.) that smaller organizations with a more specific target group would have. The CPOP is not aligned with an overall Charities outreach strategy  The CRA views outreach as a dynamic and strategic interaction with target audiences to: increase awareness and encourage voluntary compliance; educate, inform, and promote CRA programs and services; and promote CRA as a leading-edge organization. In terms of promoting the program to potential applicants, the number of applications received for the five calls has ranged from a high of 57 to a low of 28. The number of applications referred to the ARC has ranged from a high of 34 to a low of 12. See Figure 2 for more detailed information on the number of applications received, referred to ARC, and funded. Figure 2: Applications Received, Referred to ARC, and Funded 





Calls
Received
Referred to ARC
Funded


Call 1 (2005-2006)
57
34
2


Call 2 (2006-2008)
51
16
4


Call 3 (2008-2009)
28
21
7


Call 4 (2009-2010)
53
12
8


Call 5 (2010-2011)
41
13
7


Total
230
96
28





Some applicants (both successful and unsuccessful) felt that the Charities Directorate could do more to promote the contribution program. As it is unclear what was expected from a planning perspective, it is difficult to assess whether the number of applicants, and contribution recipients should be considered a success. It should be noted that an increase in the number of applications would lead to an increased workload both on the part of the CPOP but also on the part of the ARC. The majority of ARC members interviewed as part of both the formative and summative evaluations commented that the workload associated with being an ARC member was substantial and required a significant time commitment. This raises the question as to the extent the CPOP wants to promote itself taking into consideration the resulting impact on workload. As indicated in Appendix D, contributions recipients are from across the country. The number of applications from various provinces and territories is fairly representative of the distribution of registered charities across Canada. Repeat applicants submitted a total of 81 of the 230 applications. A total of 15 of the 16 contribution recipients have been "repeat" applicants and 8 contribution recipients have been funded more than once. The terms and conditions sets out some limitations in terms of funding that restricts the number of times a contribution recipient can receive funding (i.e., the maximum number of successive years that the Agency will approve contributions to a recipient for a similar project under these terms and conditions shall not exceed three). This also raises the question as to if the program should be attracting new applicants or whether the current restrictions on funding are too limiting.  The program continues to integrate information on CPOP into existing outreach products and activities in order to promote itself and the training and education developed by the contribution recipients. A good example is the information included on the contribution projects under the title of "educating and training for charities" in the Charities Connection (formerly the Registered Charities Newsletter) in September 2010. The evaluation team did not find any evidence that an outreach strategy for the program had been developed and implemented. Nor was there evidence that the needs of the CPOP have been aligned with an outreach strategy for the CISD.  The evaluation team found evidence that the CISD was coordinating the delivery of the information sessions and webinars delivered by employees of the Charities Directorate. For example, the Charities Directorate announced that information sessions and webinars developed and delivered directly by the Charities Directorate - not those funded by the Charities Directorate and developed and delivered by contribution recipients – will be coordinated in the future [Footnote 11]. Information sessions will be presented from September to November of each year and webinars from January to June. The Policy, Planning and Legislation Division (PPLD) in the Charities Directorate is also responsible for a number of outreach activities. Although the target audience is donors (the public) as opposed to registered charities, it does not appear that an outreach strategy for the Charities Directorate has been developed. The onus for communicating the training and education has, for the most part, been left to each contribution recipient. At the start of each project, contribution recipients are asked to submit a communications plan. Many contribution recipients felt that the Charities Directorate could do more to promote the training and education to assist them in reaching registered charities. Interviews conducted with representatives of the Charities Directorate outside the CPOP raised the question as to the extent to which the training and education projects had been communicated to the rest of the Charities Directorate. The evaluation team found that there was not a clear understanding of the CPOP itself and what it was trying to achieve.
 Top of Page 












Other grant and contribution programs provide options that could be considered for program improvement  The evaluation team was unable to find a contribution program that is directly comparable with the CPOP in terms of program design and delivery. Nonetheless, there are a number of grant and contribution programs administered by federal and provincial governments that could be used to identify alternatives to the CPOP's current delivery model. One best practice that was identified in the formative evaluation and was again mentioned by interviewees in the summative evaluation was that of a 2-tier application process. The applicant would first be required to submit a letter of intent and, if approval to proceed was given by the program, the applicant would then submit a more detailed application. It was felt that a 2-tier process would benefit both the Charities Directorate and applicants by streamlining the process and prevent applicants from putting significant time and effort into an application that is unlikely to receive funding. The DOJ provides annual funding to one Public Legal Education and Information (PLEI) organization which is recommended by the province. The funding is provided in the form of grants and contributions through the Justice Partnership and Innovation Program (JPIP). The annual funding provided to PLEI organizations is core funding as opposed to project funding; nonetheless, JPIP does provide an example of an alternative program design and delivery. Especially considering that a number of contribution recipients that have received funding from the CPOP are designated PLEI organizations. Many provincial governments, such as New Brunswick's Community Non-Profit Organizations Secretariat and Alberta's Ministry of Culture and Community Spirit, work closely with the non-profit and voluntary sector in their provinces. Another alternative to the current delivery model would be to revert back to the more traditional delivery model utilized by the CRA to deliver outreach. This would mean that the renewal of the contribution program would not be pursued and all outreach to registered charities would be developed and delivered directly to registered charities by the Charities Directorate. The current CRA investment of approximately $208,000 in salary and operating and maintenance costs could be reallocated to other outreach activities. However, it is unlikely that the same level of outreach could be achieved without the $3 million annual investment in the form of contribution funding from Treasury Board. In addition, without the ability to fund contribution projects, it would be impossible for the Charities Directorate to achieve CPOP's objective to "improve the capacity of the sector to develop and deliver sustainable compliance-based education programs". The majority of interviewees from the voluntary sector felt that the CPOP was beneficial to charities and has played a role in building a stronger relationship between the Charities Directorate and charitable sector. 


 5.3 Achievement of Expected Results 
Program objectives are difficult to measure  The evaluation team found that the program objectives are not well-defined and, therefore, difficult to measure. For example, the overall objective of the program is "to increase compliance and build a responsive charitable sector". This raises questions as to what is a "responsive charitable sector" and what performance indicators are needed to measure the level of "responsiveness". In terms of the main objective "to improve the capacity of the sector to develop and deliver sustainable compliance based educations programs", the assumption can be made that because the eligible recipients include both registered charities and non-profit organizations serving the charitable sector that the reference to the "sector" is intended to be the voluntary as opposed to charitable sector. Regardless, the term "capacity" needs to be further defined in order to determine if and how it can be measured.  A study conducted by the voluntary sector raises issues regarding the capacity of the voluntary sector related to training. The study found that many participants found it was often difficult to recruit volunteers who have the skills they need and many organizations have difficulties finding adequate time and money for volunteer training [Footnote 12]. The same study also found that cost and accessibility were frequently mentioned by participants as barriers to training. Although the Capacity to Serve study may be somewhat dated it is hard to imagine that the situation has improved over the years, in particular, in light of the recent economic downturn. It is interesting to note that of the registered charities that participated in the survey conducted as part of this evaluation, 86% did not feel that there were any barriers that prevented them or others in their charity from obtaining information and receiving assistance in complying with the ITA. Imagine Canada's "Sector Monitor" dated April 28, 2010, stated that many charities are experiencing challenges associated with the economic downturn. The United Kingdom Charities Commission has conducted surveys to establish and track the extent to which charities have been affected overall by the economic downtown. Their 2010 survey found that 59% of charities now say that they have been affected by the economic downturn, a slight increase from 56% in August 2009. The number of charities affected has increased for the fourth consecutive time since the survey was first conducted in September 2008 when 38% reported an impact.  The same issues around capacity can be raised with respect to the second main objective "to increase the capacity of the charitable sector in meeting regulatory compliance requirements in a sustainable fashion". To further complicate the achievement of results, this objective adds the concept of sustainability to the mix. The program provides project funding to contribution recipients to develop and deliver training and education projects. Applicants are asked to address the issue of sustainability as part of the application process; however, the majority of contribution recipients have not been able to sustain their projects once the funding has been discontinued. The lack of sustainability of the training and education delivered as part of the contribution projects was a concern raised by many contribution recipients. Several had received requests for additional training and education after the funding period had expired. Many thought that a considerable amount of time and money had been invested and that a way to maintain the contribution projects on a longer-term basis should be found. For example, lower dollar funding could be provided through grants - which are less burdensome on the part of the program and recipients to administer than contributions - or contracts which would increase the return on investment.
 Top of Page 












Limited progress in measuring program performance  The very nature of this program, which relies on third parties for the delivery of training and education and, as a result, the collection of data in order to assess the overall impact of the program, makes performance measurement a challenge. The Independent Blue Ribbon Panel (BRP) on Grants and Contributions, commissioned by Treasury Board in June 2006 to recommend ways to make the delivery of grant and contribution programs more efficient and accountable, identified that performance measurement was a struggle for many grant and contribution programs. It also stressed the importance of having a performance measurement strategy developed as part of program design in order to ensure appropriate data is collected and reported. This does not take away from the fact that little progress has been made by CPOP since the formative evaluation in terms of developing and implementing a performance measurement strategy. A performance measurement strategy is even more important now than at the time of the formative given the increased emphasis the Treasury Board Secretariat has placed on ensuring that grant and contribution programs are able to achieve results [Footnote 13]. The CPOP is not using the information provided by contribution recipients to assess performance at the program level. The BRP also noted that, while grant and contribution programs are designed to achieve public policy objectives, it is rare that a single recipient is in a position to meet these objectives alone. Another element that impacts performance measurement and the establishment of baselines by which to measure change in compliance behavior is the changing funding priorities. As stated previously, there have been five calls for applications. Each call has had different funding priorities and, with the exception of the first call for applications, each call has had more than one funding priority. Consequently, all 28 contribution projects are not aligned with one funding priority. Each funding priority should, in all probability, have its own performance indicators and baseline data, which lessen the program's ability to measure the impact of the program.


  6. Conclusion 
Ensuring the integrity of the charitable sector is important not only because of the tax benefits associated with being or contributing to a registered charity but because of the larger role the sector plays in the day to day lives of Canadians. The CPOP's objective of raising awareness of the charitable sector and of the regulatory obligations under the ITA is clearly aligned with the Charities Directorate's mission "to  promote compliance with the income tax legislation and regulations relating to charities through education … thereby contributing to the integrity of the charitable sector and the social well-being of Canadians." There is a variety of data which suggests that, although compliance by registered charities has improved over the past several years, there is still an ongoing need for assistance to registered charities in understanding the requirements of the ITA. The majority of representatives from the voluntary sector strongly felt that the CPOP was meeting a need by making a variety of resources available to assist registered charities. The feedback data collected by contribution recipients from participants and/or users of the training and education has been overwhelmingly positive. The CPOP has made progress, particularly in terms of the number of contribution projects that have developed and delivered on compliance-based training and education, since the formative evaluation in April 2008. Although there are gaps in operating procedures these deficiencies can be overcome especially in light of what has been learned by the program over the past several years. However, there are still considerable gaps in performance measurement, which may, in part, be due to program objectives not being well-defined and, not easily measured. Additionally, the terms and conditions for this program require clarification in order to ensure that they are implemented in a manner that is well understood by all stakeholders. The CPOP has also not been aligned with an overall Charities Directorate outreach strategy. The need to renew the terms and conditions in March 2011 provides an excellent opportunity for the Charities Directorate to reassess the program and determine how it aligns with the strategic direction of the Charities Directorate.
 Top of Page 












 7. Recommendations 
Based on the findings of this evaluation, program management should: 
in light of the program experience over the last five years and the findings of this evaluation, review the terms and conditions including the current objectives to ensure that they are more realistic and measurable;
once the terms and conditions and objectives are clarified, focus on developing and implementing a performance measurement strategy;
ensure that the CPOP is aligned with an outreach strategy for the Charities Directorate; and
continue to make improvements to internal operating procedures and guidance for program participants.



 8. Management Response 
In light of the program experience over the last five years and the  findings of this evaluation, review the terms and conditions including the current objectives to ensure that they are more realistic and measurable  The Charities Directorate agrees with this recommendation. The program was established with broad objectives that were meant to be flexible, to enable the program to explore and adapt itself to the unique circumstances of the sector. The intention at the program's inception was to learn as the program matured and adapt it accordingly. We believe that we have made strides in incorporating what has been learned into each subsequent call for proposals. It is time to look at the program objectives again, in light of our experience and in light of the findings of the evaluation team, to ensure the program is well-positioned for the future. The Charities Directorate will review the terms and conditions including the current objectives to ensure they are more realistic and measurable, by December 2011.  Once the terms and conditions and objectives are clarified, focus on developing and implementing a performance measurement strategy  The Charities Directorate agrees with this recommendation. The Directorate is currently developing performance indicators, which will be piloted during the current call for proposals. The Directorate will develop a performance measurement strategy by December 2011. Ensure that the CPOP is aligned with an outreach strategy for the Charities Directorate  The Charities Directorate agrees with this recommendation and is currently taking the necessary steps to align CPOP with the Directorate's outreach strategy. The recent reorganization within the CISD has brought together all of the Division's outreach activities under one manager. In addition, a new Directorate outreach committee has been established, whose mandate extends to CPOP. As well, the Directorate has begun leveraging the products developed by CPOP recipients in many aspects of its work, including the registration process and in field audits. Continue to make improvements to internal operating procedures and guidance for program participants   The Charities Directorate agrees with this recommendation. The Directorate will continue to make improvements to internal operating procedures and guidance for program participants. The Directorate is piloting internal service standards in relation to financial review of claims and technical review of products. 
 Top of Page 












  Appendix A: Glossary of Terms 
Application Review Committee (ARC) – Applications received through the CPOP that meet the screening criteria are forwarded to an Application Review Committee (ARC). The ARC includes representation from the CRA and the sector. Depending on the nature of the applications, representatives from other federal departments, the provinces, territories, and academia may also be involved in the review. The Committee considers factors such as innovativeness, sustainability, and scope of the project when evaluating the applications. Blue Ribbon Panel (BRP) – The Blue Ribbon Panel was an independent panel commissioned in June 2006 by the President of the Treasury Board Secretariat. The panel conducted a six-month review of the administration of federal grant and contribution programs and recommended measures to make the delivery of these programs more efficient while ensuring greater accountability. Charitable purposes - The courts have identified four categories of charity:  (1) the relief of poverty; (2) the advancement of education; (3) the advancement of religion; and (4) certain other purposes that benefit the community in a way the courts have said is charitable. An organization's purposes must fall within one or more of these categories to be considered for registration as a charity.  Charitable sector – The charitable sector is defined by those charities that are federally registered under the Income Tax Act.  Contribution – Is a transfer payment subject to performance conditions specified in a funding agreement. A contribution is to be accounted for and is subject to audit.  Contribution agreement –Is a written agreement or documentation constituting an agreement between the Government of Canada and an applicant or a recipient setting out the obligations or understandings of both with respect to one or more transfer payments. Formative evaluation – A formative evaluation is a type of evaluation that has the purpose of ongoing program improvement. It is usually conducted early in the implementation of a program, and used to evaluate if the program is on the right track to achieving its objectives. This type of evaluation usually focuses on issues such as implementation, relevance and possible alternatives or modifications. Grant – Is a transfer payment subject to pre-established eligibility and other entitlement criteria. A grant is not subject to being accounted for by a recipient nor normally subject to audit by the department. The recipient may be required to report on results achieved. Official Donation Receipts – Registered charities can issue official donation receipts (also referred to as "tax receipts") to acknowledge gifts. An official donation receipt is subject to particular requirements under the Income Tax Regulations including identification that it is an official receipt for income tax purposes.  Non-profit organization – A non-profit organization is an association, club, or society that is operated exclusively for social welfare, civic improvement, pleasure, recreation, or any other purpose except profit. It is not a charity. No part of the organization's income can be payable to or available for the personal benefit of any proprietor, member, or shareholder, unless the recipient is a club, society, or association whose primary purpose and function is to promote amateur athletics in Canada. Performance measurement strategy – Is the selection, development and ongoing use of performance measures for program management or decision‑making. Recipient – Is an individual or entity that either has been authorized to receive a transfer payment or that has received that transfer payment. Registered charity – A registered charity refers to a charitable organization, public foundation, or private foundation that was established in Canada and is resident in Canada. It is operated for charitable purposes and must devote its resources to charitable activities. A registered charity has received a registration number from the Canada Revenue Agency and is exempt from paying tax on its revenue. It can issue donation receipts for gifts that it receives.  Summative evaluation – Summative evaluations are typically conducted further into the implementation of a program and focus on the achievement of results. This type of evaluation focuses on program results, especially for making decisions about program continuation, expansion, reduction and funding. It addresses outcomes in order to evaluate the program in terms of effectiveness as compared with similar type programs. Terms and conditions – Is a document, approved by the Treasury Board Secretariat or a minister, which sets out the parameters under which transfer payments may be made for a given program.  Transfer payment – Is a monetary payment, or a transfer of goods, services or assets made, on the basis of an appropriation, to a third party, including a Crown corporation, that does not result in the acquisition by the Government of Canada of any goods, services or assets. Transfer payments are categorized as grants, contributions and other transfer payments. Transfer payments do not include investments, loans or loan guarantees. Treasury Board Policy on Transfer Payments – The objective of this policy is to ensure that transfer payment programs are managed with integrity, transparency and accountability in a manner that is sensitive to risks; are citizen and recipient-focused; and are designed and delivered to address government priorities in achieving results for Canadians. Voluntary sector –The voluntary sector is one of the three pillars, along with the public and private sector, which make-up Canadian society. The voluntary sector, in its broadest sense, is composed of all non-profit organizations (including registered charities) that exist in Canada.
 Top of Page 












  Appendix B: Registered Charity versus Non-profit organization
Registered charities are often referred to as non-profit organizations. However, while both types of organizations operate on a non-profit basis, the two types are defined differently under the ITA.





Topic
Registered Charity
Non-Profit Organization


Purposes
Must be established and operate exclusively for charitable purposes.
Can operate for social welfare, civic improvement, pleasure, sport, recreation, or any other purpose except profit.Cannot operate exclusively for charitable purposes.


Registration
Must apply to the CRA and be approved for registration as a charity.
No registration process for income tax purposes.


Charitable registration number
Is issued a charitable registration number upon approval by the CRA
Is not issued a charitable registration number


Tax receipts
Can issue official donation receipts for income tax purposes.
Cannot issue official donation receipts for income tax purposes.


Designation
Is designated by the CRA as a charitable organization, a public foundation, or a private foundation
Does not receive a designation.


Returns
Must file an annual information return (Form T3010) within six months of its fiscal period end.
May have to file a Corporate Income Tax Return (if incorporated), and/or an information return (Form T1044) within six months of its fiscal period end.


Personal benefits to members
Cannot use its income to personally benefit its members.
Cannot use its income to personally benefit its members.


Tax exempt status
Is exempt from paying income tax.
Is generally exempt from paying income tax. May be taxable on property income or on capital gains.





 Top of Page 












 Appendix C: Contribution Recipients and Projects 





No.
Recipient
Subject
Project Title
Project Status


1
Actions interculturelles de développement et d'éducation (AIDE)
Requirements and obligations of charitable registration and alternatives
Cultivate Charity
CompletedMarch 31, 2010


2
Canadian Association of the Deaf (CAD)
Fundraising, receipting, and maintaining books and records
Compliance in the Disability Charity Sector
CompletedMarch 31, 2010


3
Canadian Council for International Co‑operation
Foreign Activities
Charity Law Information Project
CompletedMarch 31, 2010


4
Centre for Voluntary Sector Research and Development (CVSRD)
Registered Charity Information Return (T3010)
Building Awareness and Capacity of Charities to File Complete and Accurate T3010As on Time
CompletedMarch 31, 2009


5
CVSRD
Compliance for Small and Rural Charities
The Charities File: On Board
CompletedMarch 31, 2010


6
CVSRD
Fundraising Practices
Charities File: Fundraising, Learning by Example
OngoingMarch 31, 2011


7
CentrePoint Non‑Profit Management
Requirements and obligations of charitable registration and alternatives
Charitable Registration Portal
CompletedMarch 31, 2010


8
Community Sector Council Newfoundland and Labrador 
Compliance for Small and Rural Charities
Atlantic Charities Learning Exchange (ACLE)
CompletedMarch 31, 2010


9
Community Sector Council Newfoundland and Labrador Community
Fundraising Practices
Atlantic Charities Learning Exchange (ACLE) - Compliant Fundraising Practices
OngoingMarch 31, 2011


10
Éducaloi
Requirements and obligations of charitable registration and alternatives
Protégez autant votre organisation que sa mission
CompletedMarch 31, 2010


11
Éducaloi
Accountability and Transparency in the Charitable Sector
Avoir le don de bien gérer votre organisation!
OngoingMarch 31, 2011


12
Fraser Valley Centre for Social Enterprise
Compliance for Small and Rural Charities
Capacity Building Workshops for Charities in Western Canada
CompletedMarch 31, 2010


13
Imagine Canada
Requirements and obligations of charitable registration and alternatives
Receipts, Records and Reports: Online Help for Charities
Completed March 31, 2010


14
Imagine Canada
Fundraising, receipting, and maintaining books and records
Extending Our Reach
CompletedMarch 31, 2010


15
Imagine Canada
Accountability and Transparency in the Charitable Sector
An Accountability Portal for the Charitable Sector
OngoingMarch 31, 2011


16
Legal Information Society of Nova Scotia (LISNS)
Registered Charity Information Return (T3010)
The Form T-3010A, Registered Charity Information Return: Everything you always wanted to know but were afraid to ask!
CompletedJanuary 5, 2009


17
LISNS
Requirements and obligations of charitable registration and alternatives
To Be or Not to Be: A Charity Decision Tree
CompletedMarch 31, 2010


18
Legal Resource Centre of Alberta Ltd.
Fundraising, receipting, and maintaining books and records
Charitable Sector Engagement Project: Enhancing Voluntary Compliance
CompletedMarch 31, 2010


19
Legal Resource Centre of Alberta Ltd.
Compliance for Small and Rural Charities
Enhancing Voluntary Compliance by Small and Rural Charities
CompletedMarch 31, 2010


20
Legal Resource Centre of Alberta Ltd.
Accountability and Transparency in the Charitable Sector
Charity Central: Road to Accountability
OngoingMarch 31, 2011


21
Mount Royal University - Institute for Non‑profit Studies
Compliance for Small and Rural Charities
Small and Rural charities: On-Line Compliance Support
CompletedMarch 31, 2010


22
Ontario Community Support Association (OCSA)
Gifting to qualified donees and avoiding involvement in terrorism
Charities Law Information Program (CLIP): A project to increase the awareness and compliance of the Income Tax Act
CompletedMarch 31, 2010


23
OCSA
Compliance for Small and Rural Charities
CLIP: Increasing Awareness and Compliance of the Income Tax Act: Registration, Non-Qualified Donees and Terrorism
CompletedMarch 31, 2010


24
OCSA
Avoiding false receipting and tax shelter situations
CLIP: Compliant Fundraising Practices and Reducing Tax Schemes and False Receipting
OngoingMarch 31, 2011


25
Public Legal Education and Information Service of New Brunswick (PLEIS‑NB)
Compliance for Small and Rural Charities
Welcome Aboard
CompletedMarch 31, 2010


26
Public Legal Education Association of Saskatchewan (PLEA‑SK)
Requirements and obligations of charitable registration and alternatives
Making the Choice - Deciding to Register as a Charity
CompletedMarch 31, 2010


27
Université du Québec à Montréal (UQAM)
Access to resources for Small and Rural Charities
Project Réseau PHIL / Portal et base de Connaissance PHIL
Completed March 31, 2010


28
UQAM
Fundraising Practices
PHIL-EVAL Conscientisation et outils d'auto-évaluation de l'observance fiscale
OngoingMarch 31, 2011





 Top of Page 












 Appendix D: Map of Contribution Recipients 
View a larger version of this image 







Appendix D provides a map of contribution recipients. There have been five calls for applications under the CPOP and a total of 28 contribution agreements have been signed with 15 registered charities and 1 non-profit organization. Applications were received from various organizations across Canada.  The following organizations received funding: Community Sector Council Newfoundland and Labrador; Legal Information Society of Nova Scotia; Public Legal Education and Information Service of New Brunswick; Actions interculturelles de développement et d'éducation (Quebec); Université du Québec à Montréal and Éducaloi; Canadian Association of the Deaf (Ontario; Centre for Voluntary Sector Research and Development (Ontario) and Canadian Council for International Co-operation (Ontario); Ontario Community Support Association; Imagine Canada (Ontario); Public Legal Education Association of Saskatchewan; Legal Resource Centre of Alberta Ltd; Centrepoint Non-Profit Management (Alberta); Mount Royal University - Centre for Non-Profit Studies (Alberta); and, Fraser Valley Centre for Social Enterprise (British Columbia). Some of these organizations were funded for more than one project.




Footnote _ftn1


					   Presentation by the Director General, Charities Directorate, February 2010.
					

Return to footnote_ftn1 Referrer


Footnote _ftn2


					   Caring Canadians, Involved Canadians: Highlights from the 2007 Canada Survey of Giving, Volunteering and Participating (June 2009).
					

Return to footnote_ftn2 Referrer


Footnote _ftn3


					   Satellite Account on Non‑profit Institutions and Volunteering 1997 to 2007 (Statistics Canada, December 2009).
					

Return to footnote_ftn3 Referrer


Footnote _ftn4


					   Ibid.
					

Return to footnote_ftn4 Referrer


Footnote _ftn5


					   Ibid.
					

Return to footnote_ftn5 Referrer


Footnote _ftn6


					   Caring Canadians, Involved Canadians: Highlights from the 2007 Canada Survey of Giving, Volunteering and Participating (June 2009).
					

Return to footnote_ftn6 Referrer


Footnote _ftn7


					   report (CRA, June 2008).
					

Return to footnote_ftn7 Referrer


Footnote _ftn8

Perspective on Fundraising: What Charities Report to the Canada Revenue Agency (Imagine Canada, June 2009).
					

Return to footnote_ftn8 Referrer


Footnote _ftn9


					   Charities Connection (September 2010).
					

Return to footnote_ftn9 Referrer


Footnote _ftn10


					   Registered charities are categorized as small if they reported total revenue of less than $100,000, medium if they reported $100,001-$1,000,000, and large if they reported >$1,000,000.
					

Return to footnote_ftn10 Referrer


Footnote _ftn11


					   Charities Connection (September 2010)
					

Return to footnote_ftn11 Referrer


Footnote _ftn12


					   The 
Capacity to Serve: A Qualitative Study of the Challenges Facing Canada's Nonprofit and Voluntary Organizations (Canadian Centre for Philanthropy, 2003)
					

Return to footnote_ftn12 Referrer


Footnote _ftn13


					   Treasury Board Policy on Transfer Payments (October 2008).
					

Return to footnote_ftn13 Referrer









Report a problem or mistake on this page












Please select all that apply:

A link, button or video is not working



It has a spelling mistake



Information is missing



Information is outdated or wrong



Login error when trying to access an account




I can't find what I'm looking for



Other issue not in this list



Submit



Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries, contact us.










Date modified:
2011-07-07





Enforcement and Disclosures Programs Evaluation


Final Report
Corporate Audit and Evaluation Branch October 2010  




Table of Contents

 Executive summary 
1.0 Introduction 
2.0 Background

2.1 The Challenge 
2.2 The CRA Response

2.2.1 The Criminal Investigations Program 
2.2.2 The Special Enforcement Program 
2.2.3 The Voluntary Disclosures Program 
2.2.4 The Informant Leads Program 
 
 
3.0 Methodology 
4.0 Study Limitations and Controls 
5.0 Evaluation Findings

5.1 Informant Leads and Voluntary Disclosures Programs do not align with EDD mandate 
5.2 CRA Enforcement Programs Lack Strategic Direction

5.2.1 Detection and Case Selection 
5.2.2 Deterrence 
5.2.3 Correction 
5.2.4 Delivery Model 
 
5.3 Partnerships with PPSC and RCMP Require Attention

5.3.1 Public Prosecution Service Canada 
5.3.2 Royal Canadian Mounted Police 
 
 
 Appendices

 Appendix A - Enforcement Within other Jurisdictions 
 Appendix B - Examples of CIP and SEP cases 
 Appendix C - Glossary of Terms 
 Appendix D - Example of an Agency Press Release for a Conviction of Tax Fraud 
 



     Executive Summary 
Introduction  This report presents the findings, conclusions and recommendations of the Enforcement and Disclosures Programs Evaluation.  The issues pursued by this study were: 
To what extent has the Enforcement and Disclosures Directorate (EDD) been successful in achieving its mission and enhancing the Agency's efforts to address non-compliance?
Does the Agency have a comprehensive approach to enforcement?
To what extent do internal and external factors impact the ability of EDD to achieve its objectives?
 Background   The Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) makes every attempt, through the provision of information and education, to assist taxpayers to voluntarily comply with their tax obligations. It also has the means to use both civil and criminal interventions on those who deliberately choose not to comply.  The CRA response to addressing the most serious forms of non-compliance is focussed within the EDD. The EDD is situated within the Compliance Programs Branch and tasked with a mission to deter, detect and correct tax evasion and non-compliance in the criminal economy.   The size of the “criminal economy” [Footnote 1] , the magnitude of tax fraud/evasion and the extent of criminal attacks on the CRA are all unknown. However, various indicators suggest that: 
The criminal economy in Canada may represent billions of dollars in untaxed revenues;
Tax evasion/fraud is a serious problem; and
Increasingly, tax administrations are the victims of serious criminal attacks by organized crime and others.
 The two programs within the EDD tasked with dealing with criminal non-compliance and the criminal element are the Criminal Investigations Program (CIP) and the Special Enforcement Program (SEP).  The CIP has broad based powers to investigate and gather evidence to support a prosecution of “tax evasion” or fraud. These powers are similar to the powers of any law enforcement agency with some limitations. During 2008-2009 with 453 full-time equivalents (FTEs), 199 full-scale investigations were referred for prosecution; 292 cases were prosecuted [Footnote 2] and 97% resulted in a conviction. Convictions resulted in almost $29 million in additional tax revenues, fines of just over $19 million, 42 prison sentences and 13 community services sentences.  The SEP conducts civil audits and undertakes other civil enforcement actions on individuals known or suspected of deriving income from illegal activities such as drug trafficking, fraud, prostitution and money laundering including motorcycle gang members and members of other organized crime syndicates. During 2008-2009 with 182 FTEs, SEP conducted 1,176 audits resulting in just over $101 million in assessments.  Two other programs within EDD that do not necessarily deal with criminal non-compliance or with the criminal element are the Voluntary Disclosures and Informant Leads Programs. The mandate of the Voluntary Disclosures Program (VDP) is to facilitate voluntary compliance with the legislation administered by the CRA by fostering and processing voluntary disclosures by non-compliant taxpayers and/or their representatives. The Informant Leads Program receives and processes tips or leads provided by the public regarding cases of potential non-compliance. Evaluation Methodology   A range of data collection and analysis methodologies were used in conducting the evaluation study. These included: internal and external interviews; detailed questionnaires sent to three foreign tax administrations (New Zealand, Australia and the United Kingdom); document, literature and file reviews; data analysis; and consultations with EDD middle and senior management. The evaluation also relied on an advisory committee to provide expert advice at critical points during the evaluation. Main Findings   Our evaluation of the EDD has identified that it is achieving results. Between 2004-05 and 2008-09, CIP contributed to the successful prosecution and subsequent conviction of almost 1,200 cases of criminal non-compliance. During the same period, almost 5,000 SEP audits of the criminal element resulted in the identification of over $428 million in federal tax revenues owing. However, the evaluation uncovered substantive issues that may be limiting the program's ability to achieve its mission of deterrence, detection and correction.  First, detection and referral of potential enforcement cases is largely occurring outside the EDD program in isolation of any comparative assessment against other cases. Selection or rejection of cases is office specific and not necessarily based on how those cases align to strategic objectives.  Second, with respect to deterrence, there appears to be little awareness on the part of the public about the Agency's enforcement capacity. Efforts to publicize convictions of prosecuted cases lack a proactive engagement of the media. The Agency has no knowledge of the take up rate of press releases relating to tax crime convictions. Although outside the Agency's direct realm of control, the average number of convictions resulting in custodial sentences for tax cases fall well below the average of other tax administrations and of white collar crime cases prosecuted in Canada. Data indicates that just over half of all fines levied by the courts with respect to convictions go uncollected. We found that over 85% of SEP assessments go uncollected. Further, there is no evidence that the Agency has a clear well publicized deterrence strategy that clearly links to a coordinated detection capability.  Third, although the EDD is accountable for program outcomes it lacks complete authority for program delivery. This has had an impact on partnerships, detection, case selection and the ability to achieve their mission. Fourth, key to the success of EDD programs are the relationships with public prosecutions, law enforcement agencies, collections and audit. We found that each of these relationships is showing signs of strain or incompatibility directly impacting objectives achievement.  We also found that both the Informant Leads Program and the VDP perform review processes focussed on a taxpayer group that would normally be addressed by regular audit areas. Only a small percentage of leads and voluntary disclosures are referred to CIP or SEP. While analysis of leads and disclosures may be a source of “strategic and tactical intelligence”, the majority of cases are not among the criminally non-compliant or suspected to be in the criminal economy. Overall, the Agency has a decentralized and somewhat disparate approach to enforcement and lacks a clear well articulated and operationally entrenched enforcement strategy. Shared ownership of objectives achievement is not clearly understood and managed and accountability with only limited authority has impacted the EDDs efforts to achieve its mandate.   It is important to note that the issues identified in this report are not unique to the CRA. Within the last 10 years tax administrations in the United States, Australia and the United Kingdom have all confronted many of these same issues.  The Webster Report, commissioned by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service, identified concerns with the Criminal Investigations delivery model, communication strategy and partnerships with legal counsel.  In the United Kingdom, the HMRC examined and modified processes around the use of intelligence and broader enforcement powers.  The Australian Tax Office has also modified its delivery model and established a new partnership approach to deal with egregious forms of non-compliance with the introduction of Project Wickenby. Recommendations   Based on the findings we offer the following recommendations: 
The Agency should determine the extent to which it wishes to strengthen its capability to pursue both criminal non-compliance and non-compliance in the criminal economy and then develop a comprehensive enforcement strategy. 
The EDD should engage internal and external partners in dialogue to discuss roles, expectations, impediments and responsibilities and seek solutions to the factors that appear to be negatively impacting partnerships. 
The Agency should review the appropriateness of the location of the Informant Leads Program and the VDP within the EDD.
 This report also identifies a number of alternative structures and processes employed by other tax administrations, both domestic and international, that provide options to consider. 


     1.0 Introduction 
 Compliance Programs Branch (CPB), requested assistance from the Program Evaluation Division to assess the effectiveness of EDD in achieving its mandate. Program Evaluation Division responded by developing an Evaluation Framework that defined the scope and approach of the evaluation study. The framework was approved by the Agency Management Committee in July 2008.  The issues pursued by this study were: 
To what extent has EDD been successful in achieving its mission and enhancing the Agency's efforts to address non-compliance?
Does the Agency have a comprehensive approach to enforcement?
To what extent do internal and external factors impact the ability of EDD to achieve its objectives? 
 This report presents the findings of the evaluation of EDD programs.


  2.0 Background
  “  A well-functioning tax and benefit system is essential to a healthy economy, a sustainable infrastructure, and a strong democracy.” [Footnote 3]  Although unpopular, taxation provides government with the financial resources to ensure the ongoing economic and social well-being of its citizens. Canada's tax administration is based on self assessment and voluntary compliance founded on the principles of trust and fairness - trust that Canadians will honestly comply with their tax obligations and that they will be treated fairly and respectfully by the tax authority.  Canadians generally comply with their tax obligations. Studies have found that most Canadians comply to a greater extent when audit and enforcement programs are in place [Footnote 4]. Yet if the perceived risk of getting caught is low and the benefit is sufficiently material, other survey-based reports [Footnote 5] indicate that certain segments of taxpayers will avoid reporting and/or paying their fair share of taxes. There will always be people that deliberately choose not to play by the rules or otherwise engage in various forms of tax evasion, criminal non-compliance or outright fraud. It is this segment of Canadian society that, if their behaviour were left unaddressed, would undermine the integrity of the Canadian tax administration and erode the principles of self assessment and voluntary compliance. 


     2.1 The Challenge 
 The challenge facing the Agency is twofold. First there are untaxed revenues within the criminal economy in Canada the size of which is largely unknown. A conservative estimate based on the following suggests that there are conceivably billions of dollars in unreported revenues.  Organized Crime, Drugs and Illicit Tobacco  
Since 2003, the “Integrated Proceeds of Crime” (IPOC) Units of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) has obtained the forfeiture of more than $64 million in cash and property, with an additional $143 million seized and waiting for disposition.
In 2006, the estimated street value of drugs seized in Canada amounted to $2.3 billion.
Marijuana is an industry with estimated revenues of $5 billion to $7 billion a year in British Columbia (B.C.). There are an estimated 20,000 marijuana grow-ops in houses across the province.
During 2006-2007, the Financial Transactions and Reports Analysis Centre of Canada (FINTRAC) disclosed 193 suspicious transaction cases with a total value of $9.8 billion.
In 2008, the federal and provincial governments together lost an estimated $2.4 billion in taxes from illicit tobacco.
 Second, tax evasion and criminal attacks on tax administrations are becoming increasingly complex and are growing. The following illustrate the potential magnitude of the problem: Tax Evasion and Tax Fraud  
Since 2007 the CRA has identified a growing trend in fraud perpetrated by unscrupulous tax preparers who were responsible for defrauding the tax system of tens of millions of dollars involving over 30,000 taxpayers.
Over a four year period (2001-2002 to 2004-2005) High Risk Analysis Teams (HRAT) within CPB at the CRA identified 1,900 cells claiming almost $31 million in fraudulent Goods and Services Tax/Harmonized Sales Tax (GST/HST) refunds of which about $15 million had been paid out.
The Ministère des Finances du Québec (MFQ) estimated tax evasion reduced revenues for the Government of Québec by about $2.5 billion.
The MFQ found the sectors with a tax evasion rate of more than 10% represented just over 20% of the Provincial gross domestic product (GDP) but accounted for 85% of tax losses.
Value added tax (VAT) fraud is a growing concern internationally and domestically. In 2005-2006 Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs (HMRC) identified fraudulent tax credits totalling £540 million; of this, HMRC was able to detect and prevent attempts worth £409 million, before they were paid out. 
European VAT fraud is growing at an alarming rate - both in its quantum and its level of sophistication - to the point that it is today beginning to affect the accuracy of Member states' trade statistics. Estimates vary concerning the actual level of VAT losses, with figures ranging from €60 billion to €100 billion per annum for all Member states. 
The Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) estimated that annual VAT tax losses from missing trader and carousel fraud within the United Kingdom (UK) are between £1.1 and £1.7 billion.
The UK National Fraud Authority indicates that the highest single area of fraud loss in the UK is attributed to tax fraud, estimated at £15.2 billion - approximately 3% of total tax liabilities.
 Various internal and external reports also indicate that tax administrations may be vulnerable to fraud not only perpetrated by unscrupulous taxpayers and tax preparers but by organized crime groups and terrorist organizations. 


     2.2 The CRA Response 
 The CRA endeavours to promote a level playing field where all taxpayers respect the principle of voluntary compliance and where non-compliance has known consequences. Recent research [Footnote 6] suggests that the principles of self assessment and voluntary compliance are respected when a tax administration adopts a responsive regulatory approach, striking a dynamic balance between deterrence and persuasion. The CRA uses, to a varying degree, a mix of service, education and enforcement to ensure compliance with Canada's tax laws, depending on whether taxpayers are willing to comply, do not succeed in complying, or choose not to comply. For the purpose of this study “enforcement” refers to both criminal and civil action taken to address criminal non-compliance and non-compliance within the criminal economy (see Appendix C - Glossary of Terms for definitions). The CRA response to addressing the most serious forms of non-compliance is focussed within the EDD. The EDD is situated within the Compliance Programs Branch and tasked with a mission to deter, detect and correct tax evasion and non-compliance in the criminal economy.  There are four programs within the EDD [Footnote 7]: 
Criminal Investigations Program (CIP)
Special Enforcement Program (SEP)
Voluntary Disclosures Program (VDP)
Informant Leads Program 
 The functional responsibility of the Enforcement Program is centralized at CRA Headquarters, while the CIP and SEP are operationally delivered through 32 Tax Service Offices (TSO) across the country under the management of an Assistant Director of Enforcement (ADE) who reports to the respective TSO Director. The VDP and Informant Leads Program are situated within five regional processing centres. Each of the programs is dependent on relationships or partnerships with other divisions or branches and in some cases external organizations in the achievement of their objectives. Program funding is transferred to each region which, in turn, allocates the resources based on regional priorities. Program production targets are negotiated between HQ and the Regions. Figure 1 presents the resource utilization of each of the programs during 2008-2009. The majority of EDD resources are dedicated to the CIP and SEP. Together these programs accounted for about 83% of total EDD direct FTEs and about 85% of direct utilized salaries Figure 1: 2008-2009 Resource Utilization by EDD Programs 





    
  CIP  
  SEP  
  VDP  
  Leads  
  TOTAL  


  Direct FTEs   
 453 
 182 
 84 
 43 
 762 


  Direct Salary Costs ($000s)   
 $32,049 
 $12,907 
 $5,285 
 $2,700 
 $52,941 


  O&M Costs ($000s)   
 n/a 
 n/a  
 n/a  
 n/a  
 $3,303 


  Total Program Costs** ($000s)   
     
     
     
     
  $56,244  





Source: EDD Program Statistics, CRA, 2008-2009  * Note: Total program costs do not reflect indirect salaries associated with support staff The following sections provide descriptions of each of the four programs and their roles within the CRA.


     2.2.1 The Criminal Investigations Program 
 The mandate of the CIP is to investigate suspected cases of tax evasion, fraud and other serious violations of tax laws.  Tax evasion is a crime punishable on summary conviction by a fine ranging from 50% to 200% of the evaded tax and up to two years imprisonment and conviction on indictment to a fine ranging from 100% to 200% of evaded tax and up to five years imprisonment.  Criminal investigations differ significantly from other Agency programs - CIP is the law enforcement arm of the Agency. As such, investigators must gather evidence that demonstrates, beyond a reasonable doubt, that a crime was committed (“actus reus”) and that the taxpayer knew that a crime was being committed (“mens rea”).  The roles and responsibilities of CRA investigators are largely different from those of their audit counterparts and are more similar to those of investigators in other law enforcement agencies. CRA investigators are empowered to obtain evidence by way of a judicially authorized search warrant or production order issued under the Criminal Code. Evidence can also be obtained through cooperation with third parties, by undertaking limited surveillance or with the assistance of wiretap evidence obtained through the cooperation of police authorities. Both the evidence gathered and the investigators themselves must stand up to the scrutiny of a criminal proceeding.  The CIP is dependent on the following partnerships and close working relationships with organizations both external and internal to the CRA in achieving its objectives: 
CIP cases are prosecuted by and convictions sought through lawyers within the “Public Prosecution Service Canada” (PPSC) - an independent organization reporting to Parliament through the Attorney General of Canada.
The RCMP assists CIP investigators in the conduct of search and seizures of evidence to ensure the safety of the officers involved.
FINTRAC refers suspicious transaction cases to the CRA for further investigation.
Various CRA Audit programs refer audit cases for possible investigation where tax evasion is suspected.
Public Affairs Branch is responsible for ensuring press releases of convictions are appropriately drafted and distributed to the media.
  During 2008-2009, 199 full-scale investigations were referred to PPSC and PPSC secured 292 prosecutions [Footnote 8] of which about 97% resulted in conviction. Convictions resulted in almost $29 million in additional tax revenues (“Taxes On Which Convicted”) or about $112,700 per conviction. The fines levied amounted to over $19 million, or almost $77,900 per conviction.  Figure 2 presents the numbers of completed full-scale investigations and cases accepted for prosecution, as well the prosecution and conviction rates from 2004-2005 to 2008-2009. Figure 2 







Source: CIP Program Statistics, Enforcement and Disclosures Directorate  On average, about 77% of completed full-scale investigations were accepted for prosecution by the PPSC between 2004-2005 and 2008-2009. At the same time, the conviction rate averaged about 95%. Convictions resulting from CIP investigations yielded the following average results between 2004-2005 and 2008-2009: 
Over $32 million in taxes on which convicted or about $135,000 per conviction
About $16.2 million in fines levied or about $68,000 per conviction
About 29 incarcerations per year



   2.2.2 The Special Enforcement Program 
 The SEP conducts civil audits and undertakes other civil enforcement actions, such as enforcing the filing of tax returns, on individuals known or suspected of deriving income from illegal activities. The program objectives are: 
to reduce the accumulation of unreported illicit wealth amassed by these individuals, thereby limiting the financial ability to continue or expand illegal activities
to reduce tax non-compliance in the criminal economy
 In contrast with voluntarily and contingently compliant taxpayers who generally have reasonable records available when they undergo regular audits, it's unlikely that individuals who are involved in illegal activities keep records of their criminal proceeds. Most transactions are likely of a cash nature to minimize tracking their revenues. Auditing these individuals is therefore very difficult and often requires establishing the net worth of the individual by comparing their standard of living to reported income.  SEP audits target individuals involved in drug trafficking, fraud, prostitution and money laundering including motorcycle gang members and members of organized crime syndicates [Footnote 9]. There is an inherent risk to the SEP auditor in auditing persons involved in criminality.  The SEP is dependent on the following partnerships and close working relationships with other organizations both external and internal to the CRA in achieving its objectives:   
The RCMP, municipal and provincial police agencies and FINTRAC for the detection and referral of audit cases.
Taxpayer Services and Debt Management Branch (TSDMB) is responsible for administering collections actions for SEP assessments.
 During 2008-2009 SEP conducted 1,176 audits resulting in just over $101 million in “Tax Earned by Audit” (TEBA). Figure 3 presents the trends in key SEP audit results from 1997-1998 to 2008-2009.  Figure 3 







Source: SEP Program Statistics, Enforcement and Disclosures Directorate  There has been fairly consistent year-over-year growth in TEBA averaging over 8% per year between 2004-2005 and 2008-2009. SEP TEBA reached $101 million during 2008-2009. At the same time, there was considerable year-over-year growth in TEBA per SEP audit, averaging 12% per year between 2004-2005 and 2008-2009 to reach over $115,000 per audit in 2008-2009.


   2.2.3 The Voluntary Disclosures Program 
 The mandate of the VDP is to facilitate voluntary compliance with the legislation administered by the CRA by processing voluntary disclosures by non-compliant taxpayers and/or their representatives. The linkage between the VDP mandate and the Directorate's mandate to “deter, detect and correct, tax evasion and criminal non-compliance” is unclear.  The VDP is designed to encourage taxpayers to voluntarily make disclosures to correct inaccurate or incomplete information, or to disclose information not previously reported without penalty or prosecution and sometimes with reduced interest.  During 2008-2009, 11,390 processed voluntary disclosures resulted in almost $572 million in additional federal tax revenues, as well as about $38.6 million in additional “provincial tax” revenues. The penalties waived on accepted voluntary disclosures amounted to about $107 million during 2008. There was also about $86 million in interest waived as a result of accepted voluntary disclosures during this period.


     2.2.4 The Informant Leads Program 
 The Agency cannot possibly identify every case of non-compliance; therefore, the Agency encourages Canadians, through the Informant Leads Program, to provide it with tips or leads to assist it in better addressing non-compliance.  The Informant Leads Program is delivered with support from CRA audit programs. Audit staff regularly work with the Leads units in reviewing leads obtained and selecting those for more in-depth examination.  There were 24,280 leads received during fiscal 2008-2009. Average growth in the number of leads received has remained flat from 1998-1999 to 2008-2009, though there have been fluctuations during this period.


     3.0 Methodology 
 All of the following data collection and analysis methodologies have been used in the conduct of this evaluation to yield balanced and supportable findings.  
 Interviews (internal to the CRA) - Individual and group interviews were carried out with 200 Agency management and staff from the EDD, Audit, TSDMB, Appeals Branch, Public Affairs Branch (PAB) and the Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs Branch (LPRAB) involved in or impacted by enforcement programs across the various Headquarter (HQ) branches, regional offices and TSOs. 
 Interviews (external to the CRA) - Individual and group interviews were carried out with 150 representatives from external partners and other organizations with enforcement responsibilities (e.g. PPSC, RCMP, Ontario Securities Commission, Competition Bureau, Criminal Intelligence Services Canada and Ontario, Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation (CMHC), Service Alberta, Ministère du Revenu Québec (MRQ), Insurance Bureau of Canada, Justice Alberta).
 Comparison to Other Tax Administrations (Domestic and Foreign) - Questionnaires were sent to three foreign tax administration (New Zealand, Australia and the United Kingdom) to gather information on their enforcement programs. Meetings with representatives from the US Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and US Department of Justice (DOJ) also took place in Washington. Interviews were also held with representatives of the MRQ.
 Document and File Review - Relevant documents and electronic media were reviewed including: Agency and EDD annual reports; EDD policies and procedures; Agency press releases; and, Memoranda of Understanding. 
 Literature Review - An extensive review of over 150 reports, surveys, journals, studies and other literature pertaining to regulatory enforcement was carried out.
 Data Analysis - Program data was analyzed using descriptive statistics to identify trends, patterns, profiles and results. Program data files were linked to tax audit data, assessing data, objections and appeals data and “non-filer enforcement” data. Available data regarding white collar crime, tax evasion, fraud and other types of crime were also gathered and analyzed.
 File Review - A review of 208 CIP and SEP files was carried out at three TSOs.
 EDD Symposium - Broad consultation and discussions on draft evaluation findings was undertaken with EDD senior management, Assistant Directors of Enforcement and Regional Program Advisors during the May 2010 Enforcement and Disclosures Symposium. Additionally, presentations were made by three other tax administrations about their respective enforcement programs.
 An evaluation advisory committee was also established to review evaluation plans, findings and conclusions and to offer advice. The advisory committee was comprised of senior Agency executives and subject matter experts who were selected on the basis of their skills, knowledge, and experience.


     4.0 Study Limitations and controls 
There are always limitations and constraints affecting the ability to evaluate programs. Nevertheless, there are controls that can be used to yield valid findings through gathering, comparing and contrasting information from a diversity of sources. We applied such a balanced approach in this evaluation to account for the following limitations. 
  Data  - We applied tests of data accuracy [Footnote 10] to ensure the accuracy of key fields, but did have difficulties estimating the success of collections efforts related to SEP assessments. We were able to obtain a table from TSDMB that presented the results of their assessment of collections success for the SEP. We found very limited data available on white collar crime (including fraud and tax evasion).
  Applicability of Comparisons to other Countries  - Limitations of comparisons may result from differing societal attitudes towards taxation and tax compliance, socio/economic influences, the role of government and other factors.



   5.0 Evaluation Findings 


     5.1 Informant Leads and Voluntary Disclosures Programs do not align with EDD mandate 
As indicated earlier, the Informant Leads Program is largely a processing function that screens informant leads to determine if there is non-compliance with tax legislation. Cases that contain elements of non-compliance are referred to the relevant compliance program area for action. Almost three quarters of all leads are abandoned as they lack sufficient evidence of non-compliance. The vast majority of accepted leads are accepted by regular audit programs with less than 6% accepted by SEP and CIP (see Figure 4). Leads information can potentially serve as a source of intelligence about emerging trends in tax evasion and criminal non-compliance. However, given that the leads are primarily a source of information for programs outside of EDD, it may be better situated elsewhere.  Figure 4 presents the percentages of leads accepted by different areas within the CPB during the 2006-2007 and 2007-2008 fiscal years. There were about 22,000 Leads received during each of 2006-2007 and 2007-2008. Figure 4 







Source: Developed Using Leads Program Data from AIMS, Program Evaluation Division, CAEB  Like the Informant Leads Program, the Voluntary Disclosures Program does not appear to have clear linkages to the EDD mandate. The VDP promotes compliance with Canada's tax laws by encouraging taxpayers to voluntarily come forward and correct previous omissions in their dealings with the CRA. The process is largely dependent on an assessment of the facts and the self declared nature of the non-compliance; it is, strictly speaking, a verification process. In only very rare circumstances would a disclosure fall within the CIP or SEP workload. As can be seen in Figure 5 the large majority of VDP cases are accepted as filed.  Figure 5 







Source: Special Aggregation Using VDP PowerPlay Cube, Program Evaluation, CAEB  Conclusion:  Both the Informant Leads Program and the VDP perform review processes focussed on a taxpayer group that would normally be addressed by regular audit areas. Only a small percentage of leads and voluntary disclosures are referred to CIP or SEP. While analysis of leads and disclosures may provide strategic and tactical intelligence, the majority of cases are not among the criminally non-compliant or suspected to be in the criminal economy.  Recommendation: The Agency should review the appropriateness of the location of the Informant Leads Program and the VDP within the EDD. Management Response:  Agreed. We will undertake a review to assess whether the Informant Leads and Voluntary Disclosure Programs are best situated within the EDD.  This will be done in conjunction with a review of the Agency's enforcement mandate and development of an action plan (see management response to the second recommendation).


  5.2 CRA Enforcement Programs Lack Strategic Direction  
 It is important to acknowledge that the Enforcement and Disclosures Directorate had developed a five year Strategic Direction document in 2007 that identified a number of the issues and challenges discussed in this evaluation report. A corresponding operational plan was developed. However, after the EDD requested the evaluation, further work on the initiatives contained in the plan were largely put on hold.  Over the last five years, CIP has investigated 740 cases of criminal non-compliance resulting in successful prosecutions. Similarly, SEP has audited 6,222 cases of tax non-compliance within the criminal economy and has raised $429 million in reassessments.  However, the existing processes and the operational framework are affecting the program in achieving its mission of deterring, detecting and correcting tax evasion and non-compliance in the criminal economy in a sustainable, strategic and coordinated fashion.


    5.2.1 Detection and Case Selection  
Detection is only one element of a multifaceted approach to enforcement that should not be considered in isolation; it must be examined within the context of referral and caseload selection and within the context of a deterrence strategy. Detection and referral of potential enforcement cases occurs outside the EDD program. Approximately 92% of CIP cases are identified by audit programs and just over 70% of SEP cases are identified by external law enforcement agencies. Currently, detection and subsequent referral of potential enforcement cases is based on the merits of each case determined by the person making the referral and not necessarily based on how the case aligns to an overall enforcement strategy or against other files of merit.  Each office selects its caseload based on parameters and factors unique to those offices (e.g. workload pressures, performance agreements, size of case, collectability, chances for success) and largely in isolation of what other offices across CRA are doing or what cases they are selecting. Cases that could potentially represent significant criminal non-compliance can be rejected by a specific TSO enforcement group because of limited resources or other workload pressures.  Data and interviews suggest that offices are choosing smaller cases of a lower dollar value that do not necessarily represent the greatest risk. Figure 6 presents the percentage distribution of convictions resulting from CIP investigations by range of “tax on which convicted” by region. Convictions resulting in less than $100,000 in “tax on which convicted” accounted for 84% of all convictions. In all regions, with the exception of Quebec, just over 60% of cases result in “tax on which convicted” of less than $40,000. This supports the observations by some program staff that offices are choosing smaller cases that represent “quick hits”.  Figure 6 







Source: Custom Aggregation Using AIMS Data, Program Evaluation Division, CAEB  An examination of CIP referrals demonstrates that potentially high-risk cases are disproportionately absent within detected workload. Figure 7 presents a comparison of referrals from high-risk audit areas with all audit referrals. The graph shows that an audit area such as tax avoidance is referring only 0.2% of its cases to CIP despite the fact that there is a higher likelihood of evasion in this population versus the general audit population.  Figure 7 







Source: Custom Aggregation Using AIMS Micro-Data, Program Evaluation Division, CAEB  As Figure 8 indicates, SEP cases cover a range of criminality and are referred from a variety of sources. Our examination of SEP workload shows that there is little consistency from office to office in what constitutes a priority referral. In fact most offices focus on the potential TEBA [Footnote 11] an account represents rather than the nature of the criminal proceeds or the corresponding impact on criminality. TEBA has been identified as the measure of program success [Footnote 12]. Figure 8 







Source: Estimated from a Survey of 16 Tax Service Offices, Program Evaluation Division, CAEB  Although the EDD has commenced with the development of an intelligence function, currently there is limited intelligence capacity to support case selection or serve other purposes. For the purpose of clarification, intelligence differs from risk assessment.  Intelligence is the product of a process that includes the collection, evaluation, and analysis of information.  “Tactical intelligence” identifies specific individuals or businesses that are known or suspected of serious non-compliance based on informant leads, police information, open source or other data that has been evaluated.  “Strategic Intelligence”, within the CRA, would be used to describe patterns and trends in tax evasion, tax non-compliance in the criminal economy, and serious non-compliance in the future.  Intelligence can be used to inform both decision making and risk management. We found that other jurisdictions rely to a great extent on intelligence and risk identification for workload selection in order to best determine which targets will provide the greatest impact. See the section on detection in Appendix A for additional detail.


   5.2.2 Deterrence 
The Agency is a tax collection organization that works hard to encourage and foster voluntary compliance through education and information. It is also a law enforcement organization that must have, like most tax administrations, “a range of tools, graduated in severity, to deal with non-compliance” [Footnote 13]. Like any tax administration it “must not only have powers of credible enforcement, but must also communicate effectively its use of these powers. This 'aura' of power helps give the authority as an institution its credibility ... ” [Footnote 14]  Public opinion research suggests that:  
there is little awareness on the part of the public about the Agency's enforcement capacity [Footnote 15]; 
tax practitioners believe the CRA is not doing enough to catch or prosecute tax evaders [Footnote 16] and that those engaging in non-compliant behaviour believe that the risk of getting caught for evading taxes is remote [Footnote 17]. 
 Our evaluation found that efforts to publicize convictions of prosecuted cases lack a proactive engagement of the media. The Agency does not actively engage the media to generate interest in convictions of tax crimes other than through standardized press releases. Further, there is no monitoring of the extent to which press releases of tax convictions are receiving take up by the media.  Tax administrations in the U.S. and UK recognized that since deterrence is a critical outcome of criminal investigations, a better relationship between the media and the investigations organization was necessary. In early 2001 the Special Compliance Office of the UK Revenue introduced a revised press handling strategy and appointed press liaison officers in each of its regional offices to attempt to raise the profile of their work within the regional press and local Department newsletters, specialist and national press. Similarly, in 2001 the IRS Criminal Investigations Program introduced public information officers (PIOs) within designated offices. Their responsibility would be to liaise directly with the media on all criminal investigations emanating from those offices.  The severity of penalties is an important factor in deterring tax crime. Although outside the Agency's control, the relative frequency of custodial sentences for tax crimes fall well below the average of the other jurisdictions we examined and of other white collar crimes prosecuted within Canada. [Footnote 18]  Also, in 2008-2009 the courts levied approximately $20 million in fines associated with 257 convicted cases. Only 50% of these assessed fines were collected [Footnote 19] by PPSC.  The ability of the SEP to deter non-compliance in the criminal economy is dependent upon the auditor's ability to accurately assess tax owing in a timely fashion that ensures collection of any reassessments before the proceeds disappear. SEP auditors and collections data indicate that individuals undergoing SEP audits are adept at putting resources out of reach of the CRA and availing themselves of appeal provisions that offer average Canadians administrative fairness.  We found that a significant number of SEP assessments (approximately one-third) are resulting in objections to the Appeals Branch where the vast majority (83%) are being overturned. Based on a review of appealed cases by the SEP, the majority of overturned assessments are due to insufficient analysis and support for the assessment raised as a result of the audits [Footnote 20]. SEP auditors have indicated in interviews that they must often act quickly, using a net worth approach to determine taxable income in order to get to assets before they disappear, since there is a good chance that the taxpayer will appeal. SEP auditors have expressed that they feel constrained by policy, legislation and appeal provisions especially considering they are dealing with criminal proceeds.  Figure 9 presents the percentage of SEP gross assessments collected and the gross assessments collected per SEP salary dollar during 2004-2005, 2005-2006 and 2007-2008. Figure 9 







Source: Developed Using TSDMB Data and EDD Program Statistics  The graph indicates that more than 85% of SEP audit assessments go uncollected [Footnote 21]. In two of the three years examined, the assessed amount collected is not even equivalent to the salary cost of the SEP [Footnote 22]. Despite not collecting a sizeable portion of assessments, the CRA is still responsible for remitting to the provinces their share of taxes associated with the assessed amounts of the SEP audits - whether collected or not. 


   5.2.3 Correction 
A mandate that includes correcting criminal non-compliance or non-compliance in the criminal economy is likely unsustainable [Footnote 23]. Our literature review and interviews with external law enforcement agencies has revealed that the concept of correcting criminal behaviour has been largely abandoned by law enforcement organizations in favour of “disruption” and does not factor into the mandate of other tax administrations investigations programs. 


   5.2.4 Delivery Model 
EDD is a relatively small program responsible for a challenging mandate. The EDD delivery model aligns to the Agency's functional model. Enforcement has a presence in 32 TSOs. Its caseload derives largely from local sources. The functional responsibility of the Enforcement Program is centralized at CRA Headquarters, while the CIP and SEP are operationally delivered under the oversight of regional Assistant Commissioners and under the direction of TSO directors. This structure similarly applies to other Agency programs. The current delivery model poses certain obstacles to objectives achievement. First, distribution of staff fails to comprise critical mass to effectively achieve program objectives. EDD resources have been allocated following the same distribution patterns as audit (i.e. in proportion to regional populations) despite potential differences in compliance and risk levels. The average enforcement office is comprised of 6 SEP auditors and 14 criminal investigators reporting to an ADE. Some offices consist of as few as 1 SEP auditor and 5 CIP investigators.  Second, ad hoc workload referral and selection based on locally identified non-compliance is too limited to achieve regional or national priorities. Third, lack of understanding or appreciation of the enforcement role at a local level creates challenges in achieving program objectives. Fourth, participation in partnership arrangements and development of relationships are influenced by local decision making and this has been inconsistent with national program direction or established Memoranda of Understanding with partner organizations (see Section 5.3).  The fact that ADEs must respond to the expectations of both their TSO Directors and EDD HQ creates tension and potential obstacles in ensuring objectives achievement. Local ADEs are responsible to manage external relationships (local law enforcement, RCMP IPOC units, PPSC) that may significantly impact objectives achievement but which may not result in traditional success measures at the local office level. There are also parts of the Agency engaged in enforcement-related activities that lack coordination, collaboration and communication with EDD. Examples include activities within the Charities Directorate, Tax Avoidance Program, Aggressive International Tax Planning Program, Non-Filer/Non-Registrant Program and High-Risk Analysis Teams.  Examination of other tax administrations' delivery models offers alternatives to the Agency's current program delivery model. Within the past ten years, the UK, Australia and US tax administrations have all adopted a centralized delivery model for investigations. All three have adopted a centralized approach that provides input to potential investigations cases before distribution to their regional offices to better address priority risk and intelligence criteria. Figure 10 summarizes the key changes resulting from re-organizations of enforcement functions within the IRS, Australia Tax Office (ATO) and HMRC during the past decade. Figure 10: Summary of Delivery Model Changes in Other JurisdictionsNS 







 Source: Review of Survey Questionnaires from IRS, ATO and HMRC, Program Evaluation, CAEB [Footnote 24]) There are common aspects of all three re-organizations related to adopting a centralized management approach and the creation of a centralized intelligence and detection function.  See Appendix A for a more detailed discussion of the delivery models used within the IRS, ATO and HMRC.  Conclusion:  The Agency has a decentralized and somewhat disparate approach to enforcement and lacks a clear well articulated and operationally entrenched enforcement strategy. Shared ownership of objectives achievement is not clearly understood and managed. Accountability with only limited authority has impacted EDDs efforts to achieve its mandate. Recommendation:  The Agency should determine the extent to which it wishes to strengthen its capability to pursue both criminal non-compliance and non-compliance in the criminal economy and then develop a comprehensive enforcement strategy. Management Response:  Agreed.  We will develop an action plan to be presented at the Management Audit and Evaluation Committee in January 2011. The action plan will focus on the need to review the Agency's enforcement mandate and develop a course of action for Enforcement that would include objectives, initiatives and accountabilities related to key issues contained in the evaluation report.  This would consist of: 
Determining the extent to which there needs to be a coordinated approach to enforcement. This will require meeting with all quasi-enforcement areas within the Agency as well as areas that affect or are affected by enforcement activities i.e. Collections, Appeals, Public Affairs;
Developing, through consultations with the regions, delivery model options - including assessing allocation of staff;
Determining how to ensure case selection aligns to enforcement priorities;
Strengthening the intelligence function;
Developing a broader publicity strategy designed to strengthen deterrence;
Building and strengthening partnerships



   5.3 Partnerships with PPSC and RCMP Require Attention 


   5.3.1 Public Prosecution Service Canada 
Both CIP and PPSC interviewees acknowledged that the relationship between CIP investigators and PPSC lawyers is strained. Rejection rates, personalities, lack of consistency and lack of training were all cited as contributing factors. Both lawyers and investigators agreed that the current relationship is affecting objectives achievement. The quality of the partnership between the CIP Investigators, who are tasked with developing a case, and the PPSC lawyers who determine which cases should be selected for prosecution, can be assessed in a couple of ways. First, data from other tax administrations that track the number of “cases accepted for prosecution” can be used as a point of comparison to gauge the relative success of the Canadian partnership. Further, the perspectives of CIP investigators and PPSC lawyers can shed light on how partnership participants feel about it.  Many of the tax administrations with which Canada traditionally compares itself enjoy relatively high rates of case acceptance. In the IRS, for example, the percentage of tax related investigations rejected by the Department of Justice decreased from 5 percent in fiscal year 2003 to just over 3 percent in fiscal year 2005. The ATO has estimated their rejection rate between 5 and 7 percent. Based on the relative proportion of cases accepted, the PPSC/CRA partnership appears less successful when placed in this comparative context. A review of CIP statistics indicates that the average percentage of referrals rejected for prosecution over the five year period between 2004-2005 and 2008-2009 was about 23%, ranging from a high of 27% in (2005-2006) to a low of 20% in (2004-2005). Approximately one-quarter of total investigation time (with a range of 12% to 59% depending on the region) was dedicated annually to these cases. In terms of hours invested, CIP investigations required an average of 2,073 hours of investigation time per prosecuted case to complete based on 2008-2009 data.  There may be several plausible explanations relating to the high levels of rejections that the CRA is experiencing (comparatively). A 2009 study of the HMRC Enforcement and Compliance business group concludes that “the Revenue and Customs Prosecution Office become involved in cases at an early stage and therefore, other than a few frontier referrals, all cases are adopted”. Involvement of legal counsel much earlier in the investigation process has been cited by all three tax administrations as a best practice that significantly affects the acceptance rate of cases by their respective prosecutorial bodies. Another factor, which came out of interviews with CIP management and staff, relates to consistency in what constitutes acceptable cases. An example is that in some offices cases referred from SEP to CIP are rejected due to potential issues pertaining to “Jarvis and Ling” jurisprudence whereas in others they would be accepted.  The majority of PPSC prosecutors interviewed expressed concern over the quality of investigative work completed by CIP investigators. Though they all felt that CIP investigators possess excellent accounting skills, PPSC prosecutors noted that cases have become more complex than in the past, especially criminal cases involving tax fraud. They emphasized the importance of training and the level of experience of investigators and commented that many cases are lacking the detailed investigative evidence to support a conviction.  Several human resource management factors may be contributing to this situation. On the one hand, minimal previous experience requirements and modest training may be contributing to a steep on-the-job learning curve. A review of staffing requirements for CIP investigator positions found that potential recruits do not require investigations experience or previous training. Once hired, successful candidates receive two weeks in-house training designed and provided by investigations staff (less than their international counterparts [Footnote 25]). Seasoned CIP investigators and representatives from other tax administrations commented that much of their learning has occurred with experience on-the-job and that it takes approximately five years to become proficient in the field of tax investigations. On the other hand, recent and projected turnover rates suggest that many CIP investigators have not, or will not be, in their positions long enough to develop the skills and knowledge required to consistently deliver consistently good cases to PPSC. Annual turnover in EDD field offices has been estimated by ADEs to be 15% to 25% and within the last year there has been a 50% turnover in ADEs alone. Retirement rates are also projected to remain high in the coming years [Footnote 26]. CIP interviewees have also indicated that lack of career path and classification levels lower than their audit counterparts is affecting turnover.


   5.3.2 Royal Canadian Mounted Police 
The Agency has two distinct MOUs with the RCMP involving EDD programs. The first deals with the involvement of CIP investigators as members of IPOC units. The second involves referrals to SEP from RCMP investigative units. The IPOC MOU establishes the CRA involvement within the context of the creation of the IPOC program. IPOC is an inter-departmental initiative that brings together staff of various governmental organizations with mutually supporting programs into working units with the goal of identifying, assessing, restraining and forfeiting illicit and unreported wealth accumulated through criminal activities. [Footnote 27]  IPOC units operate under the control and responsibility of the RCMP through a designated Officer in Charge (OIC). Upon becoming team members of the IPOC unit, CRA criminal investigators are expected to provide audit assistance from the earliest stages of proceeds of crime (POC) investigations. The CRA investigator is principally responsible and accountable to the OIC and typically receives “supernumerary special constable” status (SSC). CRA investigators within IPOC units do not have access to CRA databases and can not disclose taxpayer information to the RCMP except under specific circumstances provided for under the Income Tax Act (ITA) and the Excise Tax Act (ETA).  The SEP MOU sets forth the framework for a relationship between RCMP Federal Investigative Units and CRA Special Enforcement Program. The purpose of the relationship is to address more effectively the accumulation of unreported illicit wealth amassed by those involved in earning income from illegal activities. The scope of this MOU is limited to the activities supporting the referral of information and documents by the RCMP Federal Units to SEP. The evaluation identified that both MOUs are producing results where TSO Assistant Directors of Enforcement are actively engaged or have established relationships with RCMP investigative units. For example, in offices where SEP auditors are working with IPOC units in the capacity of SEP liaison officers (SLO's) data reveals that significant numbers of potential audit cases are referred representing substantial amounts of unreported income. Figure 11 identifies cases referred by IPOC to SEP that were subsequently audited. Figure 11: Cases referred to and Audited by SEP 





 
 IPOC Cases 
 IPOC referred FINTRAC Cases 
 TOTAL 
 IPOC TEBA ($) 
 FINTRAC TEBA ($) 
 TOTAL ($) 
 IPOC HOURS 
 FINTRAC HOURS 


 2005-2006 
99
46
145
3,150,271
4,239,331
7,389,602
8,025
5,438


 2006-2007 
191
5
196
11,484,391
93,514
11,577,905
13,674
156


 2007-2008 
154
23
177
10,535,136
1,060,515
11,595,651
14,475
2,558


 TOTAL 
 444 
 74 
 518 
 25,169,798 
 5,393,360 
 30,563,158 
 36,174 
 8,152 





Source:  2009 IPOC Review Project, Enforcement and Disclosures Directorate  These numbers represent only a small percentage of cases identified by IPOC units referred to and reviewed by CRA enforcement staff. In 2008 one IPOC unit alone identified and referred 401 cases to CRA representing approximately $138 million in “taxable equity”. Considering that IPOC units pursue only 10% of cases as active investigations there is considerable opportunity for the CRA enforcement units to tackle the criminal element through taxation of illegal proceeds.  While the majority of interviews with RCMP and CRA enforcement staff indicate support for existing relationships, all felt that there is much more that can be done to have a broader and more significant impact on criminality. Currently, there is a lack of consistency in approach from one TSO to another with respect to the level of participation in a partnership approach to dealing with the criminal element despite national MOUs and other agreements. A joint review of the IPOC program undertaken by the RCMP and EDD in 2009 found that CRA involvement as members of IPOC units has been decreasing over the past five years. Participation of CIP investigators in IPOC has dropped from 12 to just six. ADE's interviewed identified resource constraints as the predominant reason why resources were withdrawn from IPOC units. In offices where CIP investigators have been withdrawn, RCMP interviewees commented that it has had a negative impact on the achievement of IPOC objectives and results in significantly less referrals to SEP.  Another issue pertaining to the Agency's role as a law enforcement partner is its inability to share taxpayer information for intelligence purposes with other law enforcement partners. “Section 241” of the ITA and “section 295” of the ETA prohibit the sharing of tax information except in very specific circumstances. Our interviews with both EDD management and staff and external partners indicate that limitations imposed by these sections are negatively impacting a coordinated task force approach to crime reduction.  Although the limitations imposed by Section 241 of the ITA and Section 295 of the ETA are unequivocal, recent research suggests that Canadians are supportive of sharing of tax information in very specific instances:  “... in particular, there is support for information sharing in the face of serious criminal activity and for fair and proper administration of federal and provincial government programs, including ensuring only those who properly qualify for benefits receive them, alerting Canadians regarding their eligibility for government benefits, collecting debts, improving the effectiveness of tax and benefit programs, and ensuring compliance with tax laws” [Footnote 28].   Additionally, there have been recent changes to Section 241 permitting the sharing of a variety of information about charities to the RCMP, Canadian Security Intelligence Service and FINTRAC that would be relevant to investigations under the terrorist activity and facilitation provisions of the Criminal Code.  Conclusion: The findings indicate that there are opportunities to strengthen existing partnerships. Some of the factors are legislative, technical, procedural and operational while others are specific to communication, training and human resources.  Recommendation:  The EDD should engage internal and external partners in dialogue to discuss roles, expectations, impediments and responsibilities and seek solutions to the problems negatively impacting partnerships.  Management Response:  Agreed.  As noted above, we will develop a plan which will include objectives and initiatives related to building and strengthening partnerships.


    Appendices  


   Appendix A - Enforcement Within other Jurisdictions 
 Detection    IRS  The 2000 IRS re-organization of the Criminal Investigation (CI) function created centralized Lead Development Centers to provide strategic and “tactical intelligence” and develop cases to the point that they can be referred to primary investigation. The IRS also established Fraud Detection Centers that work closely with CI field offices to develop criminal cases and stop fraudulent refunds. CI established a close working relationship with audit divisions that is geared toward specific market-segment taxpayers for the purposes of providing anti-fraud education and identifying appropriate fraud cases for referral. The relationship is reinforced through participation on the IRS Compliance Council.  ATO  The creation of the Serious Non-Compliance (SNC) Business Line by the ATO in 2006 placed a prominent emphasis on workload selection that is influenced by a risk and intelligence focus and priorities set under the SNC Line Delivery Plan. In 2007, the SNC established two new forums to help the transition from case based work allocation to a project based allocation. Under these new forums, the SNC identifies and allocates resources to work aligned to SNC's strategic risks. The SNCI-Prioritisation Mode (an internal document) provides guidelines to SNC Intelligence officers on how to assess referrals using a range of internal and external systems and data sources. Referrals are given an initial priority rating based on the information at hand having regard to impact, leverage, priority, budget, duration, compliance effect and revenue at risk. In addition the ATO moved from a more localized process of case selection to a more national case selection process.  “Appropriate case selection is crucial to SNC meeting its objectives. Successful case selection should be aligned with national strategic priorities and assist in maintaining and enhancing community confidence. Historically, a regionally focused process allowed significant variances in case selection across Australia. Over time regions have developed particular skill sets and cases were chosen to reflect these skill sets. The Tax Office must effectively leverage from the cases that are chosen under the compliance model to ensure the greatest impact in line with its national strategic objectives. To address the regionally based focus of previous case selection, the Tax Office has revised its case approval process to greater reflect national and strategic priorities. Established in August 2007, the PMF was set up to, amongst other things, approve cases and programs following consideration at the regional level. The PMF endorsed National Case Selection Process only came into operation in September 2008.” [Footnote 29]  HMRC  During the re-organization of 2005, the UK HMRC created the Detection Directorate to centralize the detection and development of enforcement cases. The directorate includes a strategic and tactical intelligence function which identifies emerging trends and develops intelligence to support the detection and development of cases related to these emerging areas of non-compliance.  Deterrence   ATO  Within Australia, a 2009 Australian National Audit Office (ANAO) audit of the ATO's Management of Serious Non-Compliance emphasized the importance of measuring the deterrence impact of publicity and communications efforts. In response, the ATO has developed their Tax Evasion, Avoidance and Crime Communications Strategy and conducted research to establish baseline information to assess its effectiveness. The ATO SNC also measures their deterrent effect through examining trends in survey results about taxpayer perceptions about how well fraud and serious evasion risks are being managed. Trends in these perceptions are then examined in relation to deterrence activities (including publicity) to assess the effectiveness of these activities. As part of their Tax Evasion, Avoidance and Crime Communications Strategy, the ATO has also put considerable effort into increasing awareness of the consequences of tax crime using the internet. They have developed an electronic publication of a quarterly e-magazine titled “Targeting Tax Crime” which is available on their website. [Footnote 30] The magazine explicitly describes the role of enforcement and the Agency's focus on tax crime. HMRC  The UK HMRC also recognizes that more and better use needs to be made of publicity in influencing public behaviour and increasing levels of compliance and voluntary disclosure. This follows earlier criticism by a National Audit Office audit which observed that: “... more and better use needs to be made of publicity in influencing public behaviour and increasing levels of compliance and voluntary disclosure. ... They could do more to publicise specific compliance activities, including the use of publicity in advance of compliance work in specific sectors, to heighten the perception that the likelihood of detection is high and encourage voluntary disclosure.” [Footnote 31]  HMRC is now beginning to publicize their compliance work through periodic briefings to the media, writing articles for the professional press and through press releases on, for example, certain projects. They are attempting to publicize specific compliance activities, including the use of publicity in advance of compliance work in specific sectors, to heighten the perception that the likelihood of detection is high and encourage voluntary disclosure.  Alternative Delivery Models   IRS  The IRS enforcement function was facing challenges during the 1990s that are strikingly similar to the situation currently at the CRA. Two significant reasons set the stage for the re-organization of the criminal investigation function. Firstly, the Restructuring and Reform Act of 1998 (RRA 98) set the groundwork for the IRS to re-design to serve taxpayers and tax practitioners more effectively and efficiently. Secondly, the Review of the Internal Revenue Service's Criminal Investigation Program, written in 1999 by Judge William Webster, made dozens of detailed recommendations, including the major structural changes described below. Recommendations from these reports led to a re-organization of the enforcement function in 2000. The following table describes the key changes resulting from this re-organization. Overview of Key Changes in the IRS 

  Line Authority  – The IRS CI has line authority through the Chief CI who reports directly to the Commissioner. The objective was to ensure that case management is the responsibility of professional law enforcement officials within the IRS.
  Geographic Structure  – CI territory offices were aligned with the boundaries of federal judicial districts. Centralized management approach was implemented to increase consistency in the application of CI compliance strategy.
  Strategic and Tactical Intelligence  – Lead Development Centers were established to perform “strategic and tactical intelligence” and develop cases to the point they can be referred to primary investigation.
  Detection  – Structural and process changes were made within the Operating Divisions to revive the referral program. Fraud Detection Centers were created to develop criminal cases.
  Relationships with the Department of Justice  –Counsel/Special Agent Team Counsel positions were created to be involved in CI cases from the very beginning to provide legal guidance and advice.
  Partnerships with Operating Divisions  – CI was set up to work closely with the four operating divisions. The relationship between CI and the operating divisions was reinforced through participation on the IRS Compliance Council. The relationship with Audit was re-aligned to focus on specific market-segment taxpayers.
  Publicity and Deterrence  – IRS CI Special Agents began to work as Public Information Officers. They began to serve as the contact point for all internal and external communication including issuing press releases.

Source: Summarized from “What Has Changed for IRS Criminal Investigation and Our Relationship with the Department of Justice” by Mark Matthews, p. 1, US Attorneys' Bulletin, Volume 49, Number 4, July 2001  The IRS CI re-organization also resulted in a modified program mandate to foster confidence in the tax system and compliance with the tax law. The re-organization focussed on achieving the mandate by: promoting the detection and prosecution functions through enhanced relationships and partnerships and the creation of a centralized risk and intelligence function; and, promoting deterrence through new direct CI responsibility for publicity. ATO  In the ATO, a re-organization in 2006 created the Serious Non Compliance (SNC) business line. As noted earlier, the SNC was created as a separate business line (within the Compliance sub-plan) that places a strong emphasis on project-oriented cases developed primarily through a central internal risk, strategy and intelligence area. Decisions about SNC project resources are made largely by the SNC Program Steering Committee with representation from other parts of the ATO.   The re-organization also resulted in the SNC becoming the conduit between the broader law enforcement community and the ATO. Their work is undertaken in cooperation with other law enforcement agencies - often as part of a multi-agency taskforce. HMRC  With respect to the UK HMRC, re-organization in 2005 created the Criminal Investigations Directorate and allocated criminal investigations powers to four HMRC Directorates. The following table presents an overview of the key changes resulting from the 2005 re-organization. New Directorates Resulting from Key Changes in the UK HMRC 

  Criminal Investigations  – Responsible for most criminal investigations
  Internal Governance  – Responsible for civil and criminal internal investigations
  Detection  – Responsible for detecting individuals and organizations trying to evade HMRC controls
  Risk and Intelligence  – Responsible for intelligence and profiling work

Source: Survey Response from the UK HMRC  The re-organization resulted in the complete separation of criminal and civil investigations. Like the CRA, HMRC is not responsible for criminal prosecutions. Detection and intelligence were again central components of the re-organization with the creation of the Detection and Risk and Intelligence Directorates.      Training   HMRC  The UK HMRC training of new investigators covers 15 weeks of which 8 weeks are classroom designated followed by the remainder of the 12 months under a training assessment period. During this period new recruits are assessed against a personal training record. Other training requirements must be met during this period. ATO  In Australia, employees primarily engaged in preventing, detecting or investigating fraud have to meet the required fraud control competency requirements for Government. Investigators new to the ATO (or existing staff without the qualification) are required to attain the Certificate IV in Government (Investigations) as a minimum standard, within 12 months of starting work. Successful participants are awarded the Certificate IV in Government (Investigations) through Charles Sturt University. IRS  In the U.S., CI Special Agents are trained through four primary means:  
A formal 27 week comprehensive initial training program, of which 12 weeks focus on basic criminal investigation training, for all new Special Agents prior to beginning work in a CI field office
A one to two year on-the-job training program, under the guidance of an experienced agent 
A Continuing Professional Education seminar every year in each District for all Special Agents
A  two-week formal training program - Advanced Special Agent Training, for experienced agents



   Appendix B - Examples of CIP and SEP cases 
 CIP Cases  
Income Tax and GST Tax Evasion Case  A local business was a chronic non-filer. Following non-filer enforcement action, a review of the filed return led to the corporation and its owner being referred for audit. Non-Filer Enforcement recommended proceeding directly to a net worth audit. The net worth audit discovered assets and shareholder contributions that didn’t coincide with the corporate losses and low personal incomes declared on the tax returns. Additionally, the requested cash register tapes were said to have been destroyed. However, an analysis of deposits found cash and credit card deposits exceeded sales. A total income discrepancy of over $450,000 was found by the audit and the case was referred to CIP. CI investigators prepared and implemented a Search Warrant for the owner’s home where they found a large amount of cash and the business cash register tapes. An analysis of the tapes found that the cash register totals were rung off twice each day. The taxpayer only reported 1 of the totals in the sales journal. In one year, these deleted transactions amounted to over $400,000. The final factual unreported sales amounted to over $1.25 million. The initial trial found the taxpayer guilty of tax evasion for one half of the period the CRA charged him for. The judge calculated unreported income on his own amounting to almost $600,000 and income tax and GST owing of almost $175,000. The judge also applied a fine in the amount of 200% of the federal tax owing. The outcome of the trial was published in many local and regional newspapers. Both sides appealed the decision. The appeal resulted in the CRA winning. The business owner is currently awaiting sentencing. Project Colisée   The CRA had been a full member of Project Colisée for two years. The Project was led by the Combined Forces Special Enforcement Unit (CFSEU), a joint unit working under the coordination of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP), with the collaboration of the Sûreté du Québec, the Service de police de la ville de Montréal (SPVM), the Service de protection des citoyens de Laval, the Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA), as well as the Canada Revenue Agency.  On November 23, 2006, the partners of the Combined Forces Special Enforcement Unit, dealt a serious blow to traditional organized crime in the Montréal region. Over 70 persons were charged with close to 1,000 offences. The purpose of these charges was to tackle a major criminal organization on several fronts. Over 150 officers of the CRA executed 24 search warrants that day as part of seven on-going criminal investigations into tax evasion and tax fraud under Project Colisée. On November 23, 2006 the CRA issued assessments and seized certain goods, including two homes and investments over $4.4 million with a potential collection of $ 2.5 million. These investigations are on-going with the potential for over 40 follow-up audits and other criminal investigations into tax evasion and tax fraud on key players involved in this criminal organization.
 SEP Cases  
PROTECTED 


   Appendix C - Glossary of Terms 

  Actus Reus  - Actus Reus is a legal term describing the condition of carrying out illegal actions.
  Cases Accepted for Prosecution  - Once the full-scale investigation is completed, it is referred to the PPSC for prosecution. The referral is reviewed by attorneys working for the PPSC to assess whether there is sufficient evidence of mens rea, sufficient tax potential, sufficient quantum of evidence, whether there are Charter of Rights and Freedoms issues and whether the investigation was carried out properly to yield a conviction. If the referral is deemed to meet these criteria it is accepted for prosecution by the PPSC.
  Contingent Non-Compliers  - This term describes taxpayers that are currently compliant, but who would be inclined to be non-compliant if they feel there is a reasonable possibility they can succeed without being caught. 
  Criminal Economy  - Part of the underground economy where illegal activities provide a source of income. Examples of these types of activities include drug trafficking, prostitution and fraud, among others. Taxes are almost always never remitted in relation to these illegal activities. In some cases, taxes may be remitted when money from illegal activities is laundered through legitimate enterprises. 
  Delinquent Actions - Federal Tax Increase  - The federal tax increase resulting from delinquent action refers to the federal taxes assessed as a result of successful prosecution related to s.238 of the Income Tax Act requiring a taxpayer undergoing a SEP audit to file their return. The delinquent action is administered directly by SEP. 
  Full-Scale Investigation  - A CIP investigation proceeds through three stages. The first two stages assess the referral to determine if there is sufficient evidence of mens rea, sufficient tax potential, and sufficient quantum of evidence and whether there are Charter of Rights and Freedoms issues that would prevent conviction. When the case is found to meet these criteria, it proceeds to the full-investigation stage. At this stage, evidence is gathered and reviewed to develop the case for prosecution by the PPSC.
  Gross Negligence Penalty  - A Gross Negligence Penalty is the most serious civil penalty administered by the regular audit function. This penalty is applied when the auditor finds there is evidence that the person knew there were issues with his tax affairs (it does not necessarily mean there is strong likelihood of tax evasion and mens rea has not been proven).
  IMET  - Integrated Market Enforcement Teams (IMETs) are specialized teams that work in partnership with Public Safety Canada and the Public Prosecution Service of Canada to target financial crime and protect the integrity of the Canadian economy and its capital markets.
  IPOC  - The Integrated Proceeds of Crime (IPOC) units within the RCMP have the goal to contribute to the disruption, dismantling and incapacitation of targeted organized criminals and crime groups. They do this by seizing criminal proceeds of crime including cars, houses, boats, among others. 
  Jarvis and Ling Cases  - The Ling v. Her Majesty The Queen and Jarvis v. Her Majesty The Queen Supreme Court of Canada cases were both successful challenges of CIP cases related to violations of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. The challenge relates to the point within a civil audit where criminal activity becomes evident. At this point, the court judged that the civil audit must be ceased and a formal criminal investigation process must begin. As part of the formal criminal investigation process, the taxpayer must be notified by the CRA that he/she is under criminal investigation.
  Mens Rea  - Mens Rea is a legal term describing conditions where there is evidence of “the guilty mind” associated with illegal activities. In other words, the illegal activity was wilfully carried out in full knowledge that it is illegal.
  Non-Compliance in the Criminal Economy  - This refers to tax non-compliance among those involved in and receiving income from illegal activities. 
  Non-Filer   Enforcement  - Non-filer enforcement is primarily carried out within the Taxpayer Services and Debt Management Branch (TSDMB), though the SEP program can also implement non-filer enforcement actions (called delinquent actions) in relation to a SEP audit. Non-filer enforcement activities within TSDMB use matching techniques to try and identify taxpayers that have not filed returns. Subsequent enforcement activities can range from sending a letter to the taxpayer requiring them to file their return to formal prosecution under s.238 of the Income Tax Act (ITA). Similar enforcement actions are carried out within the SEP program to require taxpayers audited under SEP to file returns.
  PPSC  - The Public Prosecution Service of Canada (PPSC) reports to Parliament through the Attorney General of Canada. The Director of Public Prosecutions Act states that the Director of Public Prosecutions acts "under and on behalf of the Attorney General of Canada."
  Provincial taxes  - When a SEP audit or a CIP civil audit is completed, federal and provincial taxes owing are identified and penalties and interest may be administered. Subsequent assessments and reassessments formally identify the federal and provincial taxes to be remitted. Under current Tax Collection Agreements (TCAs) established under section 7 of the Federal-Provincial Fiscal Arrangements Act, the federal government is responsible for transferring the provincial tax component assessed or re-assessed resulting from the audit while the responsibility for collecting the provincial tax lies with the CRA. The assessed amounts are transferred whether collections efforts are successful or not.
  Rebel Non-Compliers  - This term describes a group that will be non-compliant with respect to their tax requirements irrespective of what consequences are in place.
  Risk Assessment  - Risk assessment generally assigns a probability of an outcome of non-compliance occurring to broad categories of businesses or individuals. Strategic risk assessment generally assesses risks to the tax administration using an environmental scan, reviews of internal processes and anticipated strategic shifts in the future. The ATO SNC utilizes strategic risk assessment to identify key enforcement risks which, in turn, feed into the ATO strategic risk assessment used to identify priorities, allocate its resources and develop performance measures.
  s . 238 (ITA)  - Section 238 of the Income Tax Act (ITA) describes the consequences for not filing a tax return. Under s.238, if the individual does not file their tax return, prosecution actions can be undertaken. If convicted, the individual can be liable to a fine between $1,000 and $25,000 or both a fine and imprisonment not exceeding 12 months.
  s.241 (ITA)  - Section 241 of the Income Tax Act states that “Except as authorized by this section, no official shall (a) knowingly provide, or knowingly allow to be provided, to any person any taxpayer information; (b) knowingly allow any person to have access to any taxpayer information; or (c) knowingly use any taxpayer information otherwise than in the course of the administration or enforcement of this Act, the Canada Pension Plan, the Unemployment Insurance Act or the Employment Insurance Act or for the purpose for which it was provided under this section.”  Section 241 does not permit EDD to share taxpayer information with external enforcement agencies.
  s . 295 (ETA)  - Section 295 of the Excise Tax Act is similar to s.241 of the ITA. Section 295 also prohibits the EDD from sharing GST/HST information with external enforcement agencies.
  Supernumerary Special Constable  - An Investigator who has been appointed a supernumerary special constable by the Commissioner of the RCMP pursuant to paragraph 7(1)(c) of the RCMP Act. The special constable has the same powers conferred on regular members of the RCMP.
  Strategic Intelligence  - Within CRA, strategic Intelligence would be used to describe patterns and trends in tax evasion, tax non-compliance in the criminal economy, and serious non-compliance in the future.
  Tactical Intelligence  - Tactical intelligence identifies specific individuals or businesses that are known or suspected of serious non-compliance based on informant leads, police information, open source or other data that has been evaluated.
  Taxable Equity  - Equity gained as proceeds of criminal activities that is identified as taxable income following a SEP net worth audit.
  Tax Evasion  - Tax evasion describes the act of deliberately not paying taxes where there is evidence of both mens rea (the guilty mind) and actus reus (the illegal activity). 
  Tax On Which Convicted  - Tax On Which Convicted is a term used within CIP to describe the amount of taxes the taxpayer found guilty of tax evasion (as a result a CIP investigation) is required to remit to the CRA.
  TEBA  - Tax Earned by Audit refers to the federal tax amount identified by an audit (including a SEP audit). In most cases, the results of the audit (including the TEBA amount) are referred for tax assessment or re-assessment which, in turn, results in a tax statement being provided to the taxpayer indicating the amount of federal taxes to be remitted to the CRA.



   Appendix D - Example of an Agency Press Release for a Conviction of Tax Fraud 
Brothers' tax evasion scheme nets each $59,444 fine  Surrey, British Columbia, May 6, 2010... Surrey businessmen, developers and brothers, Sohan Singh Dhesa and Nahar Singh Dhesa, were sentenced in Surrey Provincial Court on May 5, 2010, after pleading guilty to income tax evasion. The brothers were each fined $59,444 representing 75% of federal taxes evaded. Sohan Singh Dhesa and Nahar Singh Dhesa were also handed a 14 month Conditional Serve Order. A Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) investigation determined that the brothers formed a family partnership and purchased two properties for development purposes. The partnership subdivided these properties and subsequently sold them to two nominees. On review, it was revealed that the individuals, who acted as nominees for the Dhesas, were never the beneficial owners of the lots. Most of the money the nominees received from the sale of the lots was paid to the Dhesas or their beneficiaries. In fact, it was determined that the Dhesas sold the properties to various third parties for more than the amount originally disclosed. In doing so, the Dhesa brothers understated taxable income in the amount of $334,565 for the 2002 and 2003 taxation years, and evaded federal taxes of $79,392 each. When individuals are convicted of income tax fraud, they must still repay any amounts fraudulently received, plus interest and any civil penalties that may be assessed by the CRA. In addition, the court may fine them up to 200% of the refund sought and impose a jail term of up to five years. Individuals who have not filed returns for previous years, or who have not reported all of their income, can still voluntarily correct their tax affairs. They will not be penalized or prosecuted if they make a full disclosure before the Agency starts any action or investigation against them. These individuals may only have to pay the taxes owing, plus interest. More information on the Voluntary Disclosures Program can be found on the CRA's website at www.cra.gc.ca/voluntarydisclosures. The information in this news release was obtained from the court records.




Footnotes



Footnotes

Footnote _ftn1


					   Italicized text in quotations identifies terms found in the glossary (see Appendix C).
					

Return to footnote_ftn1 Referrer


Footnote _ftn2


					   Prosecutions exceed referrals because of the inventory of cases already for prosecution and time required to complete a prosecution.
					

Return to footnote_ftn2 Referrer


Footnote _ftn3


					   Canada Revenue Agency Annual Report to Parliament, 2008-2009
					

Return to footnote_ftn3 Referrer


Footnote _ftn4


					   Plumley, Alan H. (1996) 
The Determinants of Individual Tax Compliance: Estimating the Impacts of Tax Policy, Enforcement and IRS Responsiveness, Department of the Treasury, Internal Revenue Service, Publication 1916 (Rev. 11-96), Catalog Number 22555A
 Dubin, Jeffery A., 
Criminal Investigation Enforcement Activities and Taxpayer Non-compliance, California Institute of Technology
 Dubin, J., M. Graetz and L. Wilde (1990). “The Effect of Audit Rates on the Federal Individual
 Income Tax, 1977-1986,” National Tax Journal 43:395-409.
					

Return to footnote_ftn4 Referrer


Footnote _ftn5


					   Findings from CROP 3SC Survey, Compliance Research and Risk Assessment Division, CRA
					

Return to footnote_ftn5 Referrer


Footnote _ftn6


					   Leviner, S. (2007) 
A New Era of Tax Enforcement-From 'Big Stick' to Responsive Regulation. University of Michigan Law School, The John M. Olin Center for Law & Economics Working Paper Series; 
 Braithwaite V, Job J (2003) 
The Theoretical Base for the ATO Compliance Model. Centre for Tax System Integrity Research Note 5. The Australian National University, Canberra, Australia;
 Ayres I, Braithwaite J (1992) 
Responsive Regulation: Transcending the De-regulation Debate. Oxford
 University Press, NY.
					

Return to footnote_ftn6 Referrer


Footnote _ftn7


					   The Assistance Program was discontinued during the course of the evaluation.
					

Return to footnote_ftn7 Referrer


Footnote _ftn8


					   Prosecutions exceed referrals because of the inventory of cases already for prosecution and time required to complete a prosecution.
					

Return to footnote_ftn8 Referrer


Footnote _ftn9


					   See Appendix B for examples of SEP audit cases.
					

Return to footnote_ftn9 Referrer


Footnote _ftn10


					   Tests included validation of data type and summation of data to validate key fields when system-calculated checks were unavailable.
					

Return to footnote_ftn10 Referrer


Footnote _ftn11

TEBA refers to the federal tax amount identified by an audit it is one of the main components of the
 total fiscal impact of the Agency's audit actions; the other components are presently derived solely from reassessments and include where applicable, interest, penalties and provincial taxes from agreeing provinces.
					

Return to footnote_ftn11 Referrer


Footnote _ftn12


					   Planning Guidelines 2009-2010 Program Year,  31303 - Special Enforcement Program
					

Return to footnote_ftn12 Referrer


Footnote _ftn13


					   Compliance Risk Management: Managing and Improving Tax Compliance, OECD, 2004 pg. 50
					

Return to footnote_ftn13 Referrer


Footnote _ftn14


					   Ibid.
					

Return to footnote_ftn14 Referrer


Footnote _ftn15


					   SAGE Research for the Canada Revenue Agency, (2007) 
Exploring the Potential Impacts of Compliance Communications on Taxpayer Perceptions about Tax Cheating


Return to footnote_ftn15 Referrer


Footnote _ftn16


					   Millward Brown, (2007) 
Background Qualitative Research with Tax Practitioners


Return to footnote_ftn16 Referrer


Footnote _ftn17


					   Ibid.
					

Return to footnote_ftn17 Referrer


Footnote _ftn18


					   16% of convictions for CRA tax crimes result in incarceration. The national average for incarceration of white collar crime convictions is 36%. The ATO reports 74% of convictions result in incarceration, the HMRC reports 60% and the IRS reports 81%.
					

Return to footnote_ftn18 Referrer


Footnote _ftn19


					   Source: Special Aggregation of CIP Data from the AIMS Database
					

Return to footnote_ftn19 Referrer


Footnote _ftn20


					   Special Enforcement Program Update, 2010 National Enforcement and Disclosures Symposium
					

Return to footnote_ftn20 Referrer


Footnote _ftn21


					   Comparatively, a TSDMB study found that 80% of T2 regular audits requiring collections actions were successfully resolved within two years of the reassessment - Debt Management Research Section, TSDMB (2009), 
Source and Disposition of Corporation Tax Debt: Analysis of 2005 T2 Audit Reassessments


Return to footnote_ftn21 Referrer


Footnote _ftn22


					   Costs do not include salary dollars associated with collections or any corresponding objections/appeals actions.
					

Return to footnote_ftn22 Referrer


Footnote _ftn23


					   Thomas Gabor, Ph.D. for Research and Statistical Division, Justice Canada (2003) 
Assessing the Effectiveness of Organized Crime Strategies: A Review of the Literature
 Specialty Compliance Research Section, CRRAD, CRA (2007) 
Post Gross Negligence Penalty Filing and Reporting Behaviour


Return to footnote_ftn23 Referrer


Footnote _ftn24


					   Centralized management approach refers to a reporting method where management decisions affecting regional operations and resource distribution are taken primarily by the enforcement function at HQ.
					

Return to footnote_ftn24 Referrer


Footnote _ftn25


					   See Appendix A for a detailed discussion of investigative training requirements within the IRS, ATO and UK HMRC.
					

Return to footnote_ftn25 Referrer


Footnote _ftn26


					   Source: Demographics and Workforce Analysis Section, Human Resources Branch, CRA
					

Return to footnote_ftn26 Referrer


Footnote _ftn27


					   All IPOC member organizations have received special funding from Treasury Board for their participation in IPOC with the exception of the CRA.
					

Return to footnote_ftn27 Referrer


Footnote _ftn28


					   Canadian Views/Attitudes toward the Sharing of Tax Information, Prepared for Canada Revenue Agency by Corporate Research Associates, March 2009
					

Return to footnote_ftn28 Referrer


Footnote _ftn29


					   The Australian Taxation Office's Management of Serious Non-Compliance - The Auditor General Audit Report No.34 2008-09 Performance Audit
					

Return to footnote_ftn29 Referrer


Footnote _ftn30


Return to footnote_ftn30 Referrer


Footnote _ftn31


					   Report by the Comptroller and Auditor General HC 429 Session 2002-2003: 28 February 2003.
					

Return to footnote_ftn31 Referrer









Report a problem or mistake on this page












Please select all that apply:

A link, button or video is not working



It has a spelling mistake



Information is missing



Information is outdated or wrong



Login error when trying to access an account




I can't find what I'm looking for



Other issue not in this list



Submit



Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries, contact us.










Date modified:
2011-02-11





Contract Payment Reporting System Program Evaluation Study


Corporate Audit and Evaluation Branch June 2005

 Executive summary 
 Introduction 
 Background 
 Methodologies 
 Findings from the evaluation

 1.0 Concept and Design

 1.1 The Concept of Using Third-Party Information From Contractors is a Valid Approach for Improving Tax Compliance where Transactions are Documented and Audit Trails Exist Remain in the Contractors' Records. 
 1.2 CPRS Design is Adequate But Modifications Would Strengthen the Program

 Flexible Reporting Options 
 Voluntary Provision of Information Slips to Sub-Contractors 
 Expansion to Large Retailers - 50% Rule 
 
 
 2.0 Effectiveness of Implementation

 2.1 CPRS has been Implemented as Planned and is Delivered in a Manner Supportive of its Compliance Objectives 
 2.2 Some Operational Issues Still Need to be Addressed

 Compliance Issues with CPRS Reporting 
 Definition of the Contractor Population 
 Penalties for Late or Non-Filing of CPRS Returns 
 Measuring Performance and Monitoring Results 
 Automated Functionality to Support Program Delivery 
 
 
 3.0 CPRS Impacts on Compliance

 3.1 Significant Enforcement Results have been Achieved

 Non-Filer/Non-Registrant Program 
 Audit Program 
 
 3.2 Impact on Voluntary Compliance is Unknown 
 3.3 Compliance Results Should be Communicated to the Construction Industry 
 
 
 Conclusions 
 Recommendations 
 Recommended follow-up action 
 Action plans 





  Executive summary
This report presents the findings of Phase 1 of the evaluation of the Contract Payment Reporting System (CPRS), an initiative of the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) to address activity in the underground economy in the construction and home renovation sectors by promoting voluntary compliance and providing a basis for strengthening the administration's enforcement programs. The purpose of this evaluation was to address the implementation of CPRS by focusing on the concept and design, effectiveness of implementation and the early impacts on compliance. A Phase 2 evaluation is intended to explore program effectiveness in more depth and alternative delivery mechanisms that might provide greater cost-effectiveness. The CPRS is, for the most part, fully operational and is supporting operations to address tax compliance issues in the construction and home renovation industry. CRA managers and staff involved in the CPRS program fully support the program. Construction companies and construction associations are less supportive but this is largely attributable to their perception that the program is not effective in addressing the underground economy in their sector, a perception that is not supported by performance statistics. Program results achieved to date are significant and strongly support continuing the program. The program has resulted in over $650 million in tax assessments over the last four years. Results have been especially notable in the identification of sub-contractors who failed to file tax returns. However, results to date in the audit program suggest a need for a review of the CPRS audit program to ensure that it is achieving acceptable results in addressing the underground economy. The most significant benefit of CPRS was expected to be its impact on voluntary compliance. This impact has not yet been measured and effort is required to determine levels of voluntary compliance and the impact of CPRS on taxpayer behaviour. CPRS is useful in addressing underground economy activity where recorded transactions and audit trails exist in the contractors' books and records. There is general agreement within the industry and the Agency, however, that it is not effective in that segment of the underground economy where transactions are purposefully hidden by both the contractor and sub-contractor to circumvent tax laws and other legal obligations (commonly known as the 'cash' economy). This segment is addressed by other elements of the Agency's underground economy strategy. Notwithstanding the positive results that have been achieved to date, changes to the design and administration of the program would improve its overall effectiveness. Design concessions made to minimize administrative burden on the industry, in order to gain the support of the industry have, in fact, adversely impacted the administration and effectiveness of the program. Optional filing periods make it more difficult and less efficient for the Agency to identify non-compliant behaviour with respect to the filing of tax returns and the reporting of income. The provision of information slips to taxpayers is a key feature of third-party reporting systems designed to promote voluntary compliance. This requirement is missing from CPRS and is likely detracting from the strength of the program in this area. Finally, the exclusion from the program of the retail home renovation sector within the industry, which has grown significantly since the introduction of CPRS, is creating perceptions of inequity within the industry and is potentially resulting in significant tax leakage. Administratively, the program was implemented with limited automated support resulting in process inefficiencies. Performance measurement and compliance research supporting the program are underdeveloped and are required to ensure that CPRS results are monitored and that administration of the program is modified as required. The Agency does not yet have a program in place to verify the accuracy of the CPRS information returns that have been filed and as a result there is no assurance that contractors are fully and accurately reporting payments made to sub-contractors. As well, the Agency has not adequately employed the penalty provisions with respect to the timely filing of CPRS returns, which is serving as a disincentive for contractors to file returns on time or at all. Finally, the industry's lack of knowledge of the results of the program detracts from their support for the program and is a disincentive to their voluntary compliance with CPRS requirements. A phase 2 evaluation was planned to focus on program results in relation to costs, the approach and coverage for achieving tax compliance, and alternative program delivery mechanisms to achieve objectives. In recognition of the positive results achieved to date, and the fact that many of the issues identified for examination in Phase 2 have already been addressed, or will be addressed in other Agency studies, it is recommended that Phase 2 be cancelled and that further work focus on a detailed follow-up of the implementation of the recommendations included in this report.


  Introduction
This report presents the findings of the initial evaluation of the Contract Payment Reporting System (CPRS) that was introduced to address activities in the construction and home renovation industry. It does not address the government contracting portion of CPRS, and references within this report to CPRS refer only to the construction industry portion of the program. This is the first of two evaluation studies identified in the evaluation framework approved by the Internal Audit and Program Evaluation Committee in June 2003. The purpose of this evaluation was to address the program's implementation by focusing on the CPRS concept and design, effectiveness of implementation, and early compliance results. Phase 2 of the evaluation is intended to concentrate more on program results in terms of impacts as well as opportunities for improved or alternative ways of achieving objectives.


  Background
The construction industry stands out as one of Canada's major industries. According to recent Statistics Canada estimates 1 , there are approximately 266,000 construction businesses in Canada with revenues in the vicinity of $135 billion. According to the Construction Sector Council 2 , the industry has more than 20,000 general contractors and 108,000 trade contractors, and one in seventeen Canadian workers earns a living in the construction sector. The size of the average construction firm is quite small, however, with 95% of the firms having fewer than 10 employees. In 2003, the annual GDP growth rate in the construction industry was 4.5%, outstripping the national rate for that year of 1.5%. During the same year, the industry's employment growth rate was 4.3% while the national rate was 1.9%. As a result of continuing concerns about high levels of non-compliance, and consequent loss of tax revenue in the construction industry, CPRS was introduced in 1995 on a voluntary participation basis. The 10% voluntary participation level was considered too low to be effective, resulting in the introduction of mandatory reporting in the February 1998 federal budget. The mandatory CPRS was planned for implementation on January 1, 1999. The CPRS is one of a number of activities developed by the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) in its multi-dimensional approach to support taxpayers in meeting their tax obligations and to deter taxpayers from participating in the underground economy. The objective of CPRS is to assist the tax administration in addressing activity in the underground economy in the construction and home renovation sectors by promoting voluntary compliance and providing a basis for strengthening the administration's enforcement programs. Under CPRS, individuals, partnerships, and corporations whose primary activity is construction, are required to report annually their payments to sub-contractors for construction services to the CRA. The information received is matched against data maintained by CRA to identify those who have not filed tax returns or have under-reported their income. The biggest expected benefit of the program was an increase in the level of voluntary compliance in the industry. It was also envisaged, however, that the integration of third-party information into CRA's risk assessment systems would enable the CRA to better target non-compliance and initiate appropriate enforcement actions. In the February 1998 federal budget, the government also announced the introduction of a related initiative, a payment reporting system whereby contract payments made by federal departments, agencies, and crown corporations for services rendered are also required to be reported to CRA. The scope of this evaluation study did not include the federal reporting system. In order to implement CPRS, together with the reporting system for federal government contracting, Treasury Board approved funding of $30 million annually, of which approximately 85% 3  supports the construction industry portion of CPRS. The Agency expected “assessments” for both the federal and construction portions of CPRS to stabilize around $125 million per year after 2001-2002. At the same time, it was noted that the impact on voluntary compliance in the construction industry was expected to provide the greatest long-term increase in tax revenues, and that this would be the best long-term performance indicator for the CPRS initiative 4 .


  Methodologies
The methodological approach adopted for the evaluation incorporated a high level of involvement from the construction industry in keeping with the Minister's commitment to review the CPRS initiative in consultation with the key stakeholders in the industry. A mix of methodologies was used in the evaluation. An extensive document review was conducted of records (communiqués, studies, business cases, agency reports etc.) related to the CPRS to acquire a better understanding of the reasoning behind decisions made. General literature research was also undertaken to obtain knowledge on the construction industry in general, and more specifically on initiatives and programs undertaken by other government departments. An analysis of information returns was conducted at the Ottawa Technology Centre (OTC) to determine characteristics of the filing and processing of returns. A statistical analysis of operational data maintained by CRA was also conducted. A survey was administered to CRA senior officials in revenue collections and audit in 44 Tax Services Offices across Canada. The survey addressed the strengths and weaknesses of the CPRS design, and the implementation and on-going delivery of CPRS. Interviews were conducted with managers and staff at Headquarters and in four regions. These interviews involved 127 CRA managers and staff from Headquarters and regional operations in Halifax, Toronto-West, Burnaby-Fraser and Ottawa. Interviews and focus group sessions were also held with a number of contractors, sub-contractors, and construction industry officials to obtain their views on a range of issues related to the evaluation questions. In total, 73 contractors from Halifax, Toronto, Montreal, Ottawa and Calgary were interviewed, and officials representing four of the key associations were consulted. An external consultant was contracted to conduct the interviews and focus group sessions with the industry. Using an external consultant assured an independent review of the opinions of the construction industry.


  Findings from the evaluation
The following is a summary of our main evaluation findings. These findings address: 
CPRS Concept and Design;
Effectiveness of Implementation; and
CPRS Impacts on Compliance.



  1.0 Concept and Design
The first step in our evaluation involved an assessment of the appropriateness of the third-party reporting concept and the design of CPRS itself for improving tax compliance in the construction industry. In summary, the concept of using third party reporting is valid to address compliance issues where transactions are documented and audit trails remain in the contractors' records. While the CPRS design is adequate, some modifications are required to strengthen the program.


  1.1 The Concept of Using Third-Party Information From Contractors is a Valid Approach for Improving Tax Compliance where Transactions are Documented and Audit Trails Exist Remain in the Contractors' Records.
The underlying concept of CPRS is the use of third-party information to improve tax compliance in the construction and home renovation industry. The strength of the concept is seen to lie in its capacity to influence taxpayer behaviour thereby promoting voluntary compliance. Its full impact on influencing taxpayer behaviour is, in large part, dependent upon a general awareness within the target population that the information is being reported to the administration and used in its enforcement program. There is not a lot of empirical data available on the impact of third party reporting on taxpayer behaviour, however, all administrations we examined, including CRA, rely heavily on this concept to achieve voluntary compliance. The CRA recognizes the contribution of third party reporting in the delivery of its programs. In recent annual reports, the Agency notes that third-party reporting is a contributing factor to more than 90% of taxpayers complying voluntarily with their tax responsibilities. An Internal Revenue Service Federal Tax Compliance research study 5  on individual income tax supports these views. It found that under-reported income increased from 4.2% where there was substantial information reporting to 31.8% where there was little or no such reporting. The results of this study, along with the continuing reliance on such programs in various tax administrations, support the view that third-party reporting is instrumental in supporting voluntary compliance. In addition to supporting voluntary compliance, we found third-party reporting to be effective in enhancing enforcement programs. In situations where taxpayers are reticent to voluntarily fulfill their tax obligations, third-party reporting provides the administration with useful information for identifying taxpayers who do not comply with their tax filing obligations. Third-party reporting is a logical approach to address non-compliance where invoices, contracts, payment records, and audit trails already exist in the contractors' books and records. It is not seen to be effective, however, for that portion of the underground economy where transactions are purposefully hidden to circumvent tax laws and other legal obligations (commonly known as the 'cash' economy). During our interviews and focus sessions with the private sector, which included large numbers of construction companies and the four main associations representing the industry, it was widely suggested that third-party reporting does not address the cash economy, in both contractor to sub-contractor and business to consumer transactions, that continues to be a serious problem for the construction industry. In fact, some contractors noted in our focus group sessions that CPRS has actually forced some non-compliant sub-contractors into the cash economy to avoid detection by CRA. Similarly, within the Agency, it is generally recognized that CPRS does not address this segment of the underground economy, or at least does not do so effectively. While there is no evidence on the effectiveness of the program in addressing the cash economy, logic supports the perceptions of the industry and the agency officials. Logically, where a contractor and sub-contractor have agreed to hide their transactions to the benefit of both parties, there is nothing in the CPRS program that would necessarily encourage the two parties to change the arrangement as continued non-compliance of this activity would not be identified through CPRS reporting. While we could not establish documented, stated objectives for CPRS, we were advised by the Office of Primary Interest, Compliance Programs Branch (CPB) that it was recognized that the CPRS would only be effective where contractors maintain records. Other underground economy strategies, including audit strategies and outreach programs, are in place to address situations where records do not exist. With respect to efficiency, we concluded that third-party reporting represents an efficient process for both the private sector and the Agency. For those in the private sector, information being reported is generally at the core of business financial and accounting systems, and is therefore generally readily available. This minimizes the need for the private sector to implement extensive system or process changes to comply with reporting requirements. In our focus group sessions with industry participants we asked them to quantify the level of effort required to comply with CPRS requirements. The majority of those who responded gave either a time or cost estimate, averaging “a day or less” in the first instance, or $600 or less in the second instance. As a result, implementation and on-going administration costs can be significantly lower for third-party information reporting than for other options, such as withholding taxes, which are considered to be more intrusive and costly for the private sector. Third-party reporting is economical from an agency perspective as well. New third-party reporting systems can be implemented relatively easily and inexpensively given that the infrastructure already exists to support such programs in terms of receiving, matching, and processing information. Furthermore, on-going administrative costs associated with such programs are relatively inexpensive when compared to other options such as increasing the intensity of the audit penetration in the industry. As a result, we have concluded that the concept of third-party reporting is a valid concept for improving compliance with the exception of that segment of the industry where transactions are purposefully hidden to circumvent tax laws and other legal obligations. Other strategies employed by the Agency exist to improve compliance in in this area and ensure that the totality of underground economy in the construction industry is being adequately addressed.


  1.2 CPRS Design is Adequate But Modifications Would Strengthen the Program
In designing CPRS, the CPB consulted within the Agency and with the construction sector and other comparable tax administrations to develop a program that would be both effective in meeting the initiative's objectives and in providing an efficient process for both the private sector and the Agency. The resultant CPRS design represents a comprehensive approach for: identifying the client population; notifying/reminding clients annually of their obligation to report; receiving contractor reports; integrating sub-contractor information with CRA processing systems for data capture, matching, and cross-referencing of reported information; and using the information in CRA risk assessment systems. This design enables the Agency to obtain, process, and use reported information to identify individuals who have not filed tax returns or registered for GST/HST and to identify high-risk cases of unreported income for possible audit attention. While management and staff fully support CPRS, some concerns were raised about specific aspects of its design that were seen to be having an impact on either the effectiveness of the program or its administrative costs. These included flexible reporting options, voluntary provision of slips to sub-contractors, and exclusion of companies whose construction business represents less than 50% of its total business.    Flexible Reporting Options   During the design process, concessions were made to minimize the burden on contractors having to file information returns in order to gain support of the construction industry. These concessions included format and timing options for the filing of information returns. Contractors were given the option of reporting in an open format or on an agency-designed form called the T5018 Summary. This option was intended to provide contractors sufficient flexibility to minimize reporting costs. CRA managers and staff maintain that the open format option is administratively inefficient and impedes internal processes. Our review and analysis of CPRS information returns, however, found that over 95% of contractors use the Agency's T5018 format. Also, we analyzed processing times at the Ottawa Technology Centre (OTC) where CPRS returns are processed and found no significant difference in processing times for information received in an open format versus the prescribed format. Given this information, and the fact that the industry sees this feature as a benefit that provides flexibility and results in decreased costs, we found no compelling reason to change this provision. More problematic to the Agency, however, is the provision allowing contractors the choice of reporting their subcontractor payments to CRA on either a fiscal year or calendar year end basis. This option was allowed to provide flexibility where contractors' accounting cycles vary from calendar year end thereby minimizing the administrative burden on these contractors. The Minister committed to evaluate the issue of fiscal or calendar year reporting as part of a review of the effectiveness of the program. The Construction Industry is still very supportive of keeping this choice of reporting periods and would strongly resist any change that would limit this flexibility. At the same time, however, in our focus group sessions with industry participants, many recognized the limitations that this option places on the potential effectiveness of the CPRS program. So while this option is sometimes cited as being necessary to maintain industry support for the program, it is also seen as inhibiting the Agency's ability to properly administer the program. In our interviews and survey, agency officials linked this option with processing complications and delays resulting from difficulties in determining contractors' filing periods and matching T5018 information with sub-contractors' tax returns when contractors and sub-contractors had overlapping filing periods. Also, a CPB–CPRS business case to Treasury Board in 2002 notes that this option results in an inability to readily incorporate the return into existing compliance systems and causes additional matching and risk assessment workloads as fiscal year data must be apportioned to calendar year reports. We found that these difficulties delayed the analysis of the information by an average of 8 months, and in some instances the delays were up to 20 months. The majority of CPRS information returns are filed on a calendar year basis (CYE) however, a significant and growing portion of the contractor population files on a fiscal year basis (FYE). (See Table 1.) The inefficiencies cited by managers and staff will only be magnified if the trend to fiscal year reporting continues.  Table 1 Calendar vs. Fiscal Year Reporting 





 
 2000  
 2001  
 2002  
 2003  


Calendar Year
 77.5% 
 87% 
 69% 
 64% 


Fiscal Year
 22.5% 
 13% 
 31% 
 36% 





Source: Compliance Programs Branch, March 2005 When we compared CPRS with similar agency third-party reporting programs, we noted that other programs require information returns to be submitted on a calendar year basis. This allows the Agency to cross-reference and validate information in an automated environment and to readily identify filing and reporting non-compliance. Having CPRS information returns filed on a calendar year basis would align CPRS reporting to tax returns. This would eliminate the difficulties noted in identifying reporting periods for information returns and in matching information and tax returns thereby facilitating the identification of non-filers/non-registrants and potential under-reporting of income. It would also improve the efficiency, and arguably the effectiveness, of the existing manual targeting process for the audit function by improving the identification of instances where insufficient income has been reported relative to payments included on information returns filed by contractors. As a result, we have concluded that mandatory filing of information returns on a calendar year end basis should be adopted to improve both the efficiency and effectiveness of the CPRS program.    Voluntary Provision of Information Slips to Sub-Contractors   During the design of CPRS, it was recognized that the provision of information slips to sub-contractors would be beneficial to program effectiveness and would support efforts to maximize voluntary compliance within the industry. Information slips were considered to be effective in supporting voluntary compliance by serving as a helpful reminder to sub-contractors of dollar amounts paid to their businesses and of the fact that the amounts were reported to the Agency. As a concession to the industry to minimize the compliance cost of CPRS reporting requirements, however, contractors were not required to provide slips to sub-contractors but rather were encouraged to do so on a voluntary basis. While the proportion of sub-contractors receiving slips is unknown, it is generally believed by both the industry and CRA officials to be low. Providing copies of information slips is a key design feature of most third-party reporting programs as it is seen to contribute significantly to improved voluntary compliance. It is a well-established tax administration practice and is included in virtually all T5 and T4 programs in CRA. Issuance of information slips is also consistent with practices followed in other jurisdictions. Exclusion of this feature from the CPRS design detracts from the impact of the program on taxpayer voluntary compliance behaviour. Management in CRA is convinced that providing information slips to sub-contractors would be key in raising their awareness and voluntary compliance by serving as a reminder and alerting sub-contractors to the fact that the information has been reported to the Agency. This, in turn, would help to reduce the necessity of enforcement action. In our interviews and focus group sessions with representatives of the construction trade, reservations were expressed about providing slips because of potential costs associated with having to prepare and mail them out. They argue that making information slips to sub-contractors a mandatory requirement will result in substantially increased costs although they had no supporting data. They identified additional costs for researching sub-contractor addresses and for administrative costs such as mailing and postage. Our analysis, however, did not support this view. The majority of returns are filed by small to medium sized enterprises and, based on actual returns and slips received in 2002-2003 and 2003-2004, have an average of fewer than 15 slips per return. Our analysis of information returns at the OTC revealed that at least 70% of all slips received already include the sub-contractor address thereby minimizing the amount of time required to research subcontractor addresses. When asked how difficult it would be to send slips to sub-contractors, the medium to smaller sized firms said that it would not result in that much extra labour/cost and therefore would not be a significant burden. Larger firms, however, felt that the administrative burden would be larger given the number of sub-contractors with whom they work. Most, if not all, of these large firms, however, would have automation to support their processing which would ease any increased administrative burden. Our preliminary analysis, therefore, indicates that the issuing of slips to sub-contractors would not significantly add to the administrative cost of the program to the industry as a whole. Given the potential benefits to voluntary compliance by increasing sub-contractor awareness that their income is being reported to the Agency, the issuance of sub-contractor information slips should be adopted as a mandatory requirement. It is to be noted, however, that the issuance of slips to sub-contractors would have an impact on both the reporting format (open vs. closed) and on the format and content of the current T5108 slip.    Expansion to Large Retailers - 50% Rule   When CPRS was first implemented, companies and individuals with less than 50% of their business activities in construction were exempted from the CPRS reporting requirement. The impact and rationale for this exemption (also referred to as the 50% rule) was originally planned for review in Phase 2 of the evaluation (after sufficient time had passed for CPRS to reach operational maturity) within the broader context of whether or not the program's coverage was adequate for achieving its tax compliance objectives. However, because the exemption was so frequently questioned, both internally and externally, during this phase of the evaluation and the potential inequitable treatment of many taxpayers so significant, there is now a pressing need for CRA to reconsider the continuing rationale for the exemption. The exemption effectively excludes a number of business sectors involved in construction and home renovation but whose involvement in the construction industry is not their primary business. Most attention has centered on the retail sector, however others are excluded from the requirement such as the rental, insurance, and utilities sectors. While the rationale for this decision is unclear, adoption of the 50% rule by CRA was intentional and was accompanied with a commitment by the Minister to re-examine the rule. When CPRS was being designed, large sales volume retailers were not a significant force in the construction and home renovation industry. Since then, however, there has been major expansion by such retailers into the areas of installed sales and construction services. The exclusion of these retailers from the CPRS program has become a particular concern to the industry. Little documented evidence exists on the precise nature and scope of this growth except from journalistic articles and periodic statements from the retailers themselves. The consensus among representatives of the construction sector, and the companies themselves, is that very sizeable proportions of this retail business sector are now related to installed sales and services (even though still less than the 50% marker) and construction and home renovation will continue to be a major growth area for these businesses. For example, in one instance a retailer is reported in The Globe and Mail 6  to have increased its number of stores by 250% from 32 stores in 1997 to 115 in 2004 and has plans to expand by an additional 200 stores within 5 years. This large retailer announced in December 2004 that installed sales increased by 31.4% in 2004 alone. Therefore, unlike when CPRS was first implemented, these retail stores potentially represent a significant and growing share of the construction sector that is not being captured by CPRS. The exemption of these retailers and others could well be impeding compliance objectives by leaving significant volumes of business outside of the program. Additionally, industry associations have noted that the exemption is creating a strong sense of unfair treatment among construction entities that currently fall under the CPRS reporting requirement. CRA officials share this concern. Interestingly, notwithstanding the associations' concerns, there was little awareness of the filing exemption among construction participants in our focus groups. When they learned of this rule, however, they felt it to be highly inappropriate and unfair. Industry associations and focus group participants noted that the exemption excludes larger companies that do more business than others in the industry who are included in the program and felt that the rule defeated the purpose of the program by excluding a substantial amount of construction activity. They also noted that a competitive advantage in the market place could be created for the exempted companies. Based on their experience, they believe sub-contractors wanting to avoid reporting income would gravitate to those companies who do not report payments to CRA. It was suggested that this could provide the exempted companies with a costing/pricing advantage over those who were not exempted if sub-contractors offered lower prices to exempted companies on the assumption that their income would not be reported to CRA. While it makes sense to draw such building material retailers, and possibly other sectors currently excluded from the program, into the CPRS reporting requirement to ensure potential tax leakage is captured, the impacts on numbers of information returns, tax revenues and compliance are, as yet, unknown as this group has never been studied. While a commitment was made in 1998 to explore immediately the expansion of the program across the industry, there has been little consultation with the excluded sectors and little research work undertaken to date that would provide any information on the impact of expanding the program. However, even if the impact is not substantial, the arguments for proceeding at this time are still strong considering concerns for fair and equal treatment of all members of the construction sector. Expansion of this requirement would also enhance industry support for the program. As a result of our analysis, we have concluded that the Agency must begin immediately to explore fully the appropriate expansion of the program with particular attention being directed at the inclusion of the large sales volume retail sector.


  2.0 Effectiveness of Implementation
In examining the effectiveness of implementation, we assessed the extent to which CPRS was implemented according to plan and whether sufficient operationalization has occurred to adequately support long-term compliance objectives. In summary, CPRS has generally been implemented as planned and is being delivered in a manner supportive of its objectives. Some implementation issues need to be addressed, however, for the program to be more fully operational and effective.


  2.1 CPRS has been Implemented as Planned and is Delivered in a Manner Supportive of its Compliance Objectives
The CPRS implementation plan incorporated all the necessary pieces and linkages that were needed for an effective program, and the program was successfully operationalized. Extensive consultations and communications occurred during development and implementation and are considered to have been successful by both agency officials and the main associations representing the construction trade. Although some operational difficulties were experienced at the beginning, the program was settled in by the end of its second year of operation. Internally, objectives for the program were understood, roles and responsibilities were clear and carried out. Policies, procedures, forms, and work instruments were developed and implementation included appropriate internal training. As well, keeping in mind that CPRS is in fact just another component added to the already existing CRA Non-filer/Non Registrant and Tax Audit programs, effective linkages with similar programs and processes were established. These programs have sufficiently operationalized CPRS activities. In our interviews with agency officials and representatives of the construction sector, no significant issues were raised with respect to any of the foregoing although regional agency officials indicated that greater involvement on their part in the development of the program would have facilitated its implementation. Ultimately the test of effective implementation for CPRS is the execution of activities in such a manner as to reasonably achieve the desired outcomes on the compliance objective. For the Agency, this means that key program activities are being carried out as intended. For the construction contractors, it means that they understand and are able to comply with the CPRS information reporting requirements. On both fronts, these implementation objectives have been met. Internally, notices are being sent out to remind contractors to file their information returns. Information returns are being received and processed and are being used as intended by different agency programs to identify and take action against potential non-compliance. Externally, according to our focus groups of construction companies and representatives of the trade associations, the majority of contractors have a good understanding of the CPRS regulations and they considered the filing process to be relatively simple and straightforward.


  2.2 Some Operational Issues Still Need to be Addressed
Some issues need to be addressed to achieve full operationalization of the CPRS program. These include addressing compliance concerns with CPRS reporting, defining the contractor population, applying the penalties for late or non-filing of CPRS returns, developing automated support for the program, and improving performance measurement and monitoring.    Compliance Issues with CPRS Reporting   The number of CPRS information returns being filed annually has grown with 83,049 returns being filed in 2003-2004. CRA managers consider the increasing volumes of returns filed to be indicative of increasing levels of awareness of, and compliance to, CPRS reporting requirements throughout the industry. However, 47,077 or 57% of the 83,049 returns filed in 2003-2004, required Revenue Collections Branch (RCB) follow-up action with the contractor to obtain the returns. So, while volumes of CPRS returns have grown, the low level of voluntary filing in 2003-2004 is a cause for concern as it has an impact on the administrative cost of the program. We noted that a significant number of contractors who potentially should be submitting information returns is not being pursued each year. Revenue Collections Branch (RCB) has estimated that because of insufficient resources it has been unable to follow up with verification of over 37,000 contractors in 2003-2004 and 32,000 in 2004-2005. Further resources being applied to this activity may well provide significant benefit in terms of additional tax assessments. The branch has estimated potential for additional sub-contractor tax assessments of more than $50 million annually from this population. The Agency does not have a program, similar to the employer compliance audit program for T4's, to validate the CPRS payment information that is being reported by contractors. Without such validation, there is no assurance that the information being reported is in fact complete and accurate. Given the on-going non-compliance in the construction industry that gave rise to the program, there is no assurance that contractors are reporting payments accurately and completely. In fact, during our focus group sessions with the industry, it was noted that in some instances agreement is reached between contractors and sub-contractors not to include payments in CPRS reporting. Verification of the content of the contractors' CPRS information returns should be undertaken to ensure the integrity of the system.    Definition of the Contractor Population   It is noted that the Agency has not yet found an effective method to accurately identify the total population of contractors who should be filing CPRS returns and that this is resulting in operational inefficiencies. This population is used for establishing an inventory of contractors to whom letters should be mailed out to remind them of the filing requirements. CPB has been using Statistics Canada SIC/NAICS codes in the identification of contractors for CPRS purposes but these have proven to be imprecise. It is noted that Statistics Canada will no longer be providing this information and RCB is now developing an inventory of contractors based on CRA database information. There are inherent difficulties in identifying, with any precision, the population of contractors who should be filing CPRS returns. However there is a need to establish a baseline and continue to refine this information, to address operational inefficiencies. Agency officials felt that an automated system designed to support the program would improve the development and management of an inventory of contractors. The absence of an accurate inventory of contractors also contributes to an inability to determine the level of voluntary compliance with the CPRS requirements. Until the Agency can more accurately identify the population of contractors, and the subset within that population who need to file CPRS information, it will be unable to determine levels of voluntary compliance with the program requirements. We have concluded, therefore, that while the level of compliance with the filing requirements has improved, the Agency should continue to improve its methodology for identifying the total population of contractors who should be filing information returns and should verify the accuracy and completeness of the information on the returns that are being filed.    Penalties for Late or Non-Filing of CPRS Returns   Under Subsection 162(7) of the Income Tax Act, contractors who do not file or who late file information returns with the CRA are subject to penalties of $25.00/day with the minimum fine being $100.00 and maximum being $2,500.00 for each infraction. However, introduction of CPRS was accompanied by a period of administrative tolerance with respect to the application of penalties to allow a period of time for the companies to understand fully their responsibilities. Although this period of administrative tolerance ended late in 2004, penalties have been applied in only two situations where contractors deliberately and publicly refused to comply with the reporting requirement. The incidence of late or non-filing of CPRS information returns remains an issue for the program. As noted earlier, in 2003-2004 less than half of the returns were filed voluntarily. Industry participants in our interviews and focus group sessions recognized that there is still non-reporting of CPRS information occurring within the industry. One of the factors identified as contributing to this problem was that no penalties were being applied for the non-filing of information returns. Based on our study of returns at the OTC, we found that 58% of returns were filed late by an average of 5.5 months. This impacts adversely on the Agency's ability to identify and take action against construction entities that do not comply with the CPRS reporting requirements and adds to administrative costs from having to research and contact contractors to encourage the filing of their returns. The application of penalties should serve as an incentive to contractors to file their information returns or to do so on a timely basis. This would contribute to reducing CRA efforts required to follow up with non- compliant contractors, thus freeing up resources for other activities. In our focus group sessions, contractors expressed little specific awareness of penalties for late or non-filing of CPRS returns. There was also a clear message from the focus groups that not applying penalties contributes significantly to a perception that the CPRS program is not important and lessens the attention that contractors give to their reporting obligations. Some construction companies in our focus groups said they had not filed an information return specifically because they did not think that the program was important. The CRA managers we interviewed believe that the application of failure to file penalties will send a strong message to contractors on the importance of complying with CPRS filing requirements. We have concluded, therefore, that the absence of penalties being applied to late and non-filers of CPRS information returns is impacting negatively on the propensity of many companies to file returns, and on program effectiveness. As a result, the CRA needs to urgently focus on applying penalties across the program as a critical step in the process for strengthening compliance with the CPRS reporting requirements.    Measuring Performance and Monitoring Results   Performance measurement for CPRS is underdeveloped and an overall framework for analyzing and reporting performance does not exist. In the early stages of implementing CPRS, some indicators were developed for reporting to the Treasury Board on CPRS performance but these were not meaningful and were used only on a limited basis for reporting. New indicators have since been developed but on-going reporting based on these has not yet occurred. The new indicators measure production and outputs, however, and do not identify the key drivers of performance which are critical for evaluating and reporting on the impacts of the program and for adjusting the program to achieve better performance. Furthermore, there has been a lack of focus on data requirements and new research in areas such as population sizes and levels of compliance to support the indicators established. As a result, sufficient analytics are not available to properly understand and adjust the program to ensure that it is achieving its objectives. Performance measures should address both CPRS compliance issues and the impact of the program on client behaviour. To provide some perspective, performance indicators should address operational outputs including levels of voluntary and enforced compliance by contractors with CPRS filing requirements, including both late and non-filing of CRPS returns. From a program outcome/impact perspective, indicators should include sub-contractor behavioural indicators such as trends in changes in compliance with the tax filing requirements in terms of voluntary compliance, late and non-filing of tax returns, and recidivism rates. From an operational perspective, measurement of program outputs is still required to track achievements and allow for the analysis of regional and industry sector variances. It is recognized that some of these indicators will require research effort to provide the necessary information to support outcome and impact measurement and a research strategy is required to address these. A comprehensive performance measurement framework is required for the on-going management of the program. The absence of such a framework inhibits the Agency's ability to measure objectives achievement for CPRS and to make fact-based decisions to improve performance. As a performance measurement system was not in place, some early compliance results from CPRS had to be derived by the evaluation team from performance statistics generated by agency mainframe systems. However, mainframe data was either not easily accessible or not easily manipulated to produce relevant information with which to determine program impacts. To adequately and accurately demonstrate its worth and lay the foundation for on-going monitoring and management of the program, a comprehensive performance measurement and analytical framework needs to be developed and implemented. The performance measurement framework should address compliance with both CPRS and tax filing requirements and should include the impact on the Non-Filer/Non-Registrant and Tax Audit programs as well as on voluntary compliance. This information would not only support the management of the CPRS program, but could also be used to determine if there would be benefit to expanding the program to other areas of the underground economy.    Automated Functionality to Support Program Delivery   Other than adjustments to integrate CPRS with already existing systems in the CRA Non- Filer/Non-Registrant and Tax Audit programs, there was very little specific automation, i.e. a compliance system or automated information reporting, developed to support CPRS. A decision was taken to delay funding for such automation until it was established that CPRS was producing the desired outcomes. According to the CRA managers we interviewed, not addressing automation requirements immediately has resulted in processing inefficiencies, barriers to effectiveness, and severely underdeveloped performance measurement. During our review, we identified that automated T5018 functionality to support the mail-out process, issue reminder notices, and serve as a workload system, would help the efficiency and effectiveness of the program's administration. Automation to support performance measurement would facilitate the development of timely and accurate information for ongoing program administration, decision-making and planning. Automation is critical to the review and enforcement process and ultimately to generating additional revenue for CPRS and improving voluntary compliance. The system currently utilized for CPRS processing is very restrictive in its capabilities and cannot provide the necessary information and functions required to properly identify and manage the workload even with system enhancements. During our review, the most notable areas where automation would help the compliance process were: the identification and profiling of those required to file CPRS returns; issuance of reminder notices; application of penalties and interest; and record of actions taken on sub-contractors. Failing to address these automation needs will not optimize the efficiency and effectiveness of the program's enforcement activity, which in turn affects revenue generation. RCB is proposing the development of an automated compliance system to support the administration of CPRS. The functionality of the proposed system would address the automation requirements identified during this study. While this proposal is the subject of on-going discussions between RCB and the Information Technology Branch, the Agency should pursue the development of appropriate automated support for CPRS as quickly as possible. In order to effectively report on the performance of CPRS, automation is required to enable the collection, storage and retrieval of program information. Currently information is not readily available, is not easily accessible, and is not easily extracted from the mainframe sources. As a result, the CPRS cannot be measured in any consistent way, but rather those seeking information must rely on various systems, and then devise individualized methods to analyze and report on the information received. This results in a number of inefficiencies, not the least of which is the time required to extract information and analyze results. Automation of CPRS information is required to have reliable, accurate and relevant information to enable reporting, decision-making and planning.


  3.0 CPRS Impacts on Compliance
We examined the CPRS results that have been achieved in the five years that it has been operational. Our examination looked at the enforcement results from the Non-Filer/Non-Registrant and Audit programs as well as impacts on voluntary compliance. While the program requires some adjustments and may still need time to mature, enforcement results achieved to date have been significant and underscore the effectiveness of the program in achieving greater compliant behaviour within the industry. We also found that the impact on voluntary compliance with tax requirements has not yet been measured and is unknown. There is also a strong need for the Agency to develop a communication strategy to inform the construction industry about CPRS activities and results.


  3.1 Significant Enforcement Results have been Achieved
Enforcement results achieved to date have been significant and strongly support continuing the program. To date, over 100,000 non-filer/non-registrant and audit enforcement actions have resulted in more than $650 million in assessments being generated as a result of CPRS. It is noted that initially the Agency expected CPRS assessments to stabilize around $125 million per year after 2001-2002 for both the construction industry and government contracting programs. In both of the last two years, however, the revenues assessed from the construction industry alone have exceeded $230 million, almost twice the amount initially expected from both programs on an on-going basis. The most significant CPRS results have come from the identification of individuals and companies who have not filed their returns or who filed them late. To date, the identification of non-filers accounts for 86% of the enforcement actions and 95% of the CPRS revenue. Analysis of audit results suggests less certainty about the early success of CPRS related audits. Further examination of the impacts on the non-filer and tax audit programs follows.    Non-Filer/Non-Registrant Program   The objective of CRA's Non-Filer/Non-Registrant Program is to identify and remedy situations where taxpayers fail to file tax returns or to register for the GST program. It was expected that CPRS would provide a basis for the efficient and effective identification of non-filers in the construction industry. During our review of program data, we found that the number of new income tax returns filed as a result of CPRS has steadily increased since the program was implemented. The number of returns has increased from 25 in the first year to 30,182 in 2004-2005. In total, over 92,000 income tax returns and more than $620 million in assessments are attributable to the program (see Table 2). The 92,000 returns represent approximately 45,000 unique individuals or entities' submitting an average of 2 returns each, with actuals ranging from 1 to 16 returns. T1 individuals account for approximately 79% of returns filed, 76% of the unique individuals or entities filing, and 55% of dollars assessed. While the T2 corporations account for approximately 21% of the returns filed and 24% of the unique individuals or entities filing, they represent 45% of the assessments generated.  Table 2 Non-Filer/Non Registrant Results from CPRS 





 
 2000-01  
 2001-02  
 2002-03  
 2003-04  
 2004-05  
 Total  


 New income tax returns 
 25 
 8,320 
 21,601 
 32,099 
 30,182 
 92,227 


 Income tax assessments* 
 $27,764 
 $39,710,960 
 $140,607,606 
 $220,292,161 
 $221,305,950 
 $621,944,441 


 Average Return 
 $1,110 
 $4,773 
 $6,509 
 $6,863 
 $7,332 
 $6,744 


 New GST registrants** 
 
 
 1,204 
 623 
 565 
 2,392 





Source: Revenue Collections Branch Notes: *Income tax assessments from the non-filer program include both federal and provincial assessments with the federal portion accounting for approximately 75% of the assessments. These amounts did not include GST-related assessments. **The numbers of GST registrants could not be distinguished between those related to the CPRS T5018 program and those related to the parallel T1204-government program. Additionally, 2,392 companies were identified for registration in the GST program, although we were unable to determine the extent to which these involved companies in the construction or government contract portions of CPRS. The CPRS related assessments from the new GST registrants could not be identified from CRA systems. These revenues would be incremental to the $620 million already assessed through the Non-Filer/Non-Registrant program. In the five years since the program was implemented, the average CPRS non-filer assessment has been $6,744. The annual average has increased each year and in 2004-2005 reached $7,332. This compares favourably to the non-CPRS construction non-filer average assessments of $2,529 for the same year. While these results represent the total assessments resulting from CPRS, they include cases of both non-filing and late filing. The distinction between the two is relevant when attempting to determine the impact of these results on the underground economy. We attempted to determine the extent to which the results could be directly attributed to the underground economy. The lack of appropriate data, however, prevented us from doing so. Efforts to determine a recidivism rate were similarly unsuccessful. While most of the true benefit of the CPRS relates to bringing non-filers into the system, identification of late-filers within the construction industry may well prevent them from becoming non-filers and slipping into the underground economy. Given that the contribution of assessments from late filers could be seen as having less impact on the underground economy however, a distinction between late and non-filers must be made to understand fully the impact of CPRS. Discussions with officials in RCB underscored the fact that there is no formal definition of a non-filer and therefore no way for them to determine the extent to which their results are having a true impact on the underground economy. Further analysis of the results should be undertaken by RCB in order to determine what portion of the CPRS results can be directly attributed to the underground economy. We have concluded, therefore, that the program has had a significant impact on identifying the non-filing population, and achieving enforced tax compliance. Further research and analysis is required, however, on a number of fronts. It is required to ensure a full understanding of CPRS results and its impact on the underground economy. This should include clearly identifying the number of unique taxpayers who are non-compliant with their tax filing responsibilities (differentiating between non-filers and late filers) as well as determining and tracking the rate of taxpayer recidivism.    Audit Program   While the non-filer program focuses on bringing more tax returns into the system, the audit program focuses on the accuracy and completeness of the returns filed. For some time, CRA tax audits have placed considerable priority on addressing non-compliance in the construction industry, as it is one of the targeted sectors in its overall underground economy strategy. The audit program uses CPRS information in its risk assessment processes to better target its audit activities. In its simplest terms, sub-contractor payment information provided by contractors, when compared against income reported by sub-contractors, can identify situations of apparent under-reporting of income. The audit strategy followed to date has included a blend of high-risk, low-risk, and office audits. PROTECTED  In our interviews and focus groups, auditors and audit managers gave their unqualified support for CPRS as an enabler of audit effectiveness in respect of underground activity in the construction trade. The vast majority of CRA managers and staff considered agency risk assessment practices for the construction industry to be far more effective and efficient with contractor reporting by providing credible information that facilitates the identification of situations of apparent under-reporting. In particular, they noted that CPRS has improved the effectiveness and efficiency of targeting high-risk sub-contractors for audits. Analysis of audit data, however, suggests less certainty about the early success of CPRS related audits. Since CPRS was implemented, the numbers of audits supporting the program have increased from 666 in 2001-2002 to 4,221 in 2004-2005 for a total of 14,518 audits over the four-year period (see Table 3). Tax assessments of over $34 million have resulted from these audits, mainly from high-risk audits. The average assessment since inception is $2,366 and like the Non-Filer/Non-Registrant program, the results have generally been increasing year over year with the average assessment for 2004-2005 being $3,089.    Table 3 Number of CPRS audits and related tax assessments 





 
 2000-01 
 2001-02  
 2002-03  
 2003-04  
 2004-05  
 Total  


 Total Audits 
 5 
 666 
 5,192 
 4,434 
 4,221 
 14,518 


 Total Assessments 
 $9,980 
 $1,516,447 
 $8,074,503 
 $11,703,875 
 $13,038,752 
 $34,343,557 


 Average Assessments 
 $1,996 
 $2,277 
 $1,555 
 $2,640 
 $3,089 
 $2,366 


 High risk audits 
 $9,980 
 $1,136,303 
 $4,096,894 
 $6,539,793 
 $8,428,991 
 $20,211,961 


 Low risk audits 
 $ - 
 $ - 
 $1,157,211 
 $3,220,246 
 $3,364,278 
 $7,741,735 


 Desk audits (office exams) 
 $ - 
 $380,144 
 $2,820,398 
 $1,943,836 
 $1,245,483 
 $6,389,861 





Source: AIMS extractions. We broke the results down by audit type for 2004-2005 and found that the average tax assessment per audit varies from a low of $1,494 for low-risk audits to a high of $5,684 for high-risk ones (see Table 4). We compared these results with the average cost to conduct the audits and found that the assessments for both high-risk and low-risk audits were not significantly higher than the cost of the audits.  Table 4 Average Tax Assessments and Average Costs for CPRS Audits (2004-2005) 





 Audit Type  
 Average Tax Assessment  
 Average Cost*  


 High Risk 
 $5,684 
 $2,191 


 Low Risk 
 $1,494 
 $978 


 Office 
 $2,563 
 $562 





Source: AIMS extractions. Based on PM2 salaries and the number of hours worked on the audits. To gain some perspective on these results, we compared the CPRS high-risk audit results to non-CPRS high-risk audit results completed in the construction industry over the same period of time. This comparison revealed that while the CPRS high-risk audits averaged a return of $4,584, the return for non-CPRS audits was 33% higher at an average of $6,097 (see Table 5). This could be expected given that non-CPRS audits are not restricted to income reporting, as is the case for CPRS high-risk audits. Furthermore, it is noted that the yields from the CPRS audits are improving and by 2004-2005 have almost reached the same level as the non-CPRS audits. The fact that the results of the two audit programs are no longer significantly different may indicate that once sub-contractors are compelled to file returns they become no more risky than others in the industry with respect to accurate reporting. This could bring into question the continuing rationale for a separate audit program for CPRS within the construction industry. Our initial comparison has not taken into account all of the possible differences between the two and further exploration of the effectiveness of the CPRS audit program needs to be undertaken, especially given that these audits are directed at a significant problem that exists in the construction industry.  Table 5 Construction Industry High Risk Audit Results 





 
 2000-2001  
 2001-2002  
 2002-2003  
 2003-2004  
 2004-2005  
 Total  


 CPRS  
 
 
 
 
 
 


 Audits 
 5 
 297 
 1,298 
 1,326 
 1,483 
 4,409  


 Assessments 
 $9,980 
 $1,136,303 
 $4,096,894 
 $6,539,793 
 $8,428,991 
 $20,211,961  


 Average Assessment 
 $1,996 
 $3,826 
 $3,156 
 $4,932 
 $5,684 
 $4,584  


 NON - CPRS  
 
 
 
 
 
 


 Audits 
 9,111 
 8,887 
 10,562 
 10,807 
 9,350 
 48,717 


 Assessments 
 $58,616,276 
 $49,799,295 
 $62,939,816 
 $67,189,223 
 $58,467,155 
 $297,011,765 


 Average Assessment 
 $6,434 
 $5,604 
 $5,959 
 $6,217 
 $6,253 
 $6,097 





Source: AIMS extractions. It is acknowledged that the impact of the CPRS audit strategy being pursued (focusing on revenue reporting and visibility) may have had an impact on the program's overall results to date. The restricted nature of the high-risk audit could explain why their results are somewhat lower than those for non-CPRS high-risk audits conducted during the same period given the risk associated with the CPRS program. Given the manner in which low-risk audits were selected, and the restricted nature of the audit itself, significant results could not be expected. It is noted that for the current fiscal year, the CPRS audit program will be focusing its efforts on high-risk rather than low-risk audits, which should improve the overall results. Restricting the scope of the high-risk audit, however, will likely still result in CPRS audits not achieving it full impact on non-compliance. Nevertheless, it is premature to make definitive judgments on the contribution of the CPRS audit program. Firm conclusions cannot be made on the continued relevance of the CPRS audit program and further analysis should be undertaken by CPB to determine the underlying contributing factors to the level of performance. This would allow the branch to determine if improvements would provide additional benefit or whether there is a need for a separate CPRS audit program for the construction industry. This analysis should include the following elements: 
assessment of the effectiveness of CPRS audit selection criteria and methodologies;
comparison of CPRS related audit results with cost and results in other comparable industry sectors and audit programs;
examination of regional results to identify deficiencies and best practices; and
examination of compliance levels and trends of sub-contractors in the construction industry.



  3.2 Impact on Voluntary Compliance is Unknown
When CPRS was implemented, the impact on voluntary compliance was expected to generate the most significant increase in tax revenues, and this was seen to be the best long-term indicator of the effectiveness of the CPRS initiative. It was not intended that this phase of the evaluation would examine the impact on voluntary compliance as it was recognized that it can take a lengthy period of time to influence taxpayer behaviour, and that considerable methodological preparations are required to undertake such an assessment. Consequently, we have not reached conclusions on the program's achievement of its most important objective. Managers and officers administering the CPRS are confident, however, that CPRS is positively influencing voluntary compliance by the construction industry although they had no data to support their perceptions. While the logic, underpinning the third-party reporting concepts in general, suggests that an impact on voluntary compliance is likely occurring, the high numbers of non-filers being identified indicate that there may still be significant non-compliance in the industry. Design changes recommended in this report should help to encourage voluntary compliance but the impact of the program in this area still needs to be quantified. Measurement of voluntary compliance, however, is historically as elusive as the underground economy itself and suitable methodologies have not yet been developed to measure impacts on voluntary compliance. In a 2002 preliminary CPRS review, the CPB suggested that a voluntary compliance impact from CPRS was resulting, as demonstrated by increasing levels of tax returns relative to estimated entities in the construction sector. However, methodological complexities made it difficult for this study to reach firm conclusions on voluntary compliance levels. As difficult as the task may be, it is imperative that it be addressed in order to be able to measure the impact of CPRS, as well as other initiatives and programs, on the underground economy. As the number of annual enforcement actions is increasing, a better understanding of taxpayer behaviour in the construction industry is required to permit the Agency to manage the program and maximize its impacts on the underground economy. Nevertheless, there is one step that could be taken now to establish one proxy measure of the level of voluntary compliance. Contractor information returns define a known population of sub-contractors from which a rate of voluntary compliance can be determined by analyzing the filing behaviour of this population. This serves only as a proxy measure, however, and would overstate the level of voluntary compliance to the extent that sub-contractors are not being identified on CPRS information returns. Although not pure, this analysis would allow the Agency to estimate the level of voluntary compliance on an annual basis, thereby providing an indication of the impact of the program on sub-contractor behaviour over time. Analysis of the tax filing and reporting patterns of these sub-contractors before and after the introduction of CPRS could also provide further insights into their behaviour and help to measure the impact of CPRS. Because the complexities of underground economy and voluntary compliance measurement are so significant to this and other underground economy programs, CPB should increase its efforts to research and analyze compliance behaviour in the underground economy. This becomes increasingly important if the CPRS approach is to be considered for other major sectors of the underground economy.


  3.3 Compliance Results Should be Communicated to the Construction Industry
During our focus group sessions and interviews, it was clear that both companies and associations continue to believe that the program is ineffective or are uncertain of its effectiveness. By their own admission, this perceived ineffectiveness of CPRS undermines their support for the program and reduces the worth the industry sees in efforts to comply with their tax obligations. As one association official stated “if industry saw results and benefits from CPRS, if we perceived the system to be leveling the playing field, then we would view the costs of CPRS not as a burden, but as an investment.” As outlined above, enforcement results to date from CPRS have been significant, and have exceeded expectations, yet the industry has not been apprised of the results. Since the likelihood of support for CPRS is strongly driven by the perceived effectiveness of the program, there is a need for the Agency to communicate information to associations and individuals/companies about its CPRS activities and results. This would help to gain support for the program from within the industry and potentially lead to increased compliance with CPRS-specific and tax requirements. The Agency should develop a communication strategy that is designed to increase industry support for the program, in part by releasing CPRS achievements to the construction industry on a regular basis.


  Conclusions
Overall, we have concluded that CPRS results achieved to date strongly support the continuation of the program although some program changes are warranted to enhance its effectiveness. We found that the concept of using third party reporting is valid for addressing compliance issues where documented transactions and audit trails already exist in the contractors' books and records but is not effective for addressing non-compliance where transactions are purposefully hidden by both the contractor and sub-contractor to circumvent tax laws and other legal obligations (commonly known as the 'cash' economy). This segment is addressed by other elements of the Agency's underground economy strategy. Furthermore, we found that while the design of CPRS is adequate, modifications are required to strengthen the program. The program should be adjusted to require contractors to file information returns on a calendar year basis and to provide information slips to sub-contractors. There is also an urgent need to re-examine the scope of the program to determine the appropriateness of including sectors not currently included, especially the retail sector. Implementation has generally been achieved as planned and the program is being delivered in a manner supportive of its tax compliance objectives. To obtain full benefit from the program, the Agency needs to apply penalties consistently for late or non-filing of CPRS information returns in order to encourage voluntary compliance with the program's requirements. Since the Agency has not yet validated the accuracy of the information being provided by contractors, there is no assurance that payments to sub-contractors is being reported. Efficient delivery of the program suffers from a lack of automated support that should be developed. Attention is required to developing and providing program monitoring, performance measurement, and research results to support evaluation and informed program delivery improvement. Significant benefits have been achieved through enforcement actions that have resulted in an additional $650 million in assessments over the last five years. The identification of the non-filing of tax returns has had the greatest impact and has accounted for 95% of these assessments. Results from the audit program suggest a need for a review of the CPRS audit program to ensure that it is achieving acceptable results in addressing the underground economy. Compliance Programs Branch should conduct the necessary research and analysis to identify the factors underlying the performance achieved to date. Voluntary compliance levels and impact on taxpayer behaviour resulting from the program have not been established but must be addressed to measure the full impact of the program. To foster industry support for CPRS, which is driven in part by the perceived effectiveness of the program, there is a strong need for the Agency to develop a communication strategy to inform the construction industry about CPRS activities and results.


  Recommendations
In order to improve the effectiveness of the program in both encouraging voluntary compliance and in addressing non-compliance, it is recommended that the Agency: 1. require contractors to report CPRS information on a calendar year basis and to provide copies of information slips to sub-contractors on whom they are reporting payment information to the Agency; 2. re-examine the scope of the program to determine the appropriateness of including sectors of the industry, particularly the retail sector involving installed sales and construction services, that have been excluded by application of the 50% rule; 3. verify the accuracy of the information being reported for CPRS to ensure the integrity of the CPRS reporting process; 4. begin applying penalties for late and non-filing of information returns on a consistent basis; 5. develop automated support for CPRS processes to issue the annual mail-out process to notify contractors of their reporting obligations, issue reminder notices and serve as a workload system. Develop automated support to enable the collection, storage and retrieval of CPRS related information for performance measurement and analysis; 6. develop and implement a comprehensive performance measurement and monitoring framework for the CPRS program and actively monitor the impact of the program on an on-going basis; 7. review the current audit program and results to identify potential improvements and/or the appropriateness of re-allocating resources to activities that have demonstrated better cost-effectiveness; 8. develop and implement a research and analysis program to support CPRS performance measurement including examination of voluntary compliance issues with respect to both CPRS and tax filing requirements and of the impact of CPRS on taxpayer behaviour; and 9. communicate the results being achieved by CPRS to the construction industry.


  Recommended follow-up action
The approved framework for evaluating CPRS called for a Phase 2 evaluation to be undertaken after the completion of this first study. Phase 2 is to focus on program results in relation to costs, the approach and coverage for achieving tax compliance, and alternative program delivery mechanisms to achieve objectives. Program results achieved to date far exceed stated expectations and are sufficiently impressive that the benefits from further addressing performance in a phase 2 evaluation is questionable. In recognition of these positive results, and the fact that many of the issues identified for examination in Phase 2 have already been addressed, or will be addressed by other studies, the need for a Phase 2 evaluation is significantly lessened. It is recommended, therefore, that the Phase 2 evaluation be cancelled and that further work on this program focus on a detailed follow-up of the implementation of the action plans developed to address the recommendations contained within the report. This review, to be undertaken in fiscal year 2007-2008, would focus on the extent to which the action plans have been implemented and, to the extent necessary, the effectiveness of the changes. At that time, a review of program performance data could also be undertaken to ensure that the program is still achieving results.


  Action plans
Responses and action plans to the nine recommendations proposed by Corporate Audit and Evaluation are provided below. While the intention of both Revenue Collections Branch (RCB) and Compliance Programs Branch (CPB) is to carry out the plans, it must be noted that most of the actions require additional funding or the need to shift resources. Some of the funding requirements could be significant; however, this will be determined once further analysis as cited in the action plans has been completed. Should funding not become available, implementation of some of the action plans may not be carried out in full, or may be delayed. Recommendation #1 - require contractors to report CPRS information on a calendar year basis and to provide copies of information slips to sub-contractors on whom they are reporting payment information to the Agency. Program Branch response: CPB, in conjunction with RCB, will undertake additional research on the impact of making these changes. We will consult with stakeholders to advise them of these findings, and work with them to consider how best to address the changes that would be required. As well, we will review the content/format of the T5018 slip to determine areas for improvement from the perspective of contractors, sub-contractors, and the CRA, including the fact that amounts that are reported are often “blended payments” (goods, services, GST/HST, provincial taxes). The research, and consultative process with the industry, is targeted for completion by March 31, 2006. Recommendation #2 - re-examine the scope of the program to determine the appropriateness of including sectors of the industry, particularly the retail sector involving installed sales and construction services, that have been excluded by application of the 50% rule. Program Branch response: CPB, in consultation with RCB, will undertake to examine the scope of the program to determine the appropriateness of including other sectors of the industry that deal with construction or home renovation (e.g. installed sales, the insurance industry). The study is planned for completion by March 31, 2006 at which time recommendations with respect to expansion will be made (including a strategy for communication to any new sectors or industries). The study will also identify any requirements for legislative or regulatory changes, and will describe resource implications. It should be noted that any expansion of the program's scope will result in additional workload for all program areas. As stated earlier, additional funding will be required to address the growth in the program. Recommendation #3 - verify the accuracy of the information being reported for the CPRS to ensure the integrity of the CPRS reporting process. Program Branch response: CPB and RCB will develop a plan to verify the accuracy of the information being reported for the CPRS by March 31, 2006. Implementation will be scheduled for 2006-2007, contingent on availability of resources. Recommendation #4 - begin applying penalties for late and non-filing of information returns on a consistent basis. Program Branch response: As of January 2004, RCB developed and disseminated policy procedures to their staff with respect to applying penalties to non-filers of T5018 summaries. We agree that the application of penalties needs to be consistent, and that these penalties act as a deterrent to non-compliance. However, given the limited resources currently available, focus of the application of penalties for the CPRS is primarily related to contractors who refuse to file their summary. RCB will enhance the application of penalties to non-compliant contractors. PROTECTED  Recommendation #5 - develop automated support for CPRS processes to issue the annual mail-out process to notify contractors of their reporting obligation, issue reminder notices and serve as a workload system. Develop automated support to enable the collection, storage and retrieval of CPRS related information for performance measurement and analysis. Program Branch response: RCB, in consultation with CPB, has submitted a High Level Business Requirement (HLBR) to the Information Technology Branch (ITB) to create a CPRS compliance system that will automate the annual mail-out, issue reminder notices and serve as a workload system. This system will have the capability to assess late filing penalties and generate production and filing statistics at the contractor level. Once ITB provides a cost estimate for the system, discussions will be required to determine how the system will be funded. RCB will produce updates on the advancement of the compliance system on a quarterly basis. Expectations are to have the compliance system operational for the 2007/08 fiscal year, provided funding is available, and subject to ITB being able to accommodate additional system releases that year. As development of the performance measurement framework proceeds and information requirements are identified, RCB in consultation with CPB will approach ITB to develop automated support to enable the collection, storage and retrieval of CPRS related information for performance measurement and analysis. Recommendation #6 - develop and implement a comprehensive performance measurement and monitoring framework for the CPRS program and actively monitor the impact of the program on an on-going basis. Program Branch response: CPB, in consultation with RCB, will develop a performance measurement framework by March 31, 2006 that will include performance indicators measuring outputs, outcomes and impacts to support analyzing program performance and improving program delivery. Program performance will be monitored on an on-going basis through annual reporting of results. Recommendation #7 - review the current CPRS audit program and results to identify potential improvements and/or the appropriateness of continuing with a separate audit program for the construction industry. Program Branch response: We concur that a review of the audit program to identify potential improvements is prudent, and would add that maintaining an audit program presence for the CPRS is important. CPB will: 
study risk assessment and workload development procedures and implement changes as appropriate for 2006-2007;
in 2006-2007 expand the scope of audit for high-risk files to include all non-compliance (note that low-risk files have been discontinued in 2005);
work with RCB to ensure that appropriate consideration is given to referrals from NF/NR, effective fall 2005;
consult with field operations with respect to all of the above beginning summer 2005.
 Recommendation #8 - develop and implement a research and analysis program to support the CPRS performance measurement including examination of voluntary compliance issues with respect to both CPRS and tax filing requirements and of the impact of CPRS on taxpayer behaviour. Program Branch response: CPB, in conjunction with RCB, will undertake research and analysis to support the CPRS performance measurement, which will include examination of voluntary compliance issues as follows: 
CPRS and tax filing requirements: 
  
by December 31, 2005--develop proxy measures to use as a baseline to determine future year compliance (using 2004-2005 baseline year) and analyze the breakdown of the Non-Filer statistics.
by March 31, 2006: examine the feasibility of identifying the contractor and subcontractor populations and of determining their compliance levels with the CPRS.
 
the impact of the CPRS on taxpayer behaviour: 
  
over the next several years, determine compliance rates of the known population of sub contractors.
 
 The introduction of the proposed compliance system (as described in the Program Branch Response under recommendation #5) will assist in identifying the contractor population which will in turn support the measurement of the sub contractor voluntary compliance rate. Recommendation #9 - communicate the results being achieved by the CPRS to the construction industry. Program Branch response: We agree that it would be beneficial for the construction industry to be aware of the strong results achieved through the CPRS. CPB and RCB are developing a strategy for the communication of results to the construction industry. This strategy will build upon existing communication activities and will include the following: 
inform at conferences and meetings on an on-going basis;
produce stand-alone documents for distribution on an on-going/ad hoc basis beginning with the pamphlet “Will you do it for cash?” which was included in the May 2005 mail out of the T5018 package to contractors;
include results in official CRA documents beginning with 2004-2005;
include results on the CRA website by January 2006; and
explore other opportunities and means for communicating the CPRS results on an on-going basis.
 CPB will measure the effectiveness of the distribution channels to determine those that should be continued on an on-going basis.




  1 June 2004, Statistics Canada information   2 The Construction Sector Council, Building Tomorrows Workforce: The Industry, www.csc-ca.org/english/industry.html, 2004 and www.statscan.ca    3 Compliance Program Branch-Audit Program Strategy Division - estimate resource utilization of T5018 versus T1204 portion of the CPRS   4 1998 Omnibus Submission for CPRS, p.p.6   5 Internal Revenue Service, (1996),  Federal Tax Compliance Research , IRS publication 1415 (rev 4-96)   6 Marina Strauss, The Globe and Mail, Toronto, Home Depot Woos Do-It-For-Me Crowd, June 8, 2004





Report a problem or mistake on this page












Please select all that apply:

A link, button or video is not working



It has a spelling mistake



Information is missing



Information is outdated or wrong



Login error when trying to access an account




I can't find what I'm looking for



Other issue not in this list



Submit



Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries, contact us.










Date modified:
2005-09-14





Management Action Plan


Line of Enquiry : Program Evaluation


Finding
The Agency has a decentralized and somewhat disparate approach to enforcement and lacks a clear well articulated and operationally entrenched enforcement strategy. Shared ownership of objectives achievement is not clearly understood and managed. Accountability with only limited authority has impacted Enforcement and Disclosures Directorate's (EDD) efforts to achieve its mandate.


Recommendation
The agency should determine the extent to which it wishes to strengthen its capability to pursue both criminal non-compliance and non-compliance in the criminal economy and then develop a comprehensive enforcement strategy.


Action Plan
We will review the Agency's enforcement approach to ensure that it continues to reflect a strong Agency-wide approach to enforcement and then adjust the strategic direction as required. The approach we propose includes: Actions  
 Establish a steering committee consisting of Regional Assistant Commissioners (ACs) and functional ACs to review the Agency's approach to enforcement to ensure it is aligned to our enforcement mandate and to make any required adjustments to our strategic directions.
Establish a working group involving key stakeholders, to make recommendations to the steering committee on changes to the strategic direction. The main areas of review will be: file selection, program delivery, legislative framework, partnerships and communication products.
Present recommendations from the steering committee and working group to Strategic Directions Committee for review and input.
Present the recommendations of the Steering Committee to Agency Management Committee for input and direction.
 Timelines  
Establish steering committee and working group: March 31, 2011
Present recommendations to senior management: December 31, 2011





Finding
Currently there exists the opportunity to strengthen existing partnerships. Some of the factors influencing partnerships are legislative, technical, procedural and operational while others are specific to communication, training and human resources.


Recommendation
The EDD should engage internal and external partners in a dialogue to discuss roles, expectations, impediments and seek solutions to the factors that appear to be negatively impacting partnerships.


Action Plan
As noted above, we will develop recommendations which will include objectives and initiatives related to building and strengthening partnerships. Action  Please refer to action item b) above.




Finding
Leads and Voluntary Disclosures Programs do not align with the EDD mandate. Both programs perform review processes focussed on a taxpayer group that would normally be addressed by regular audit areas. 


Recommendation
The agency should review the appropriateness of the location of the Leads Program and the Voluntary Disclosures Program within the EDD.


Action Plan
We will undertake a review to assess whether the Leads and Voluntary Disclosures Programs are best situated within the EDD. This will be done in conjunction with a review of the Agency's enforcement approach and development of a strategic direction (see management response to the first recommendation). Action  Review whether the Leads and Voluntary Disclosures Programs should be resituated within the Agency in order to maximize program delivery and to enhance the intelligence gathering capacity for Agency programs by September 30, 2011.





Report a problem or mistake on this page












Please select all that apply:

A link, button or video is not working



It has a spelling mistake



Information is missing



Information is outdated or wrong



Login error when trying to access an account




I can't find what I'm looking for



Other issue not in this list



Submit



Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries, contact us.










Date modified:
2011-02-11





Tax Appeals Evaluation


Final Report
Corporate Audit and Evaluation Branch Program Evaluation Division May 2012 




Table of Contents

 Executive Summary 
 1.0 Introduction 
 2.0 Background 
 3.0 Evaluation methodology 
 4.0 Study limitations and constraints 
 5.0 Findings and recommendations

 5.1 Effectiveness in addressing taxpayer contested decisions

 5.1.1 Impartiality of the review process 
 5.1.2 Significant increase in aggressive tax planning has impacted the CRA's ability to resolve taxpayer contested decisions in a timely manner 
 5.1.3 There are differences between the GST/HST and income tax appeals in terms of the collection effort required following Tax Court decisions 
 5.1.4 Taxpayers are providing new information throughout the dispute resolution process 
 5.1.5 Further development of business rules and analytical capacity is needed to support program improvements 
 
 5.2 Potential modifications and alternatives to improve program effectiveness

 5.2.1 Impartiality can exist in conjunction with internal review and feedback 
 5.2.2 Opportunities exist to increase taxpayer awareness of the implications of non-compliance and of participating in aggressive tax planning 
 5.2 3 Horizontal working relationships – A catalyst for change 
 
 
 6.0 Going forward 
 Appendix A 
 Appendix B 
 Appendix C 
 Appendix D 



  Executive Summary
This report presents the findings of the Tax Appeals Evaluation. The purpose of this evaluation was to assess how effectively the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) is addressing taxpayer contested decisions, Footnote 1 including factors impacting the program, and to identify potential alternatives or modifications that could improve the CRA's effectiveness. The Appeals Branch is responsible for providing a timely, impartial and consistent review process to resolve disputes arising from decisions made under the legislation within the different programs administered by the CRA. Total spending related to taxpayer contested decisions in 2010-2011 was $117.0 million and $101.4 million in 2009-2010. For this evaluation study, we completed a workload analysis of the 2009-2010 inventory of taxpayer contested decisions and an analysis of an aggressive tax planning Footnote 2 group file. We also completed a case file analysis of a statistically valid sample of Personal Income Tax (T1), Corporate Income Tax (T2) and Goods and Services Tax/Harmonized Sales Tax (GST/HST) Tax Court of Canada (Tax Court) decisions from 2009-2010, conducted interviews and focus groups with both internal and external stakeholders and reviewed CRA documents and related studies including literature from other similar tax jurisdictions. Our capacity to analyze the contested decisions from the moment of entry into the Tax Appeals Program to the communication of a decision was limited. This is attributable to the current appeals business rules, system constraints within computer processes and challenges identified with the quantity and quality of retained documentation in taxpayer files. As a result we have determined that the Tax Appeals Program needs to identify information needs and gaps in current business rules and computer processes including the lack of appropriate linkages, to develop analytics that could support program improvements. Overall our analysis of program results has revealed that the Tax Appeals Program continues to provide taxpayers with a process to obtain an impartial review of their tax situation; however, the significant increase in aggressive tax planning is impacting the program's ability to resolve taxpayer contested decisions in a timely manner. For aggressive tax planning group files, once a Tax Court decision has been made there is no legal provision to make the decision binding to all appellants. Proposed legislation was issued for consultation on November 10, 2011 that would permit the Tax Court to hear a question affecting a group of two or more taxpayers that arises out of substantially similar transactions where the resulting judicial determination would be binding across the group. If this proposed legislation becomes law, it could assist the Tax Appeals Program in resolving the 211 national group files, which represent 129,000 taxpayers and approximately $2.2 billion in Federal Tax, in the inventory as of January 2012. Beyond program results, our analysis revealed that there are noticeable differences between the Excise Tax Act (ETA) and the Income Tax Act (ITA) concerning the requirement to pay or secure the tax liability when filing a notice of objection. The ETA requires that GST/HST registrant pay or post suitable security when filing a notice of objection or appeal. As part of our analysis, we determined no collection activities were required for the GST/HST cases however 23% of the T1 and 33% of the T2 cases heard by the Tax Court required some type of intervention by the CRA to obtain payment of the tax arrears. Although the requirement to pay or provide security when filing a notice of objection may not be required in every instance, opportunities exist to strengthen compliance by implementing this requirement in situations where the CRA believes taxpayers may have engaged in aggressive tax planning. This may reduce the advantage of taxpayers using the appeals process for a purpose for which it was not intended. We also determined that some taxpayers are not providing all relevant information to support the amounts claimed as income or deductions when requested to do so by the CRA. Our case file review found that new information was provided and considered in 50% of the decisions made by the Tax Court. With respect to notices of objections, a study Footnote 3 undertaken by the Compliance Programs Branch, in consultation with the Tax Appeals Program, found that taxpayers provided new information to the Tax Appeals Program in 73.7% of audits conducted in the Small and Medium Enterprises Audit Program. Full disclosure legislation, similar to the current legislative requirement for foreign based entities, would support the CRA's mandate to administer tax, benefits, and related programs in a more effective and efficient manner. It is recognized that communication can be a powerful tool to influence taxpayer behaviour. An increased level of taxpayer awareness on tax obligations and the consequences of non-compliance and aggressive tax planning could influence taxpayer behaviour and leverage the impact of our tax administrative efforts. Responsible citizenship requires that all taxpayers pay their fair share of tax to support the economic well-being of all Canadians.  The CRA should continue their efforts to create an environment where filing, remitting and reporting tax obligations are well understood by taxpayers. The increase in taxpayer contested decisions is a challenge for both the Appeals Branch and other stakeholder branches. From initial assessment to audit, appeals and collections the cost to resolve individual taxpayer issues increases as the number of contacts with the taxpayer increases. The Tax Appeal Program is responsible to review the relevant facts, law and other evidence provided by both the CRA and the taxpayer in order to reach a decision. The cumulative information gathered during this process is available and could be analyzed, shared and discussed with other stakeholder branches to add value and enhance both the focus and direction of future CRA compliance activities. Although communication mechanisms exist to support the interaction and the sharing of information with CRA stakeholders it is not at a sufficient level to support program improvements. Improved internal review and feedback, both before (strategic level) and after a decision (case specific) is made, could support CRA's compliance efforts. Horizontal working relationships are a catalyst for change. The CRA has started to assess the potential benefits of different branches working together to identify and stop the issuance of unwarranted refunds. The CRA should continue their efforts to adapt and to evolve with current trends in aggressing tax planning through the increased use of horizontal management, front-end validation processes and the use of CRA intelligence. This evaluation identified opportunities to improve program effectiveness and to increase communication and taxpayer awareness to promote compliance and deter non-compliance. We therefore made the following recommendations: 
CRA should undertake an analysis to identify and assess the feasibility of options for requiring appellants to pay the amount under dispute or post suitable security in situations where the CRA believes a taxpayer may have engaged in aggressive tax planning.
CRA should undertake an analysis to identify and assess the feasibility of options for improving the full disclosure of taxpayer information when requested, including the possibility of introducing mandatory disclosure rules.
The Appeals Branch should identify their information needs and gaps in current business rules and the Case Appeals/Equitas system to allow for the development of analytics to support program improvements.
The Appeals Branch should explore opportunities for improved internal review and feedback, both before (strategic level) and after a decision (case specific), is made to support CRA's compliance efforts.



     1.0 Introduction 
In January 2011, the Management Audit and Evaluation Committee of the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) approved the framework for the Tax Appeals Evaluation. The framework identified the following evaluation issues: 
How effectively is the CRA addressing taxpayer contested decisions Footnote 4, including the factors that may be impacting the program? and
Are there alternatives or modifications that could improve the CRA's effectiveness in addressing taxpayer contested decisions?
 This evaluation report summarizes the findings related to these issues.


    2.0 Background
The Appeals Branch is responsible for providing a timely, impartial and consistent review process to resolve disputes arising from decisions made under the legislation administered by the CRA.  Operating independently of other CRA Branches, the Tax and Charities Appeals Directorate and the Program Management Analysis Directorate (Tax Appeals Program) of the Appeals Branch (including appeals regional operations) are responsible for dealing with disputes that arise from assessments of income tax, excise tax, goods and services tax, harmonized sales tax, benefit programs, softwood lumber products export, air traveller security and charities. Within the Appeals Branch, total spending Footnote 5  related to taxpayer contested decisions was $117 million in 2010-2011 and $101.4 million in 2009-2010. Taxpayers have multiple avenues to communicate with the CRA to resolve tax and service related issues. This includes the enquiries program, taxpayer requested reassessment program, the taxpayer relief program and the service complaints program. Although these avenues exist, it is recognized that some taxpayers will exercise their right to have an impartial and timely review of their tax situation. The Minister of National Revenue has the authority to assess or reassess tax payable and the time limitations for doing so are stipulated in the Income Tax Act (ITA) and Excise Tax Act (ETA). Once an assessment or reassessment has been issued, a taxpayer may dispute the amount assessed or reassessed by filing a notice of objection, outlining the reasons for their objection and requesting an impartial review. The Tax Appeals Program conducts these reviews by actively engaging in dialogue with the taxpayer and using alternative dispute resolution processes when appropriate. Decisions must be in accordance with applicable legislation and result in a fair and equitable treatment of taxpayers within established timeframes. To ensure impartiality, taxpayers Footnote 6 who file a notice of objection have a review completed by an appeals officer who was not involved in the original assessment or reassessment. The Tax Appeals Program has an established process in place to receive, process and respond to notices of objections. The Case Appeals/Equitas system is used to track and monitor taxpayer contested decisions. Upon receipt of a notice of objection by mail, fax, through the CRA website or in person at a Tax Centre (TC) or Tax Services Office (TSO), the notice of objection is forwarded to either the Eastern or Western Appeals Intake Centre Footnote 7 where it is reviewed for validity, date stamped and entered into the Appeals inventory. An acknowledgement letter is issued to the taxpayer to indicate its acceptance or rejection. The notice of objection is then assigned to an appeals officer according to a predetermined workload allocation process and level of staff expertise. Upon being assigned the notice of objection, the appeals officer completes the review by interpreting the relevant legislation, policies and the taxpayer's point of view. When necessary, they also obtain technical, expert and/or legal opinions. If the matter is not resolved to the taxpayer's satisfaction, an appeal of the CRA's decision can be made to the Tax Court of Canada (Tax Court). This next level of review is referred to as litigation and is subject to the rules of the Tax Court. The litigation process requires that the Tax Appeals program assist the Department of Justice (DoJ) in the preparation of the Tax Court cases including pleadings, discoveries, attendance at trials and consideration of proposals for settlement. They also play a key role in considering the impact of adverse court decisions and recommending whether to appeal or accept the Tax Court's decision. Appendix A provides an overview of the notice of objection and appeals decision process from initial dispute to an appeal to the Tax Court. In recent years, the Appeals Branch has faced major challenges due to the growth in workloads. The workload entering this program is generated through the action of both taxpayers and other CRA activities and as such is not under the direct control of the Tax Appeals Program. In order to address these challenges, the Appeals Branch initiated an internal study Footnote 8 for the purpose of finding solutions to mitigate the growing cost of processing notices of objections and appeals to the Tax Court. The Agency Management Committee recognized that these pressures are expected to increase in future years unless the CRA can proactively introduce measures to manage and stem this growth.


     3.0 Evaluation methodology 
For this evaluation study, we used the following methodologies: 
A workload analysis of the 2009-2010 inventory of taxpayer contested decisions was undertaken. This included an analysis of the total number of cases allowed, partially allowed, disallowed and/or in work-in-progress status.
A case file analysis of a statistically valid sample Footnote 9 of Personal Income Tax (T1), Corporate Income Tax (T2), and Goods and Services Tax/Harmonized Sales Tax (GST/HST) Tax Court decisions from 2009-2010, representative of the five regional operations and headquarters was undertaken. This included taxpayer contested decisions from the TC/TSO through to the Tax Court. Appendix B provides information on sample size by region and revenue line.
An analysis of an aggressive tax planning Footnote 10 group file, which included 1,163 taxpayers, was undertaken to identify the characteristics of this group and how the taxpayer contested decisions were resolved.
Interviews and focus groups were carried out with 182 CRA managers and staff. Participants were selected from the Appeals Branch, the Assessments and Benefits Programs Branch (ABSB), Compliance Programs Branch (CPB), Taxpayer Services and Debt Management Branch (TSDMB), Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs Branch (LPRAB) and the Public Affairs Branch (PAB) and included regional personnel in the Atlantic, Ontario, Quebec, Prairie and Pacific Regions.
External interviews were conducted with representatives of the DoJ, the Office of the Taxpayer's Ombudsman, and the United States of America (USA) Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and the USA Government Accountability Office (GAO).
CRA documents and related studies and literature from other similar tax jurisdictions and countries were reviewed.



   4.0 Study limitations and constraints 
Our capacity to analyze the taxpayer contested decisions from the moment of entry into the Tax Appeals Program to the communication of a decision at the Tax Court was limited due to the current Tax Appeals Program business rules, constraints within the Case Appeals/Equitas system and the inconsistent retention of documents within the taxpayer's tax files. This affected our ability to analyze critical account level events for individual taxpayers as part of our qualitative case review analysis. We were also unable to assess the Appeals Branch strategies and research plans as they were not available for review. This is discussed in section 5.1.5.


 5.0 Findings and recommendations


 5.1 Effectiveness in addressing taxpayer contested decisions
As part of the Appeals Branch, the Tax Appeals Program is responsible for providing a timely, impartial and consistent review process. We found that the program is set up to provide taxpayers with a process to obtain an impartial review of their tax situation; however, the significant growth in aggressive tax planning is impacting the programs ability to resolve taxpayer contested decisions in a timely manner. On average it took 299 calendar days to resolve a notice of objection in 2009-2010 and there have been challenges in meeting the service standard of 30 days for initial contact to the taxpayer.  We were unable to examine the consistency of decisions since complete information was unavailable for the full sample of cases selected for our file review. The workload entering this program is generated through the action of both taxpayers and other CRA activities. The resulting volume and diversified nature of this workload creates challenges for the Tax Appeals Program to adapt, evolve and respond to taxpayer contested decisions in an effective and efficient manner. The next sections of the report outline the results of our analysis on how the CRA is addressing taxpayer contested decisions and factors that may be impacting the program.


 5.1.1 Impartiality of the review process 
The term "impartial" implies the absence of actual or perceived bias; that is, whether a reasonable person would consider that an official's personal interest might have an influence on the exercise of their duty. There are different situations which could place the impartiality of a decision-maker in question. In the case of the Tax Appeals Program this would be situations where an appeals officer would have (or be perceived to have) an interest, either direct or indirect, in the outcome of the objection before them. Another situation would be where the relationship to one of the parties is sufficiently close to give rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias. We found that policies and procedures are in place whereby regional appeals officers keep taxpayers informed of any discussions with other CRA personnel (e.g. protocol agreements with TSDMB, CPB, LPRAB).  Interviews with appeals officers also confirmed that they recognize the importance of the principles of impartiality and do not review any taxpayer contested decision where they know the taxpayer and/or had been involved in the tax assessment or reassessment.  We were unable to test for any instances of impartiality as part of our statistically valid case file analysis as consistent information was not available in the taxpayer's files.  This is discussed in section 5.1.5 of this report.


   5.1.2 Significant increase in aggressive tax planning has impacted the CRA's ability to resolve taxpayer contested decisions in a timely manner
Over the period of 2006-2007 to 2009-2010 there has been an increase of 367% for disputes related to aggressive tax planning schemes Footnote 11. Our workload analysis of the 2009-2010 remaining inventory (119,335 cases) revealed that 79% of the cases were recorded as aggressive tax planning and 21% were considered regular taxpayer contested decisions. It was also noted that 86% of this inventory were recorded as having previously been audited by CPB. To better understand what was occurring and to determine how taxpayer contested decisions were resolved; we reviewed the 2009-2010 workload related to notices of objections, appeals to the Tax Court and an aggressive tax planning group file.  Notice of Objections  The Tax Appeals Program's resolution of taxpayer contested decisions has been relatively consistent. The CRA Annual Reports to Parliament revealed that 55,303 income tax disputes were resolved in 2007-2008 and 56,974 in 2008-2009. As part of our workload analysis, we determined that in 2009-2010, the Tax Appeals Program resolved a total of 59,569 cases and 119,335 Footnote 12 remained in inventory as of March 31, 2010. From the total volume of 178,904 notices of objections in the 2009-2010 inventory, our analysis revealed that 33% were closed by the Tax Appeals Program. Of the amount closed, 22,547 were intake from previous years and the remaining 37,022 were new intake received in 2009-2010. Interviews with Tax Appeals Program managers and staff revealed that the business decision to process new intake ahead of other cases may in part be attributed to the increased front-end validation process undertaken by the Eastern and Western Intake Centres. These Centers were introduced in 2006 to support program management in the timely and consistent validation of notices of objections as well as the assignment of the case to an appeals officer according to a predetermined workload allocation process and levels of staff expertise. Decisions from the CRA are categorized into 13 types by the Appeals Branch, as outlined in Appendix C. Our analysis of the notices of objections revealed that 27% of the decisions were in favour of the taxpayer and 26% in favour of the CRA. An additional 17% were partially agreed upon between the CRA and the taxpayer. The remaining 30% were dismissed because the taxpayer did not meet the timeline to file a notice of objection (11%) or the notice of objection was considered invalid for other reasons (19%). With respect to timeliness, in 2009-2010 it took on average 299 calendar days to resolve a notice of objection. Our review of the CRA external service standard of 30 days for initial contact to the taxpayer revealed that the target of 85% was met in 2006-2007 but was not achieved in subsequent years (Figure 1). This, in part, has been attributed to the increase in the volume of taxpayer contested decisions since 2006-2007. Figure 1 




Appeals external service standard



 
Current target
2006-2007
2007-2008
2008-2009
2009-2010
2010-2011


Service standard for initial contact – Appeals
85%
89%
84%
68%
50%
50.5%





Source: CRA Annual Report to Parliament 2010-2011  Appeals to the Tax Court  Beyond the notice of objections phase, our analysis revealed that during the 2009-2010 fiscal year 3,692 cases were resolved through different levels of the judicial process. During the 2009-2010 fiscal year 3,147 cases were resolved at the Tax Court. In addition 461 cases were resolved at the Federal Court of Appeal, 59 cases at the Provincial Court, 1 case at the Supreme Court, and 24 cases at the Canadian International Trade Tribunal. For this evaluation study the focus of review was on 3,136 Footnote 13 cases resolved at the Tax Court during 2009-2010. Decisions from appeals to the Tax Court are categorized into 11 types by the Appeals Branch, as outlined in Appendix D. Cases may have been heard by a judge and allowed in full, allowed in part or dismissed; cases may be resolved in whole or in part through a formal consent to judgment without a court hearing; or cases may be determined by the judge to be invalid or dismissed by the judge for want of prosecution. The manner in which a case is ultimately resolved can increase the time and cost to administer the file depending on the degree of legal resources required. Our analysis revealed that the majority of the Tax Court cases (52%) were resolved without a hearing before a judge, most often resulting in a full or partial consent between the taxpayer and CRA (73%). A hearing before a judge resulted in a decision in the remaining cases (48%). Of the case heard by a judge, 28% were allowed (i.e. the judge allowed the taxpayer's appeal in full or in part). The remaining 72% were either dismissed by the judge (33% of all cases heard) or withdrawn by the taxpayer (39% of all cases heard). Our analysis of timeliness revealed that from the date of registration to the Tax Court it took on average 688 calendar days to resolve a case in 2009-2010. The legal costs, provided by the DoJ, associated with our statistically valid case file analysis of Tax Court decisions revealed that in 2009-2010, $5.3 million was spent on the provision of legal services for a total disputed amount of $1.1 million. This represents a 5:1 ratio. Although this ratio appears high, the Tax Appeals Program is mandated to review cases based on law and fact not on the value of the taxpayer contested decision. The need for further analysis of legal costs is discussed in section 5.1.5. For the Taxpayer Relief Program, our analysis of the cases resolved by the Tax Court revealed that 12% of the appellants applied for taxpayer relief after their case was resolved by the Tax Court and 36% of these applications were approved or partially approved. The most common reason for requesting taxpayer relief was recorded as CRA errors or delays.  Aggressive Tax Planning Group File  In general terms, aggressive tax planning Footnote 14 schemes are questionable transactions that are promoted on the basis that they offer an income tax savings, often referred to as a tax benefit. A tax benefit is a reduction, avoidance or deferral of tax or other amount payable under the applicable legislation or an increase in a deduction claimed to reduce taxable income. Document reviews and interviews with CRA managers and staff revealed that there are many common types of legitimate deductions that could potentially be used for aggressive tax planning purposes. These include: 
Widely marketed business loss arrangements
Loss carryovers
Registered and unregistered gifting tax shelters
Other registered and unregistered tax shelters
Large charitable donations
Allowable business investment losses
 Considering that aggressive tax planning represents the largest segment within the 2009-2010 inventory, we randomly selected and reviewed one group file from within the statistically valid sample of 355 Tax Court cases. Individuals within this group had filed tax returns in 2005 and/or 2006 claiming that they had made a charitable donation during that year(s). There were a total of 1,163 taxpayers that were identified as part of this particular aggressive tax planning scheme. We analyzed all 1,163 cases to understand CRA's ability to resolve these types of taxpayer contested decisions. Our analysis revealed that the taxpayer files in question were initially identified by CPB as a group of individuals who had claimed a questionable charitable donation. The average donation claimed was approximately 17% of gross family income. Based on an average gross family income of $68,000, this equates to a charitable donation claim of $12,000. This is high in comparison to the Canadian average charitable donation amount of 1.8% Footnote 15. Upon CPB's review, reassessments were made to the tax return(s) of the 1,163 taxpayers. This resulted in 1,314 notices of objections and 188 requests for time extensions. Of these, 130 cases were appealed to the Tax Court. Of the notice of objections, 86% received a decision as of March 31, 2011 of which 66% were in favor of the CRA and the average time for a decision was 187 calendar days. For the Tax Court, 50% received a decision of which 49% were resolved by partial agreement or consent and the average time for a decision was 609 calendar days. Circumstances presented by individual taxpayers may differ and result in varying decisions despite being classified under the same group file.  This finding suggests that further analysis is required to understand the underlying reasons for the different treatment of taxpayers within the same group file. The need for further analysis, including that of the differences in decisions, is discussed in 5.1.5. As many of these cases are still under dispute, a full analysis of the CRA's ability to collect could not be undertaken. Once a decision has been made for an aggressive tax planning group file there is no legal provision to make the decision binding to all appellants. At the present time taxpayers have the legal right to appeal to the Tax Court. The Tax Appeals Program advised that they inform taxpayers of the most recent decision of the Tax Court based on similar cases along with any relevant new policies. The taxpayer is not required to change their position based on this new information. Proposed legislation was issued for consultation on November 10, 2011, that would permit the Tax Court to hear a question affecting a group of two or more taxpayers that arises out of substantially similar transactions where the resulting judicial determination would be binding across the group. If this proposed legislation becomes law, it could assist the Tax Appeals Program in resolving the 211 national group files, which represent 129,000 taxpayers and approximately $2.2 billion in Federal Tax, in the inventory as of January 2012.


     5.1.3 There are differences between the GST/HST and income tax appeals in terms of the collection effort required following Tax Court decisions 
Currently, the ETA requires that GST/HST registrants either pay the full amount of their outstanding tax liability or provide suitable security when filing a notice of objection. Since the GST/HST amounts are considered to be "amounts held in trust for Her Majesty" this requirement ensures that there is a minimal risk of recovery in situations where assessments are confirmed in whole or in part by the CRA or the Tax Court. In comparison, we identified notable differences within the provisions of the ITA. Although there is a requirement that large corporations Footnote 16 pay 50% of amounts assessed upon receipt of a notice of assessment, individual taxpayers are not required to pay any portion of their tax balance when filing a notice of objection or appeal to the Tax Court. To better understand any potential impact of these different legislative requirements on collections, we completed a case file analysis of Tax Court decisions. We identified the number of cases within each revenue line that were confirmed in whole or in part at the Tax Court to determine whether an unpaid tax balance existed at the time of decision, whether the amount was subsequently paid and the degree of intervention, if any, required to recover the tax arrears. For the T1 revenue line, a total of 86 cases were confirmed in whole or in part and 77% of those cases were paid without further intervention by CRA. The remaining 23% required some intervention by CRA to obtain payment of the tax arrears. The range of actions included issuing a letter or contacting the taxpayer by telephone, garnishment of wages and in the most severe cases, registration of the debt in Federal Court and seizure and sale of assets. The T2 revenue line revealed 9 confirmed cases with no intervention being required in 67% of those files. For the remaining 33%, the CRA did not recover any of the outstanding tax as two of the cases were closed through insolvency and the other was closed by a write-off of the debt. For the GST/HST revenue line there were 13 confirmed cases and we did not identify any situations where CRA action was necessary as no outstanding amounts remained at the time of decision. This is likely due to the requirement to pay or provide suitable security at the beginning of the process. The result of this analysis indicates that although collection activity is sometimes required when an amount remains outstanding at the time of decision, requiring taxpayers to pay the amount under dispute or post suitable security significantly reduces the risk and need for collection action after a decision has been communicated. In circumstances where taxpayers have engaged in aggressive tax planning for the purpose of delaying the payment of tax, a requirement to pay the amount under dispute at the time of filing a notice of objection may reduce the advantage of using the appeals process for a purpose for which it was not intended. Although this approach may not be required in every instance, many CRA managers and staff were of the opinion that opportunities exist to strengthen compliance by implementing this requirement in situations where the CRA believes taxpayers may have engaged in aggressive tax planning.  Recommendation 1  CRA should undertake an analysis to identify and assess the feasibility of options for requiring appellants to pay the amount under dispute or post suitable security in situations where the CRA believes a taxpayer may have engaged in aggressive tax planning.  Management Response  We concur with this finding and recommendation.  The Appeals Branch agrees to undertake an analysis of this issue in fiscal year 2012-2013. 


     5.1.4 Taxpayers are providing new information throughout the dispute resolution process 
The ITA and the ETA require that taxpayers maintain appropriate books and records to support the amounts claimed as income or deductions on their respective tax returns. These acts also require that the taxpayer submit this supporting documentation for review when requested by the CRA. In the absence of documentation the CRA will disallow the expense. To enhance the effective resolution of disputes, the legislation provides for an administrative review process. The success of these processes is contingent on the timely provision of complete information, by all parties, combined with a genuine willingness to achieve a resolution. The absence of either of these elements increases the likelihood that additional time and expense will be unnecessarily incurred on both sides. CRA's ability to raise accurate assessments and reassessments is affected by the availability of taxpayer information. When the taxpayer does not provide the supporting information, without a valid reason, it affects the timeliness of the process and the accuracy of the assessment or reassessment. Our case file review found that new information was provided and considered in 50% of the decisions made by the Tax Court. An internal study Footnote 17 undertaken by CPB, in consultation with the Tax Appeals Program, found that taxpayers provided new information to the Tax Appeals Program, at the notice of objection stage, in 73.7% of audits conducted in the Small and Medium Enterprises Audit Program. The addition of this new information resulted in changes to the original assessments. Many CRA managers and staff interviewed were of the opinion that some taxpayers and their representatives are increasingly aware of the environment in which the CRA operates and use this to their advantage. By this they mean that by not providing requested information to support the amounts claimed as income or deductions on their return, as required by law, and then filing a notice of objection and/or an appeal to the Tax Court, they are making a conscious attempt to deliberately delay the payment of tax. The Tax Appeals program is committed to providing taxpayers with an impartial review of contested decisions; however, questions remain as to whether an impartial review of the facts is impacted by taxpayers providing new or additional information at a later stage in the review process. The absence of relevant information contributes to unnecessary delays since it requires both a review of the initial facts and a review of the new information by the Tax Appeals Program. During our interviews many CRA managers and staff expressed frustration with situations where new information had been introduced at a later stage in the process. They found this particularly discouraging when they had made repeated requests to taxpayers for supporting documentation related to an assessment or audit and did not receive a response. The use of full disclosure legislation was frequently suggested by both CRA managers and staff as an opportunity for program improvement within the CRA compliance continuum. It is their belief that the full disclosure of taxpayer information when requested at initial assessment or during an audit would reduce the time and expense required to administer the legislation. Efficiencies could also be gained by the Tax Appeals Program as all relevant facts would be available for their review on receipt of a notice of objection. An Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) study Footnote 18 reported that providing timely, accurate and complete information is a benefit to governments and taxpayers. The mutual benefits of which can include fewer routine audits, increased transparency and a positive impact on compliance culture in general. They reported that mandatory disclosure rules can: 
Reduce the time taken by tax administrations to detect a scheme
Enable effective risk based investigations
Allow for a rapid response through legislation, compliance action and/or litigation and
Deal with aggressive tax planning schemes more quickly, thus reducing the period in which promoters can earn professional fees from those schemes and users can accrue tax advantages from those schemes. This has a significant deterrent effect and reduces the attractiveness of aggressive tax planning.
 Full disclosure legislation, similar to the current legislative requirement for foreign based entities, would support the CRA's mandate to administer tax, benefits, and related programs in a more effective and efficient manner.  Recommendation 2  CRA should undertake an analysis to identify and assess the feasibility of options for improving the full disclosure of taxpayer information when requested, including the possibility of introducing mandatory disclosure rules.  Management response  We concur with this finding and recommendation.  The Compliance Programs Branch, with the support of the Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs Branch, will collaborate with CRA stakeholders in 2012-2013 to develop a business case PROTECTED.  


   5.1.5 Further development of business rules and analytical capacity is needed to support program improvements 
Building a strong foundation for improving a program requires that business rules, systems and analytics be in place to gather necessary information to understand what is occurring within a program and what improvements are needed. In implementing our data analysis plan, we noted that taxpayer information collected and retained by the Tax Appeals Program throughout the lifecycle of a taxpayer contested decision is limited. This is largely because the appeals business rules, constraints within Case Appeals/Equitas system including the lack of appropriate linkages, and the inconsistent retention of documents within tax files will not allow a taxpayer who has contested their tax assessment or reassessment to be tracked and monitored from a notice of objection to an appeal to the Tax Court. This is further complicated when a taxpayer raises several notices of objections or appeals to the Tax Court as the Case Appeals/Equitas system will not allow for all contested decisions for a particular taxpayer to be reviewed as a whole. This limited our ability to reconstruct a taxpayer`s case as part of our statistically valid case file analysis to understand: 
the level of impartiality (e.g. appeal officer was not involved in the initial assessment or audit);
the reason for the taxpayer contested decision;
the validity of the taxpayer contested decision (e.g. received within legislative timeframes);
the communication between the appeals officer and the taxpayer or other CRA stakeholders;
the actions taken by the appeals officer (e.g. steps taken and timelines to resolve the case);
the consistency and rationale for the decision (e.g. differences in decisions for cases with similar circumstances); and
the impacts on other CRA stakeholders. 
 Furthermore, as outlined in 5.1.2, gathering and analyzing information on the investment in legal costs and the underlying reasons for the differences in decisions for taxpayers within the same aggressive tax planning group file could support program improvements not only for the Tax Appeals Program but for other CRA stakeholders. Beyond the analysis of program results, consideration should also be given to measurement of expected results of new initiatives. This will support the Appeals Branch in ensuring that major initiatives are clearly defined in terms of expected results and are supported by sound measurement, reporting and accountability provisions at their outset. For example, many Tax Appeals regional personnel interviewed had concerns with the introduction of the settlement protocol between the CRA and the DoJ. This agreement came into effect on February 10, 2004 and was revised on February 10, 2010. In this agreement, the DoJ may proceed to settle low-impact cases before the Tax Court without being required to obtain prior instructions from the Appeals Branch. The Tax Appeals Program had no information regarding results of this initiative. However, the DoJ provided some preliminary analyses which indicated that, since 2008, the average number of hours required to complete a case having met the specific criteria has decreased by 4.9%. Feedback to personnel on the results of this strategy would be beneficial. Results of how DoJ settlements were made could also support training and improve how the CRA reviews cases. The lack of this type of information, as well as the information collected and retained by the program, makes it difficult to have a clear understanding of the volume or costs of taxpayer contested decisions for a distinct taxpayer or aggressive tax planning group file or to confirm adherence to policies and procedures. This does not allow for any profiling or trend analysis to identify opportunities for program improvement on how cases are reviewed and decisions made. Improved analytics could lead to increased program effectiveness and efficiencies for the Tax Appeals Program and other CRA stakeholders.  Recommendation 3  The Appeals Branch should identify their information needs and gaps in current business rules and the Case Appeals/Equitas system to allow for the development of analytics to support program improvements.  Management response:  We concur with this finding and recommendation.  The Appeals Branch is committed to undertake a review during the fiscal year 2012-2013 to determine information needs and identify the analytics needed to support program improvements based on the findings from this evaluation report as well as other studies.  Based on this review, the Appeals Branch will initiate the development of an action plans in 2013-2014 that are supported by measurement, reporting and accountability at the outset. 


     5.2 Potential modifications and alternatives to improve program effectiveness
Through data analysis, literature research, information gathered from other tax administrations and interviews with CRA managers and staff, both in headquarters and the regions, the evaluation identified opportunities for improvement to support the CRA's mandate to address taxpayer contested decisions. These are discussed in the sections that follow.


 5.2.1 Impartiality can exist in conjunction with internal review and feedback 
The principle of impartiality has created communications challenges between the Tax Appeals Program and other internal stakeholders. CRA interviews highlighted the need for greater information exchange, both before (strategic level) and after decision (case specific), as an impediment to CRA compliance efforts. The Tax Appeals Program is uniquely positioned in their capacity as an impartial review body within the CRA. When a taxpayer files a notice of objection or an appeal to the Tax Court, the Tax Appeal Program is responsible to review the taxpayer's interactions with the CRA which resulted in the assessment or reassessment. They review the relevant facts, law and other evidence provided by both the CRA and the taxpayer in order to reach a decision. The cumulative information gathered during this process is available and could be analyzed, shared and discussed with other stakeholder branches as it could provide value to the focus and direction of future CRA compliance activities. The Tax Appeals Program advised that communication mechanisms exist to support the interaction and the sharing of information with CRA stakeholders. They indicated that they lead the Appeals Branch Risk Management Committee, are piloting an Appeals Feedback Loop initiative and Regional Chiefs of Appeals regularly communicate with TSOs and TCs. Although these mechanisms exist, CRA stakeholders interviewed stated that the current level of feedback is not of a sufficient quantity or quality to support their efforts to allow for program adjustments. For example, many stated that more analysis on the adverse court decisions is required to understand the rationale for the differing positions taken by the Tax Appeals Program or the Tax Court including the relevant facts and supporting documentation. Many also stated that the Tax Appeals Program should be more engaged in discussions surrounding CRA compliance strategies being considered. The Tax Appeals Program perspective on previous decisions could prove useful in considering the risks related to future compliance strategies. The CPB Appeals Variance Study (referred to in section 5.1.4) also recognized that although CPB and Appeals have separate and distinct responsibilities, knowledge of the reasons for disposition of objections (whether or not the assessment was varied and if so, in what part), may be relevant in improving audit practices. This information could support training, process improvements as well as the quality of audit cases being brought forward. The Australian Government's Inspector-General of Taxation completed a study Footnote 19 on the management of tax objections which included references to studies completed by the Australian Review Council (ARC). It was their opinion that the ultimate aim of a dispute resolution system must be to improve original decision making. The ARC considered that it is important to foster a culture where overturning a decision does not necessarily mean that the original decision was 'wrong' or that it is intended as a 'criticism' of the standard of original decision making. They stated that the analysis of statistics of internal review reversal rates can be used, among other purposes, to monitor trends, identify problems in policy and legislation, and identify training needs. Discussions with representatives of the IRS and the GAO recognized the importance of providing meaningful feedback between the original decision maker(s) and their Appeals Program. The IRS also supports strong communication at the strategic level. They have recognized that there is a clear dividing line between issues of an administrative nature versus issues that are case specific. For example, we were informed that IRS appeals personnel regularly participate in discussions related to strategic planning, operational or legislative issues that may impede or adversely affect the IRS's effectiveness in achieving program delivery. Any potential impacts on Appeals are also discussed in the development of compliance strategies. Conversely, discussions of case specific nature are avoided to ensure impartiality. This balanced approach ensures that relevant information is freely exchanged among all IRS stakeholders so that it can be incorporated into compliance strategies for the IRS as a whole. Improved internal review and feedback is a critical element for future CRA program planning and success. It is possible to retain impartiality of decision in conjunction with the provision of meaningful feedback.  Recommendation 4  The Appeals Branch should explore opportunities for improved internal review and feedback, both before (strategic level) and after a decision (case specific), is made, to support CRA's compliance efforts.  Management response  We concur with this finding and recommendation.  The Appeals Branch is currently piloting an Appeals Feedback Loop initiative, wherein case disposal information is provided to CRA stakeholders at all levels. The Appeals Branch will analyze and report on the results of the pilot by September 2012. In 2012-2013, the Appeals Branch will also consult with relevant CRA stakeholders to identify opportunities for improved communication at the strategic and operational levels to support CRA compliance efforts while maintaining its impartiality and independent process. 


   5.2.2 Opportunities exist to increase taxpayer awareness of the implications of non-compliance and of participating in aggressive tax planning 
The ITA and ETA are recognized as two of the most complex pieces of legislation in Canada. These laws are the framework from which the CRA administers the tax system. For the taxpayer, the ability to comply with the ITA and ETA is affected by their understanding of the tax laws, awareness of the implications of non-compliance and of participating in aggressive tax planning schemes. Responsible citizenship requires that all taxpayers pay their fair share of tax to support the economic well-being of all Canadians. Our analysis of the 2009-2010 inventory revealed that 79% of the cases were recorded as aggressive tax planning. Participation in aggressive tax planning is of primary benefit to individuals that have tax payable. By decreasing their taxable income, they reduce the amount of tax payable. This may result in the issuance of a tax refund to which they may not be entitled. Individuals participating in these arrangements may also reduce their taxable income which can increase the amount of social benefits received such as GST/HST credits and Child Tax Benefit payments. Participation in aggressive tax planning schemes can also result in significant financial challenges if a taxpayer is ultimately required to repay an unwarranted refund. In circumstances where a taxpayer has knowingly, or under circumstances amounting to gross negligence, made or participated in, assented to or acquiesced in the making of, a false statement or omission in the tax returns filed there is also the potential for prosecution. CRA compliance strategies continue to identify questionable activity both before and after an assessment. Many of the CRA managers and staff interviewed expressed the view that certain taxpayers or their representatives are interpreting the ITA and ETA outside of the spirit and intent of the legislation and using this to gain some type of tax savings. Communication is a powerful compliance tool. A 2010 report Footnote 20 by the OECD states that communication plays a critical role in how a deterrence strategy is perceived by taxpayers. A CRA study Footnote 21, on the potential impacts of compliance communication on taxpayer perceptions about tax cheating revealed that the majority of focus group participants had not in the past year seen or heard of people getting caught for tax cheating, and almost none had seen information on the general likelihood of getting caught. Furthermore a report Footnote 22 from the Canadian Federation of Independent Business recommended that more effort by the CRA is required to provide basic examples and guidelines for what constitutes compliance and non-compliance. Most CRA managers and staff interviewed were of the opinion that current outreach activities may not be at a sufficient level to maximize the potential benefits. Regional personnel involved in outreach activities advised that the consequences of non-compliance are mentioned but not discussed in any great detail during outreach presentations. The increased need for communication has also been recognized in previous program evaluation reports Footnote 23.  An increased level of taxpayer awareness on the consequences of non-compliance and of participating in aggressive tax planning is needed. Preventing tax avoidance can produce significant tax revenue. Moreover, it is crucial to the integrity of the self-assessment tax system. The Summary of the Corporate Business Plan Footnote 24 has identified the need for the CRA to expand efforts to find out what works best in building taxpaying values in our society, and to put that learning into practice.  The focus moving forward is to build upon existing programs. For example, the CRA promotes tax and benefit compliance as elements of responsible Canadian citizenship to all taxpayers through expanded use of social media including Agency You Tube and Twitter Channels. The CRA should continue their efforts to create an environment where filing, remitting and reporting tax obligations are well understood by taxpayers.


      5.2.3 Horizontal working relationships – A catalyst for change
The increase in taxpayer contested decisions is a challenge for both the Appeals Branch and other stakeholder branches. From initial assessment to audit, appeals and collections the cost to resolve individual taxpayer issues increases as the number of contacts with the taxpayer increases. The Appeals Branch can achieve limited success on its own in dealing with the increased use of aggressive tax planning, particularly in terms of changing taxpayer behavior. Interviews with CRA managers and staff as well as our literature review Footnote 25 suggest that the review of past behavior can be a valuable tool in predicting future behavior. Once a taxpayer or a tax preparer is identified as having participated in an aggressive tax planning scheme there should be a higher degree of scrutiny assigned to their subsequently filed returns to ensure deductions and tax credits are legitimate before any refunds are issued. We recognize that Section 152(1) of the ITA requires the Minister to assess "with all due dispatch" however there are situations, supported by case law, where it is appropriate to delay the assessment of a return for a period of time. Preventing taxpayers from receiving unwarranted refunds reduces the cost of post assessment compliance activities. Furthermore it sends a strong message to both the taxpayer and/or their representative that addressing non-compliance and aggressive tax planning remains a high priority within CRA. The CRA has started the process to assess the potential benefits of this approach. For example, the Burnaby–Fraser TSO and the Surrey TC Compliance Working Group is PROTECTED. Another example is the Suspicious Activities Working Group (SAWG). The SAWG initiative includes the pre-assessment review and analysis of various taxpayer risk indicators such as verifying proof of payment for charitable donation claims and multiple taxpayers linked to the same deposit account before the returns are assessed and refunds issued. From mid-February 2010 to mid-June 2010 SAWG Footnote 26 stopped over $8.3 million in unwarranted or suspicious refunds from being issued.  When the potential tax savings associated with referrals to the Enforcement and Refund Examination programs are factored in, the total estimated tax impact associated with SAWG review work would approach $16 million.  Although these new horizontal working relationships have not been fully assessed, the individuals responsible recognized the value of using front-end validation programs and unanimously agree that they should be expanded. Open communication and the sharing of information between the different branches involved have been identified as an unintended positive impact. Implementing targeted compliance strategies can often result in additional public scrutiny. It is reasonable to expect that some taxpayers are likely to complain to the CRA, the Taxpayers Ombudsman, their Member of Parliament or the Minister of National Revenue if they do not receive their expected refund soon after filing and some may even engage the media. If this type of compliance strategy were expanded, a strong communication plan would have to be developed to inform taxpayers of the CRA direction to deal with aggressive tax planning. The Minister of National Revenue and CRA stakeholders would have to be alerted and educated so that they understand the rationale and are prepared to appropriately respond to potential enquiries and complaints. Based on the preceding it is our conclusion that the CRA should continue their efforts to adapt and to evolve with current trends in aggressive tax planning through the increased use of horizontal management, current front-end validation processes and the use of CRA intelligence.


 6.0 Going forward 
We observed a high level of commitment, in headquarters and the regions, and recognition for the need to adapt and to evolve with the current trends in aggressive tax planning. We recognize that it will take time to implement the recommendations contained in this report. In some respects, the implications are significant and entail changes in how the CRA conducts business. This includes the need for increased horizontal management, potential legislative changes, increased front-end validation and changes in external communication practices to influence taxpayers to respect the intent and spirit of the ITA and ETA.


  Appendix A


Notice of objections and appeals to the Tax Court
View screen image - Notice of objections and appeals to the Tax Court 


  Appendix B




Case file analysis sample (Appeals to the Tax Court) 



CRA Adm Regions
Atlantic
*
%
Quebec
%
Ontario
%
Prairies
%
Pacific
%
HQ
%
Total


Number of Decisions
155
 
4.0
742
19.2
1,261
32.6
485
12.5
660
17.0
571
14.7
3,874


T1
9
 
 
43
 
73
 
28
 
38
 
33
 
226


T2
1
2
 
6
 
11
 
4
 
6
 
5
 
35


GST
1
2
 
6
 
11
 
4
 
6
 
5
 
34


Others (T3, T4, R&D)
3
2
 
11
 
19
 
7
 
10
 
9
 
60


Total sample regions
14
6
 
66
 
114
 
43
 
60
 
52
 
355


Corrected
20
 
 
66
 
114
 
43
 
60
 
52
 
355





*Correction made to get the minimum size of account (20) for Atlantic **This total was later corrected (3,748) by removing notice to request for extension of time in order to analyse only notice of objections. Nine cases found as notice to request for extension of time that were first selected were replaced.


 Appendix C 




Decision codes for notices of objections



 Codes
Definitions


 Code 1 – Agreement - Allowed in full
The objector is in agreement with our position that allows everything that was requested in the Notice of Objection


 Code 2 – Agreement - Allowed in part
The objector is in agreement with our position that allows only a portion of what was requested in the Notice of Objection


 Code 3 – Confirmed with agreement
Confirmation of assessment with the taxpayer's explicit agreement.


 Code 3A – Confirmed without explicit agreement-TC
Confirmation of assessment without the taxpayer's explicit agreement. This procedure is to be followed by Appeals officers in Tax Centres only.


 Code 4 – Upward with agreement
Decision made by the Appeals officer to increase the tax assessment with the taxpayer's agreement.


 Code 5A – Confirmed no agreement
Confirmation of assessment without the taxpayer's agreement. Usually, the taxpayer has expressed disagreement to the Appeals officer.


 Code 5B – Allowed part no agreement
Decision made by the Appeals officer who reviews the objection and allows part of it. The taxpayer does not agree with the adjusted amounts.


 Code 5C – Upward no agreement
Decision made by the Appeals officer who increases the tax assessment without the taxpayer's agreement.


 Code 06 – Late filed objection
Objection case closed by Appeals because it was not filed within the specified timeframe.


 Code 7-1 – Appeal to TCC
Used when 90 days per the Income Tax Act or 180 days per the Excise Tax Act have elapsed since the taxpayer's objection was filed but the decision has not yet been made and since a notice of appeal has been filed with the Tax Court of Canada.


 Code 7-4 – Subsequent-duplicate objection
Case closed because it is another objection or is a duplicate of a current valid one.


 Code 7-5 – Sub-RAP
Used when a reassessment is issued by another section rendering the objection invalid.


 Code 7-6 – Invalid – other
Used when a case is closed for a reason that does not fall under any other code.





 Appendix D 




Decision codes for appeals to the Tax Court



Codes
Definitions


 Code 1 – Regular - Allowed in full
A term used in reports that represents files for which a decision allowing in full an appeal has been delivered by the judge presiding over the case. It is not a consent to judgment as per 169(3) of the ITA.


 Code 2 – Regular - Allowed in part
A term used in reports that represents files for which a decision allowing in part an appeal has been delivered by the judge presiding over the case. It is not a consent to judgment as per 169(3) of the ITA.


 Code 3 – Dismissed
Ruling made by the judge presiding over the case to not continue the review of the appeal.


 Code 5 – Quashed
An appeal is considered quashed when the court determines that a previous decision of that court or a lower judicial body is invalid as a result or an error having been made by a lawyer or the court itself. The process requires that a lawyer introduce a motion with the court and that the judge issue a decision to quash based on the error.


 Code 6 – Withdrawn-discontinued – Confirmed
An appeal having been confirmed by the judge because an appellant withdrew or discontinued the appeal.


 Code 7 – Consent – allowed in full
A document prepared and signed by the two parties to an appeal that informs the TCC that the parties have agreed on terms to resolve the appeal in full, and requests the TCC to issue a judgment reflecting the agreement.


 Code 8 – Consent – allowed in part
A document prepared and signed by the two parties to an appeal that informs the TCC that the parties have agreed on terms to resolve the appeal in part, and requests the TCC to issue a judgment reflecting the agreement.


 Code 9 – 169(3) Agreement – allowed in full
Private agreement between the appellant and the Minister of National Revenue that is not reviewed nor guaranteed by the TCC. This agreement allows in full the appeal.


 Code 10 – 169(3) Agreement – allowed in part
Private agreement between the appellant and the Minister of National Revenue that is not reviewed nor guaranteed by the TCC. This agreement allows in part the appeal.


 Code 11 – Dismissed for want of prosecution
An appeal dismissed due to the appellant delaying it without a valid reason.


 Code 12 – Invalid
An appeal that does not meet the criteria for a valid appeal. Some examples of invalid appeals include those that were filed with the court: where no objection was previously filed, where the appellant has waived the right to appeal, with no tax in dispute (ETA), with an objection that is still under consideration by the Minister.





 Footnote 1 Contested decisions are notices of objections submitted to the CRA and appeals to the Tax Court of Canada.    Footnote 2 Aggressive tax planning schemes  are questionable tax transactions that are promoted on the basis that they offer an income tax savings, often referred to as a tax benefit.    Footnote 3 Appeals Variance Study, March 2009   Footnote 4 Contested decisions are notices of objections submitted to the CRA and appeals to the Tax Court of Canada.   Footnote 5 Source: Programs Management Analysis Directorate, Salary and O&M $ (SSA 54110 & 55100, including HQ)   Footnote 6 For the purpose of this evaluation the term "taxpayer" also includes businesses responsible for collecting and remitting payroll deductions and GST/HST   Footnote 7 Eastern Intake Centre is located in the Sudbury TSO/TC and the Western Intake Centre is located in the Surrey TC.   Footnote 8 Appeals Mitigation Study: Growth in the Appeals Objections Workload and Volume of Litigation and Costs of Conducting Litigation, dated: September 22, 2010.   Footnote 9 95% confidence level, 5% error rate   Footnote 10 Aggressive tax planning schemes  are questionable tax transactions that are promoted on the basis that they offer an income tax savings, often referred to as a tax benefit.    Footnote 11 CRA Annual Report to Parliament 2009-2010   Footnote 12 Time extension requests for notice of objections were not included as a formal notice of objection was not yet filed.   Footnote 13 11 cases were excluded as no decision was recorded in the Case Appeals/Equitas system.   Footnote 14 http://www.cra-arc.gc.ca/gncy/lrt/vtp-eng.html   Footnote 15 CRA – Final statistics - Sample Data 2010 Edition (2008 tax year)   Footnote 16 Total of taxable capital employed in Canada of the corporation, at the end of a particular taxation year exceeds $10 million. (Source: Income Tax Act 225.1 (8))   Footnote 17 Appeals Variance Study, March 2009   Footnote 18 Tackling aggressive tax planning through improved transparency and disclosure, February 2011    Footnote 19 Australian Government – Inspector-General of Taxation – Review into the underlying causes and the management of objections to Tax Office decisions – A report to the Assistant Treasurer – 15  April 2009   Footnote 20 Forum on Tax Administration - Understanding and Influencing Taxpayer's Compliance Behaviour, 2010   Footnote 21 Exploring the potential impacts of compliance communication on taxpayer perceptions about tax cheating, November 28, 2007   Footnote 22 Canadian Federation of Independent Business Audit of the CRA – January 2012   Footnote 23 GST/HST Registration (Non Registration) Evaluation Study, July 2008; GST/HST Delinquent Filing and Remitting Evaluation Study, April 2009; Debt Management Call Centre Evaluation Study, June 2010; and Enforcement and Disclosures Programs Evaluation Study, October 2010   Footnote 24 2012-2013 to 2014-2015   Footnote 25 HRMC Deliberate Defaulters Programme and  Australian Government – Australian Taxation Office, 2010-2011 Compliance Program   Footnote 26 Suspicious Activities Working Group – Tax Centre Reviews 2010 Program, March 2011 





Report a problem or mistake on this page












Please select all that apply:

A link, button or video is not working



It has a spelling mistake



Information is missing



Information is outdated or wrong



Login error when trying to access an account




I can't find what I'm looking for



Other issue not in this list



Submit



Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries, contact us.










Date modified:
2012-07-23





Evaluation Study - Employer Compliance Audit (ECA) Program



Notice to the reader:
Please note that in the spirit of the Access to Information Act, some information within this document cannot be disclosed for reasons related to the security of our infrastructure and to the operations of Government.



Final Report


Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch


November 2016


Table of Contents

Executive Summary 
1.0 Introduction 
1.1 Background 
2.0 Issues, methods, and approach 
3.0 Findings regarding outcome achievement 

3.1 Maintaining the integrity of the tax system through responsible enforcement 
3.2 Maintaining the integrity of the tax system through education 
 
4.0 Findings regarding CRA administrative effectiveness

4.1 Calculating the fiscal impact 
4.2 Collectability of fiscal impact resulting from ECA generated reassessments 
4.3 Challenges and barriers related to program delivery 
 
Acknowledgement 
Appendices 

Appendix 1: Glossary of terms 
Appendix 2: Example of a Statement of Remuneration Paid (T4 slip)
Appendix 3: Example of a Statement of Pension, Retirement, Annuity, and Other Income (T4A Slip)
 



Executive Summary
Introduction to the Employer Compliance Audit (ECA) Program The mandate of the ECA Program is to maintain the integrity of the tax system with respect to employers’ reporting of employment income and taxable benefits, withholding and remitting of payroll related amounts, and proper characterization of workers, through a combination of taxpayer education and responsible enforcement. This program contributes to protecting $255 billion in source deductions annually. As in most organizations, employers in Canada manage payroll on behalf of their employees who assume that all source deductions and calculations are compliant with relevant laws. This makes ECA a one-to-many program, as its audits of employer reporting result in adjustments on multiple individual income tax (T1) accounts. Overall, this evaluation found that the ECA Program: 
Adequately discharges its mandate with respect to responsible enforcement.
Averages a high change rate (which is the percentage of audits that detected and corrected non-compliance) of approximately 80% annually.
Audits impact subsequent reporting compliance in a sustained manner several years after the audit.
Is the only program to address taxable benefits non-compliance with a budget of about $7.2M in fiscal year 2015-2016 and approximately 113 full-time equivalent (FTEs) employees in the regions, as well as 5 FTEs in Headquarters. PROTECTED
Faces noteworthy willful non-compliance within its target population.
 With respect to taxable benefits, it was found that: 
Reporting has increased significantly over the ten year period 2005-2014.
Different stakeholders bring different perspectives on how best to communicate guidelines on taxable benefits in the Canada Revenue Agency’s (CRA) guides. Those tasked with creating and editing them try to communicate principles and seek simplicity. However the payroll practitioners who do the calculations and the Business Enquiries Call Centre (BECC) agents who answer their calls seek specificity, clarity, and consistency.
There are many taxable benefits for payroll practitioners to understand and evidence shows that self-reported confidence in making these calculations drops for less commonly occurring benefits.
 It is recommended that the: 
Collections and Verifications Branch (CVB), Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs Branch (LPRAB), and Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch (ABSB) work together to enhance the CRA’s payroll related phone and website supports.
CRA supports CVB in leading the process to include more guidelines surrounding the definition or substantiation of “reasonable” in the CRA taxable benefit guide. 
 With respect to the proper characterization of workers, it was found that: 
Issuing T4A slips encourages compliance in the amount of T4A self-employed commissions reported; about one-third of independent contractors were found to have not reported income when they did not receive a T4A slip.
Approximately one-third of payroll practitioners surveyed acknowledged that they did not issue a T4A slip to report fees for service when they should have.
Finding relevant information was identified as a challenge by a higher proportion of payroll practitioners than was finding information for other payroll obligations.
The CRA guide states the CRA is not assessing penalties for failing to complete box 048, or reporting payments made by a person for "fees, commissions or other amounts for services". Some employersFootnote 1 interpret this to mean that they are not obliged to complete this box on the T4A slip. There are two consequences to this interpretation: first, employers may not capture the Social Insurance Number (SIN) or other relevant identifier information of the worker; and second, ECA auditors may have trouble gathering the information necessary to complete the slips. These findings suggest that the current enforcement strategy for box 048 T4A slips is not cost effective.
PROTECTED
 It is recommended that the: 
CVB and LPRAB clarify employers’ obligations surrounding the filing of box 048 T4A slip, PROTECTED. 
ECA Program adopts more cost effective methods to enforce T4A slip reporting compliance PROTECTED
 With respect to the federal tax portion of the Program’s calculated fiscal impact, it was found to be lower than the amounts determined by the Program due to: 
PROTECTED
Increases to income identified by the audits having been already reported by the independent contractor or employee on their personal tax returns.
Using a tax rate of 29% when calculating federal tax results does not reflect the income tax rate paid by all individuals affected by the Program.
 It is recommended that the: 
ECA Program works with internal stakeholders to adopt assumptions that better reflect amounts that are being reassessed.
 With respect to the collectability of the federal taxes assessed by the Program, it was found that: 
The one-to-many structure of the ECA Program is unaligned with the individual level of analysis conducted by the Appeals Branch’s officers. One of the main reasons for the reversals of ECA results is the different level of analysis between the areas: ECA captures records from employers, Appeals from employees.
Affected taxpayers (employers, employees, and contractors) pay the majority of amounts owing with relatively little effort expended by Agency resources.
 It is recommended that the: 
The ECA Program and Appeals Branch mitigate the factors that contribute to the undesired impacts on ECA program outcomes and monitor the impact of these efforts.  
 The following factors were identified as challenges to ECA Program delivery: 
Timeliness of training for new employees;
Communications between Headquarters and field, and cross-region communication; and
Timeliness of responses to technical and legislative enquiries, which may result in the premature closure of an audit nearing its statute bar dates.
 It is recommended that the: 
ECA Program addresses the timeliness and coordination of its support, training, and communication functions in order to improve consistency and responsiveness to the field.



1.0 Introduction
On April 9, 2015, the Employer Compliance Audit (ECA) Program evaluation framework was approved by the Management Audit and Evaluation Committee. The ECA Program evaluation study was included in the Risk-Based Audit and Evaluation Plan (RBAEP) 2013-2016 which was approved by the Board of management on September 17, 2013.


1.1 Background
The collection of personal income tax revenue through source deductions is a large source of government revenues. In 2014-2015 alone, the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) collected approximately $255 billion combined from Canada Pension Plan (CPP), Employment Insurance (EI), and federal and provincial income tax through source deductions remitted by over 1.1 million employers, representing approximately 70% of total revenues and pension contributions for the year. As such, ensuring compliance with these obligations is an important aspect of maintaining integrity in the Canadian tax system. Correct calculation of source deductions relies on the proper reporting of employment income and taxable benefits, withholding and remitting of CPP/EI amounts, and proper characterizations of workers. One program responsible for reviewing these three areas is the ECA Program which is part of the Employer Compliance Division in the Business Compliance Directorate of the Collections and Verification Branch (CVB). The ECA Program had a total annual budget of about $7.2 million in the 2015-2016 fiscal year and approximately 113 full time equivalent (FTE) employees in the regions, as well as 5 FTEs in Headquarters (HQ). Canadian legislation places several obligations on employers. These obligations include requiring employers to deduct and withhold the employee’s share of personal income tax, as well as their combined portions of the CPP contributions and EI premiums. Those dollars are remitted on the employee’s behalf to the CRA. These payments, which are held in trust by the employer, are commonly known as “at source” deductions. Employers are tasked with identifying, calculating, and reporting taxable remuneration and premiums paid to employees on their Statement of Remuneration Paid slips (i.e. T4 slips) (Appendix 2). In the event of services rendered from another business (i.e. a contract worker), employers, as payers, are required to issue a Statement of Pension, Retirement, Annuity, and Other Income to contract workers ( i.e. T4A slips) (Appendix 3) to report the fees paid to these contractors. In order to enforce these employer payroll obligations, the mandate of the ECA Program is to maintain the integrity of the tax system with respect to the reporting of employment income and taxable benefits; withholding and remitting of payroll related amounts; and, the proper characterization of workers, through a combination of taxpayer education and responsible enforcement. The ECA Program promotes employer awareness and understanding of tax laws and obligations as provided in the Income Tax Act (ITA), the Excise Tax Act (ETA), the CPP, the Employment Insurance Act (EIA), and their respective regulations, to increase and enhance voluntary compliance.  The ECA Program can be characterized as a one-to-many program: an audit of one employer’s reporting can, depending on the size of the organization, impact the T4 slips of multiple employees. If employer reporting non-compliance is detected, this could affect many individual taxpayers working with that employer years after the individuals have filed their tax returns for a given tax year.


2.0 Issues, methods, and approach
This evaluation reports on two issues: Outcomes achievement (section 3): The first issue highlights the outcomes achieved based on the ECA Program mandate to maintain the integrity of the tax system through both responsible enforcement (see section 3.1) and education (section 3.2).  CRA administrative effectiveness (section 4): The second evaluation issue assessed the overall administrative effectiveness. A taxpayer-centric view of the CRA was used to identify the main program areas that contribute directly or indirectly to facilitating compliance among the population targeted by the ECA Program. The main topics covered are the Program’s calculation of fiscal impact (section 4.1), collectability of the reassessed fiscal impact (section 4.2), and barriers and challenges to program delivery (section 4.3). The main methods of analysis employed in support of this evaluation were: 
data analysis of calculated fiscal impact between 2008-2009 and 2013-2014 fiscal years, with particular emphasis on 2010-2011 and 2011-2012 to allow 3 years for the program to complete its audits and for downstream results to be realized. This data included analysis on almost 100% of employers which issued a T-slip, and on matched T-slips created or amended as a result of an ECA audit;
online consultation that sampled 1,600 payroll practitioners from among organization members of the Canadian Payroll Association (CPA) in March 2016;
interviews with 40 ECA Program officials at all levels and across all regions and HQ, as well as interviews with numerous other CRA officials; and
review of documentation provided by various stakeholders and available on the CRA intranet and internet.
 This report also contains findings that are outside of the ECA Program’s mandate in order to provide a more holistic view of the CRA’s administration of employer payroll obligations. The premise of such horizontal evaluations is that they take a taxpayer-centric approach, so that they can provide insight into multiple compliance outcomes rather than just the one for which the program being evaluated is accountable. This approach means that there is a need to: 
recognize that there are upstream impacts, or stakeholders across the CRA which may affect the evaluated program’s ability to achieve its mandate; and
provide insight into the downstream impacts that the evaluated program could have on stakeholders within the Agency. For this evaluation, “downstream impacts” refers to the impact on post ECA audit processes and programs.



3.0 Findings regarding outcome achievement
The first issue summarizes the outcomes achieved based on the ECA Program’s mandate to maintain the integrity of the tax system through both responsible enforcement (sub-sections within 3.1) and education (sub-sections within 3.2). 


3.1 Maintaining the integrity of the tax system through responsible enforcement
This section examines the core activities of the ECA Program, namely the impact its audits are having with respect to employers’:  
reporting of employment income and taxable benefits (sections 3.1.2 – 3.1.4);
proper characterization of workers (sections 3.1.5 – 3.1.7); and
withholding and remitting of payroll related amounts (section 3.1.8).
 3.1.1 The ECA Program covers all aspects of its mandate with respect to detecting and correcting reporting non-compliance. In most organizations, employers manage payroll on behalf of their employees who assume that all source deductions and calculations are compliant with the relevant laws. As the ECA Program assesses employers’ reporting of workers’ compensation (income, benefits, and premiums), any change from the audit will create reassessments on the workers’ T1 accounts, including penalties and interest owed to the CRA. This means that aside from missing CPP/EI contributions, employers are not directly impacted by the audit results. Figure 1 illustrates the annual volume of completed audits and the change rates. Between 2009-2010 and 2013-2014, the program conducted PROTECTED employer compliance audits per fiscal year, representing a coverage rate of approximately PROTECTED of the total target population. Since not all employers in Canada offer taxable benefits and incentives to their employees, the coverage rate for taxable benefits and incentives would be higher.




Figure 1: Number of completed audits and percentage of those that resulted in an additional taxes payable, by fiscal year



 
2009-2010
2010-2011
2011-2012
2012-2013
2013-2014




Number of completed audits
PROTECTED
PROTECTED
PROTECTED
PROTECTED
PROTECTED


Number of changes/FY
PROTECTED (84%)
PROTECTED (80%)
PROTECTED (84%)
PROTECTED (87%)
PROTECTED (80%)





Amongst the key observations from a review of the complete audits during those periods: 
the ECA Program achieved a change rate (which refers to the percentage of files audited where non-compliance was detected and corrected) of at least 80% of selected files per year;
at least 86% of all change audits identified improper reporting of taxable benefits;
between 46 and 55% of all change audits required subsequent changes to the withholding and remitting of payroll related amounts, such as CPP or EI as a result of changes made to income or worker status; and,
13% or less identified an improper characterization of a worker (where a contractor was changed to an employee).
 3.1.2 Employer compliance audits enhance subsequent taxable benefit reporting compliance. As part of their reporting obligations, employers who provide cash or non-cash benefits or allowances to their employees must complete the following steps: 
determine if the benefit is taxable;
calculate the value of the benefit;
calculate payroll deductions; and
file a statement of remuneration paid (T4 information return).
 The ECA Program examines employers’ records to determine whether or not they have accurately identified, calculated, and fully reported the amounts of taxable benefits. According to interviews with ECA auditors, this component of the mandate takes up 70% to 90% of their total audit efforts. Analysis of reassessed T4 slips found that audited employers increased their reporting compliance in the years following an employer compliance audit including a: 
45% increase in the audited employer population reporting taxable benefits;
147% increase in total taxable benefit amounts reported;
46% increase in T4 slips filed with reported taxable benefits; and
70% increase in the taxable benefits amounts reported per employee.
 3.1.3 Filing trends suggest that an increasing number of employers are reporting taxable benefits. An analysis of T4 slips from 2005-2014 with and without taxable amounts reported was conducted. Between 17 and 19 million distinct taxpayers were present in the T4 population during each of the years reviewed, with almost 1.5 T4 slips issued for each recipient. Amended slips were excluded in order to focus on voluntarily compliant behaviour.




Figure 2: Growth in number of T4 slips for employers who did or did not report taxable benefits



 
2005 (base)
2008
2011
2014




With taxable benefits reported
0%
7%
5%
13%


No taxable benefits reported
0%
3%
1%
0%





Over the ten-year period: 
as shown in Figure 2, the number of T4 slips filed that reported taxable benefits on them had increased by 13%, while there was no net change in the number without taxable benefits during the same period of time; and,
while the aggregate T4 income had increased by 32% among those filings without taxable benefits, the T4 income of those that included taxable benefits had increased by 46%.
 Taken together, these results may be interpreted as an indication that there is an increasing awareness of the need to file and report taxable benefits by employees. 3.1.4 Payroll practitioners are confident in their abilities to comply with requirements for the most commonly used taxable benefits. However, concerns were raised regarding those with fewer occurrences.   A large majority (85%) of the payroll practitioners who participated in the consultation indicated that they calculate taxable benefits as part of their payroll-related activities. These respondents were asked to self-assess their level of confidence in properly calculating and reporting taxable benefits applicable to them (out of a list of 14). Where they lacked confidence, they were asked to identify why. Overall, payroll practitioners averaged 6.9 out of a possible 10 regarding their self-rated confidence in calculating and reporting the taxable benefits examined. There were three taxable benefits, “group term life insurance“, “accidental death and dismemberment”, and “gifts and awards in cash” which: 
were by far the most widely used (about nine in ten participants indicated they calculated each of these); and
the average confidence level (between 7.9 and 8.5) of payroll practitioners suggests relative confidence in their abilities to properly calculate and report them.
 Conversely, “security/stock options”, “personal and living expenses/purchase of assets”, and “housing, free/low rent, board, and lodging”: 
were among the taxable benefits calculated by a smaller proportion of payroll practitioners (approximately two-thirds of participants); and
the mean confidence level (between 4.1 and 5.6) in calculating and reporting these suggests a lower level of confidence among payroll practitioners.
 3.1.5 ECA audits have found limited non-compliance with respect to the proper characterization of workers, and they enhance future T4A slip reporting. Defining a worker as either an “employee” or an “independent contractor” can impact an employer’s CPP/EI obligations. An employee is defined as a person who works for an employer under a “contract of services” which provides the employer with total control over the details of the work performance. An independent contractor is a worker who is hired under a “contract for services” for a specific project, but has the freedom to work out the details of how to complete that project. Employers are required to provide CPP/EI payments on behalf of their employees but have no such obligation for independent contract workers they hire. As such, properly characterizing workers is an important part of the ECA Program’s mandate. If an employer or a worker is not sure of the worker's employment status, a CPP/EI ruling should be requested by the auditor. In the event that an individual worker is treated as a contractor and the auditor has reason to believe they are an employee, the case is referred to the CPP/EI Rulings division who make a determination of that worker’s status. In 2014-2015 CPP/EI Rulings conducted 470 rulings from referrals from the ECA auditors. The proper characterization of workers found in the ECA Program’s mandate supports the identification of unpaid CPP/EI contributions for workers who are treated as independent contractors even though their relationship with the employer may be that of an employee. Since the 2009-2010 fiscal year, changes to a worker’s status to a contract of services (i.e. an employee) happened in 13% or less of the cases. For cases where the contract for service is upheld, ECA auditors create T4A information slips to document the fees paid to the contractor on behalf of the employer when no T4A was issued. In order to estimate the net impact of the employer compliance audit on taxpayer T4A filing behaviour, the level of filing for years preceding the audit was compared with T4A slips processed a long time after the audit was completed. Examining the T4A slip counts issued by 590 employers who were audited by ECA in 2010, the data showed that there was a substantial increase, on average, in T4A filing in the years following an employer compliance audit. Over the 2012 to 2015 period: 
the average number of employers to issue T4A slips increased by 105% from the years prior to their 2010 employer compliance audit; and
these employers issued 98% more T4A slips which represented a 348% increase in the income reported on the slips.
 3.1.6 T4As appear to positively impact reporting compliance among a portion of the self-employed population, although there may be reason to believe that the majority of the population reports its income regardless. In the absence of third-party reporting (reporting on behalf of others as employers do for workers), there have been concerns about whether independent contractors accurately report their income. In 2014, for example, approximately 260,000 independent contractors were supposed to report $9.7 billion in commissions, but reported only 88% of that total ($8.5 billion). In order to assess the potential impact of the T4A slip on the independent contractor population, a comparison of the reporting behaviours was conducted between those who received their T4A slips in time for T1 filing and those who did not. The analysis found that while the majority of independent contractors reported the majority of their income regardless of receiving a T4A slip, those who did not receive the slip were nearly twice as likely to report no income as those who received it (31% compared to 17%). On balance, it would appear that issuing T4A slips may increase accuracy in reporting as well as encourage greater compliance in the amount of T4A commissions actually reported. 3.1.7 The consultation with payroll practitioners revealed that about one-third of those who had recently retained a self-employed worker did not voluntarily complete a T4A. This practice has resulted in the Program issuing more slips on the employers’ behalf as part of their audits. Overall, one-quarter (25%) of consultation participants indicated that they are responsible for determining the status of a worker and would be responsible for issuing T4A slips. Among those who stated their organization had retained the services of a self-employed worker over the past 2 years: 
nearly three-in-ten (28%) indicated “we don’t issue T4As to self-employed workers”; 
another 5% agreed that they “don’t issue T4As to self-employed workers because [they] don’t understand CRA’s requirements.” A review of the demographics revealed that this group was disproportionately represented by those in the public administration sector; and
another group (3%) said that they issue T4As only when asked by self-employed workers. This small group was dominated by those in the health care and professional, scientific and technical services sectors.  
 Meanwhile, the Program has evolved to focus more on issuing T4A slips for identified contracts for service in order to capture the potential non-reported income paid to those contractors. The number of audit files in which T4A slips were issued increased from 15% of the change audit files in 2009-2010 to 46% by 2013-2014. This has occurred despite the fact that issuing T4A slips is not a part of the Program’s official mandate. PROTECTED 3.1.8 Employers who are audited by the ECA program are typically fully compliant with their withholding and remitting requirements, and only need to pay the excess amounts resulting from employment income reassessments. Although part of the ECA Program mandate, employers’ obligation to withhold and remit payroll amounts does not pose a significant area of non-compliance for the employer compliance auditors. Auditors interviewed explained that this is because the employers targeted by the ECA Program are normally up to date in their payroll deductions, and so, correcting CPP/EI amounts requires less relative effort compared to other areas of the mandate. Instead, the majority of the ECA Program’s changes related to payroll remitted amounts are derived from assessed amounts for taxable benefit and employment income as well as changes to workers’ status.   3.1.9 Summary Overall, the ECA Program: 
adequately discharges its mandate by verifying employer’s reporting of employment income and taxable benefits, properly characterizing workers, and withholding and remitting payroll related amounts;
audits impact subsequent reporting compliance of the vast majority of those employers audited in a sustained manner several years after the audit;
has presided over increasing taxable benefit filing and reporting over the ten year period 2005-2014; and
has no major concerns with respect to withholding and remitting payroll amounts.
 However, the following reporting compliance concerns emerged: 
payroll practitioners are required to learn and understand numerous taxable benefits, and tend to lack confidence in their ability to calculate those benefits which occur less due in part to concerns with educational resources;
approximately one-third of those who should have completed a T4A did not; and
ECA auditors are completing more and more T4A slips that are the obligation of the employer.



3.2 Maintaining the integrity of the tax system through education
The second element of the ECA Program mandate is the provision of educational support to enhance voluntary compliance. This section also reviews the most commonly used CRA services by examining: 
feedback received for both taxable benefits and T4A slips, how best to communicate clearly, and the ease of finding information in CRA guides and webpages;
website statistics;
telephone support service at the Business Enquiry Call Centres (BECC); and,
webinars.
 3.2.1 The ECA Program provides minimal educational support beyond that which is achieved from the audit process. While ECA Program officials considered audits to be the principal mechanism used to educate employers, their efficacy is limited largely to those who are audited, PROTECTED CRA audits were cited by 6% of the consultation respondents as providing a source of information or explanation on their payroll related enquiries, and only a small group from those noted concerns with it as a source of information.  The ECA Program has implemented initiatives over the years with the objective of providing outreach and education to the employer population. However, ECA Program officials recognized that these activities did not provide significant coverage and there was limited, if any, follow up. Instead, most key payroll-related educational activities tend to occur in other CRA programs while the ECA Program plays an indirect role in the development of webpage and guide content. For example, in the course of an audit or review, if the ECA Program finds discrepancies or contradictions in the guides it informs relevant stakeholders within the Agency to action the necessary changes. To facilitate reporting compliance, the CRA provides several resources to employers and their representatives, including telephone support, rulings and interpretations, and numerous guides and webinars all found on the CRA website. The following table highlights key CRA programs that support the ECA Program in facilitating understanding across the payroll community:




Table 1: Areas that provide upstream support to the ECA Program mandate



Section
Branch
What they do




Policy and Legislative Research Section (PLRS)
CVB
Policy advice and clarification Present webinars and conferences


Stakeholder Relations, Issues Management and Services (SRIMS)
CVB
Outreach and liaison with external stakeholders


Specialty Information Section (SIS)
ABSB
Updates guides and webpages


Business Enquiry Call Centres (BECC)
ABSB
Phone support to taxpayers


CPP/EI Rulings
LPRAB
Rules on the status of a worker


Income Tax Rulings Directorate (ITRD)
LPRAB
Interprets legislation





Employer education efforts are also supported by external stakeholders including the CPA, which, in addition to CRA educational efforts, provide their almost 20,000 members with educational materials and responses to enquiries related to employer reporting compliance. Payroll practitioners participating in the consultation were asked whether they had sought any information on a payroll related issue over the last year. Respondents were provided a list of thirteen possible sources of information, eight of which were from the CRA. 98% of respondents indicated that they had consulted at least one of the eight CRA resources listed. CRA web pages (77%) and the employer guides on the CRA website (76%) were the two most frequently cited sources, and CRA BECC was contacted by almost half of respondents (47%). 3.2.2 Stakeholders have different perspectives on the level of detail required to communicate clearly in the CRA’s guides and webpages. There are numerous guides and webpages covering employer related payroll obligations such as taxable benefits and characterization of workers. The main guide for taxable benefits is T4130, Employers' Guide - Taxable Benefits and Allowances. In the event that the Program detects content concerns in the guides and webpages related to employer payroll obligations, it would communicate these concerns with the PLRS who in turn send the changes to the SIS in ABSB which is responsible for updating and developing the online content for CRA programs. Officials from both PLRS and ECA Program HQ stated that the purpose of the guides is to communicate general principles that can be applied to a broad range of situations in order to allow taxpayers to be compliant. This practice stems from two inter-related concerns: 
it was felt too many specific examples made the guides difficult to follow; and
providing detailed examples could increase non-compliance because employers may consider specific situations not covered in the guides to mean that, by being omitted, they are not part of their tax obligations.
 According to HQ officials interviewed, the guides aim to address 90-95% of situations encountered by taxpayers, and other CRA resources are made available to help resolve extraordinary situations. Given the legislative framework, perfect clarity in all cases is not possible. As a result, over the last few years the T4130 has been updated to include fewer examples and instead focus on assisting employers in how to recognize taxable benefits. Additionally, the Government of Canada’s desire to remove extraneous content from its webpages in preparation for the launch of the Canada.ca multi-departmental website is also a consideration for those who design the webpages. The Program’s regional staff take a different perspective. Many of those in the field indicated that taxable benefits were generally not well understood by employers or their representatives, in part because their calculation can require appropriately defining “reasonable” amounts, to which there are over 70 references in the taxable benefits guide. Reviewing the information in the guide on the list of 14 taxable benefits included in the consultation with payroll professionals, seven were found to have a reference to “reasonable”. Among those seven, it was found that self-reported confidence in making these calculations was higher for those benefits where either (i) reasonable was defined in the guide or (ii) a link to an interpretation bulletin was provided and generally lower in the instances where reasonable was not defined or no links to bulletins existed. Participants’ written-in concerns with respect to their confidence ratings could be summarized as follows: 
The CRA guides lack clarity and examples that addressed their specific cases. The most commonly cited concern identified was the lack of clarity around how to distinguish between business usage and personal usage, and how this principle can be applied when it comes to automobile and motor vehicle allowances, cell phone/internet usage, and housing and travel allowance taxable benefits.
 It should be noted that just over half (52%) of the respondents who wrote in these concerns had 7 or more years’ experience in their current payroll job and 62% had a payroll-relevant certification, percentages that align with those in the larger participating population. Based on these criteria, this group may even be more knowledgeable than the larger participating sample. 3.2.3 There are differences in messaging regarding penalties for failure to report in Box 048 of the T4A slip.  Employers and their representatives can access two key sources of information to understand their payroll reporting obligations: the ITA and the CRA guide RC4157 Deducting Income Tax on Pension and Other Income, and Filing the T4A Slip and Summary. According to the ITA, Regulation 200(1) states that “ […] every person who makes a payment described in subsection 153(1) of the Act […] shall make an information return in prescribed form in respect of the payment.” Paragraph 153(1)(g) includes “fees, commissions or other amounts for services.” which is captured in box 048 of the T4A slip. However, the RC4157 states that while fees for services provided by independent contractors should be reported on a T4A slip in Box 048, it goes on to note later (on p13) that: “the CRA is not assessing penalties for failures relating to the completion of box 048.” ECA auditors indicated that some employers have incorrectly interpreted the lack of penalty as absolving them of their responsibility to report on fees for service. Given this, and being widely recognized that audit is the most expensive enforcement strategy available to the CRA, ECA auditors expressed concern about their increasing focus on issuing T4A slips. CPA’s representatives on the other hand support increased enforcement in T4A filing because they believe it protects against tax avoidance among non-employee workers. Despite these differences, both the ECA auditors and the CPA representatives did agree that an education strategy regarding the slip would be the most beneficial tool for improving compliance in the area. 3.2.4 Finding relevant information on the proper characterization of workers is a challenge for payroll practitioners. Achieving reporting compliance depends on the degree to which the practitioner is aware of, understands and is knowledgeable enough to do the desired calculations.  To do so, they need to be able to find relevant information that is clear enough to act on. The consultation revealed that fewer payroll practitioners are finding the information they are looking for with respect to the rules around the proper characterization of workers and issuing T4A slips when compared with other payroll-related obligations. The vast majority of payroll practitioners seeking information on the calculation, deduction, reporting and remittance of income tax, CPP contributions, EI premiums (90%), and taxable benefits (87%) found the information they sought. In comparison, 71% of those seeking information on deciding the status of a worker (T4As) found the information they were looking for, and this was also the smallest group that indicated it was easy to find. Several payroll practitioners commented that the key word search function on the CRA web pages retrieved too much irrelevant information, thereby making it difficult to find answers to their specific queries. A review of the CRA website used a payroll practitioners’ perspective searching for this information. This review found that information regarding the status of a worker is accessible through the CRA webpage for businesses under the “CPP/EI rulings” heading where it states: “The CPP/EI Rulings Program is responsible for providing clients with rulings that indicate whether a worker is an employee or is self-employed.” Further interpretative content is provided under a second hyperlink, “CPP/EI Explained”, where users can access specific considerations for determining a worker’s status. Payroll practitioners, however, might be looking for the words “T4A” or the heading “Worker’s Status” and may not recognize the CPP/EI heading as being where they need to look, despite the description provided.   3.2.5 Recent trends suggest that the CPA web site traffic is increasing at the same time that the CRA’s is largely declining. From the list of thirteen payroll sources mentioned earlier, the CRA’s webpages (77%) and guides (76%) were the only two CRA resources among the top five information resources cited by payroll practitioners in the consultation. After these, the next three most frequently selected sources were: 
entered one or more payroll-related keywords in a commercial search engine (62%);
contacted a professional association (62%); and,
asked peers or colleagues (55%).
 However, written responses from the consultation noted that clarity and consistency in CRA online content were common areas of concern. Some mentioned that they received conflicting information between CRA resources, or between CRA and CPA resources, particularly with respect to T4A related obligations. Taken together, these responses provide context to a larger shift in web site preferences that appears to be occurring in the payroll community: 
While visits to the two most accessed CRA webpages “Benefits and Allowances” and “T4A-information for payers”, increased by 24% and 46% respectively in the 2014-2015 fiscal year from the previous year, general visits to the CRA payroll-related webpages declined significantly. According to the internal CRA statistics, there was a decline in the number of visits to the webpages related to employer-tax compliance (English visits decreased by 39.5%; French pages by 60%), between fiscal years 2013-2014 and 2014-2015.
Meanwhile, visits to the CPA resources section tool, which provides guidance on a number of employer-tax related topics, doubled between 2013 and 2014 and increased again in 2015 by 14%.
 3.2.6 Lack of a feedback loop between BECC agents and other areas has led to some instances of inconsistent responses to callers regarding employer payroll obligations. Nearly half of the payroll practitioners (47%) who participated in the consultation called the CRA business enquiries line for employer-tax related enquiries. The BECC agents answer approximately three million enquiries per year, and one in five calls (21%) relate to employer tax obligations. Analysis of the 2013-2014 Profile of Enquiries for the Business Enquiries line revealed: 
Approximately one-third (35%) of the calls related to employer payroll compliance are fairly straightforward enquiries regarding payments/remittances and balance and are handled by front line agents.
Complex employer payroll enquiries, including enquiries on taxable benefits, represent 15% of Level 2 agents’ workload.
Among the employer/payroll calls relating to taxable benefits, “insurance premiums” (17%), “gift and awards” (15%), “automobile allowance” (10%) and “automobile benefit” (10%) represented the most frequently enquired about topics.
In 2013-2014, nearly 10% of payroll related enquiries escalated to Level 2 related to how to complete the payroll related slips.
 According to BECC agents interviewed, the more abstract enquiries that relate to taxable benefit obligations are considered more complex and referred to Level 2 agents whose job it is to interpret beyond what is directly stated in the guides. If BECC agents are unable to resolve the query at the local level, they forward the question to a field support mailbox, which is then responsible for escalating enquiries they cannot answer to the PLRS. The PLRS in CVB may in turn liaise with the LPRAB. Some BECC agents have noticed that one practice adopted by callers is to call in twice and “go with the answer that they like best.” While BECC agents are expected to probe clients to better understand their information needs, agents interviewed believed that having greater detail on more specific payroll scenarios would improve consistency in responses between Agents. Almost 100 payroll practitioners commented on concerns they had experienced with the CRA phone service, which could be summarized as follows: 
they received inconsistent responses from enquiries agents;
the agents “read the guide back to them” and could not provide further information; or,
their concerns related to the more complex case-specific situations that are not directly covered in the guides which prompted them to make the calls.
 Employers also seek out information from the CPA’s telephone enquiries service Infoline. Since 2011, taxable benefits have consistently been the fourth most enquired about topic for the Infoline. While the ECA Program contributes to the call centres’ reference material used to respond to taxpayer enquiries, there is no mechanism to receive feedback on the input, nor does the Program appear to provide sufficient support to BECC agents in responding to escalated enquiries. This has two consequences: 
call centre agents may be providing callers with incorrect or inconsistent information; and
program areas miss out on the opportunity to learn about the educational needs which they can use to better design or update the relevant guides.
 3.2.7 Webinars are viewed positively and there is growing demand for more. The PLRS and SRIMS provide upstream support to the ECA Program in achieving the educational component of its mandate through the development and presentation of webinars to key stakeholders such as the CPA. These tools are available to all employers in Canada; at least 55,000 members receive direct notifications from the CRA. Nearly a quarter of consultation respondents cited the webinars as a source of information. Written comments by this group were positive and revealed a demand for more webinars to be provided. The webinars are particularly popular among employers and are primarily presented to the target population of employers through external stakeholders such as the CPA. According to the PLRS, its webinars are consistently sold out to participants, and it has had to double the participation limit in the last year in order to accommodate the growing interest. Beyond indirect input through the technical enquiries that reach the PLRS, the ECA Program provides minimal contribution to these outreach activities and tools. 3.2.8 Summary and recommendations The ECA Program relies heavily on external stakeholders to provide educational support beyond that which is achieved from the audit process. The overall findings were as follows: 
Stakeholders bring different perspectives on how best to communicate clearly in CRA guides and webpages. Those tasked with creating and editing them (i.e. CRA) try to communicate principles and seek simplicity, while those who do the calculation (i.e. payroll practitioners) seek specificity.
Finding relevant information on the proper characterization of workers is a challenge for payroll practitioners.
Recent statistics indicate that the CPA web site traffic is increasing at the same time that the CRA’s is largely declining.
BECC services rely on interpreting the guides and, when necessary, expertise in other areas of the Agency to respond to more complex enquiries that arise from specific taxpayer situations.
Webinars are the most positively viewed educational resource by users and there is growing demand for more.
 The above findings resulted in the following recommendations: CVB, LPRAB, and ABSB work together to enhance the CRA’s payroll related phone and website supports.  Management response We concur with this recommendation. The Program recognizes the importance of telephone and website support to employers as they seek to fulfill their obligations with respect to the accurate treatment and reporting of taxable benefits.  The Program will work with ABSB to identify gaps in the information and support tools for call centre agents and make adjustments to reference material and scripts as indicated by gap analysis. As is the practice currently, technical queries received by the call centre will continue to be escalated to the PLRS housed in the Business Compliance Directorate for response. The Program will also strengthen collaborative efforts in support of call centres by implementing semi-annual meetings with the Telephone Programs Division (TPD) to determine and analyze the top call drivers with respect to taxable benefits.  Further, the rulings and legislative policy areas in LPRAB will be engaged, as needed, to confirm the consistency of the content provided for use by call centre agents, the website and of responses developed by PLRS in instances where the taxable benefit issues may be outside the scope or mandate of the call centre or business enquiries function.   Timelines 
Consultations between the Business Enquiries Support Section and the Learning Services Section within the Taxpayer Services Directorate along with CVB to analyze the scope of enquiries and the business enquiries reference and training material in order to address the concerns raised – Q1 2017-2018. 
Consultations and business enquiries reference material changes will be completed by end of Q1 2017-2018. This will continue to be an iterative process between the impacted stakeholders, with semi-annual check points taking into consideration filing season and the demands on the phone program. The first follow-up will be done by end of Q1 2018-2019. 
 The CRA supports CVB in leading the process to include more guidelines surrounding the definition or substantiation of “reasonable” in the CRA taxable benefit guide. Management response The T4130 Employer’s Guide – Taxable Benefits, as with all guides, is intended to provide general principles that are applicable to the innumerable situations that may arise in the context of any one taxpayer or employer. As observed in the evaluation report, these guides are intended to address the majority of the situations encountered by the reader. As such, the guides cannot be used to provide exhaustive lists of examples related to taxable benefits and employer reporting obligations.   In recent years guides have been streamlined to respond to Government of Canada requirements for web publication as the CRA has moved to electronic formats.   Where an employer needs further support to understand their obligations in a specific instance, they can avail themselves of the BECC. If the question is outside of the call centre’s capacity, there is a channel by which the more technical questions are routed to the program for analysis and response. In the response to recommendation # 1, the program has undertaken to work with colleagues in ABSB and LPRAB to ensure that call agents have the information they need to respond to taxpayer and employer enquiries regarding taxable benefits.   With respect to the use of the word “reasonable” in the T4130 guide, this reflects the approach taken in the Income Tax Act to recognize that there are many different situations and fact patterns that can exist in respect of taxable benefits.   Additionally, for key taxable benefits, the guide uses the term reasonable not only providing the provision, but also explaining how the term is used and applied for example automobile and motor vehicle benefits, allowances based on the kilometers driven and travel allowable. To this end, the Program view is that the guide properly reflects the law upon which it is founded. CVB continues to work collaboratively with both internal and external stakeholders to ensure guides and other support tools are clear and concise, while respecting the requirement for plain language.  The publication program will continue to work with the CPA with respect to the content of guides, which are reviewed by a committee of CPA members on an annual basis, in advance of publication, for both content and readability. CVB and LPRAB clarify employers’ obligations surrounding the filing of box 048 T4A slip, PROTECTED Management response We concur with this recommendation. The CRA has the opportunity to clarify box 048 T4A reporting requirements and this topic has been the subject of questions by key external stakeholders. To this end, the Program will continue to work collaboratively across the Agency to define the position with respect to the reporting of fees for service, as noted in box 048 of the T4A slip. Further, external consultations with key stakeholders on this topic have recently been approved by the CRA’s Policy and Regulatory Committee and it is expected that the feedback received via these consultations will be important to clarifying obligations for businesses to report fees for services on a T4A. PROTECTED Once a final position is accepted with respect to T4A reporting of fees for services, the Program will ensure that stakeholders and businesses are made aware of the requirements using outreach on a number of channels including the website, guides, presentations at stakeholder association events, webinars, podcasts, social media, and scripts for call centre agents. Timelines 
Consultation plan and products including senior management approval – Q4 2016-2017.
External Consultations and analysis of results – completion by Q4 2017-2018.



4.0 Findings regarding CRA administrative effectiveness
The second evaluation issue, which assessed overall administrative effectiveness, employed a taxpayer–centric view of the CRA to identify the main ECA Program areas that contribute, either directly or indirectly, to facilitating compliance among the target population. It summarizes the Program’s calculation of its fiscal impact (4.1), collectability of reassessed fiscal impact (4.2), and barriers and challenges associated with program delivery (4.3). For the PROTECTED of the population covered by the Program, auditors verify employers’ reporting of employment income and taxable benefits on T4 and T4A slips to ensure that the rules governing these payroll-related activities have been properly applied. If non-compliance is detected, the slips of affected taxpayers need to be corrected. The slips are first sent to a tax centre for processing, then are subsequently adjusted on the individual's T1 account which triggers the creation of a Notice of Re-assessment (NoR) sent to the taxpayer. With this step, the analysis of ECA Program “downstream impacts” begins. A central component of this process is the availability of a valid social insurance number (SIN) which enable processing staff to link slips and adjustments to the correct individual account. While this process is straightforward for employees as the employer gathers their SIN in preparing the T4 slip, employers do not capture the SIN for contract workers if they do not believe they are obligated to issue a T4A slip. As a result, the auditors, who are spending increasing audit time completing these slips on behalf of the employer, face difficulty in finding a valid SIN to be associated with the contract worker. ECA auditors stated that they typically spend at least 10% of their allocated audit hours searching for a SIN, which is a concern considering audit hours are amongst the most costly resources on the enforcement continuum. Other downstream impacts are also possible: in the event of a taxpayer objection, the audit results may be upheld or overturned by Appeals, and if necessary, the account will go to Collections to be collected. The table below summarizes the key steps:




Table 2: Areas that support the ECA Program mandate downstream



Program area
What they do
Intended impact




Process/Adjustments
Adjust T4s and T4As and re-send NoR to taxpayer
Ensure individual taxpayer receives NoR


Appeals
Receive ECA-related objections and appeals
Ensure correctness of ECA audit finding


Collections
Collect the ECA re-assessments
Outstanding amounts owing to be collected as efficiently as possible





4.1 Calculating the fiscal impact
The key performance measure of the ECA Program is fiscal impact, which the Program calculates as the sum of: 
federal taxes earned from increases to income found by the audit (approximately 80% of total fiscal impact per year);
provincial taxes earned from increases to income found by the audit (approximately 16% of total fiscal impact per year);
associated increased CPP/EI premiums (approximately 2% of total fiscal impact per year); and
resulting penalties and interests (approximately 1% of total fiscal impact per year).
 The following analysis is based exclusively on the federal tax portion of the Program’s calculated fiscal impact, as it represents the majority of results (~80%) and it avoids potential complications in analyzing different provincial tax rates which may have an effect on overall results. For the sake of clarity, references to “fiscal impact” will be replaced with “federal tax” throughout this section. T4 and T4A slips generated by ECA audits were analyzed over two time periods: slips from 1,669 audits completed in fiscal years 2010-2011 and 2011-2012 (2010-2012), and those from 360 audits completed between April and December 2015. ECA generated T-slip (i.e. T4 and T4A slips) data were analyzed to determine whether the Program’s calculation of federal tax results improved when compared to reassessed amounts. 4.1.1 The Program estimates its federal tax using assumptions that are based on optimal outcomes.  ECA auditors review employers’ books and records to verify that they have reported the correct employment income and payroll amounts. When auditors find income that was not reported, they include these amounts as “increases to income” on the appropriate T-slip (T4 for employees, T4A for self-employed contractors) and send them to be processed, thereby initiating a reassessment on the applicable T1 account. However, for purposes of program administration and monitoring, an estimate of federal tax related to the increase to income is calculated prior to reassessment of the T1 account based on the information available at that time. The following four Program-specific assumptions are used in the estimation of federal tax: 
100% of the increases to income identified on a T4 slip has not already been reported by the employee;
60% of the increases to income identified on a T4A slip has not already been reported by the self-employed contractor;
all of the T-slips generated or amended by the Program will be processed and reassessed downstream; and
all of the T-slip recipients will be subject to a federal tax rate of 29% (the marginal tax rate at the time) on the full amount of increases to income assessed.
 The results from testing each of these assumptions are summarized below. The assumption that 100% of the increases to income identified on a T4 slip have not been reported by the employee has been found to be based on an unattainable ideal. Although reassessments on employment income almost always equalled the T4 increases to income amounts, there were sometimes secondary changes that partially offset the increase. For example, when taxpayers were converted from self-employed to employed status, amounts that had been reported as self-employment income by the individual would have been converted to employment income, but would not have generated additional taxes as calculated by the Program. Therefore, increases to the federal tax were often less than the Program estimated based on the increase to employment income. For fiscal years ending in 2011 and 2012, approximately 20% of the increases to income on T4 slips were offset by credits to self-employed income on the T1 account, and so the associated expected federal tax would not have been reassessed. These findings remained when analyzing 2015 audit results. The Program’s second assumption is that 60% of the increases to income identified on a T4A slip have not been reported by a self-employed contractor. However, data analysis found that self-employed contractors consistently reported the majority of their income even without a T4A slip. As a result, in the 2010-2012 fiscal years, 13% of the total determined increases to income on T4A slip amounts were reassessed and this percentage increased to 17% in the April and December 2015 period. While these findings suggest that the Program is improving in identifying non-compliance, they also illustrate that this assumption remains an optimistic estimate. As a result of the findings from the first two assumptions, it follows that the third assumption, that all T-slips are processed and reassessed, would be unlikely. A comparison of the 2010-2012 and more recent 2015 data suggest that approximately four-fifths of the T4 slips generated by the Program resulted in reassessments. The primary reason why the remaining slips had not been reassessed was that the income found on them had already been reported by the employee, which affects the validity of the Program’s second assumption. Analysis of ECA generated T4A slips also shows that approximately one-quarter of those generated in the 2010-2012 periods was reassessed. PROTECTED However, given that reassessed T4A slips result in 17% of federal tax amounts calculated by the Program, the decision to invest auditor hours in this activity may not be the most cost-effective approach. Finally, the assumption that increases to each individual’s income would be taxed at a federal tax rate of 29% (the years’ highest tax bracket) also contributed to the Program estimating higher federal tax results than was reassessed by the Agency (see figure 3). To illustrate the point, during the 2010-2012 period, only 11.0% of taxpayers affected by ECA generated reassessments fell into the highest tax bracket, while almost 18% fell into the lowest tax bracket, resulting in a weighted average federal tax rate of 24.9% for T4 slip recipients. The weighted average federal tax rate was also lower than 29% in the more recent period, coming in at 23.3%. For T4A slip recipients, the average tax rate for the earlier period was 22.6%, increasing to 24% for T4A slip recipients more recently.




Figure 3: Average federal tax rate applied to reassessments compared to the calculated tax rate



 
2010 to 2012
April - December 2015
Calculated, all years




T4 Slip
24.9%
23.3%
29%


T4A Slip
22.6%
24.0%
29%





The result of these findings is that the total federal tax reassessed for the populations covered in this study was lower than the amounts determined by the Program using its existing assumptions. On balance, this finding may result from procedures both internal and external to the Program. By estimating its federal tax results based on assumptions rather than waiting for the reassessment process to be completed, the Program is not verifying that the information slips and reassessments were actually processed, nor is it examining the assessing information on the impacted T1 accounts. Looking downstream, the findings could also be related to procedural differences between ECA and other Agency programs. PROTECTED Notwithstanding the above findings with respect to the Program’s estimation of federal tax, revenue to the Government of Canada is calculated based on actual assessments of tax returns thereby ensuring accurate accounting of these amounts. 4.1.2 Summary and recommendation The amount of federal tax reassessed for the populations covered by this study was found to be lower than what was estimated by the Program using its existing assumptions. Analysis of reassessed T-slips found that: 
At least 20% of increases to income identified by the audits on T-slips were found to have already been reported by the employee on their personal tax returns, even without a T-slip.
Only 13% of the identified increases to income from T4A slips were unreported by the self-employed worker, rather than the 60% assumed by the Program.
Not all T-slips generated by the Program were reassessed. PROTECTED
Using a tax rate of 29% when calculating federal tax results does not reflect the income tax rate paid by all individuals affected by the Program.
 It was also found that: 
The current enforcement strategy of T4A slip compliance is not cost effective.
PROTECTED
 The above findings resulted in the following recommendations: ECA Program adopts more cost effective methods to enforce T4A slip reporting compliance PROTECTED Management response We concur with this recommendation. Over the course of time, box 048 T4A fees for services has become a larger part of the ECA Program and there is the opportunity to increase the focus of the program on employer obligations to report employment income accurately.   Over the coming planning periods the Program will seek to focus the interventions of ECA on the correct reporting of taxable benefits and the proper characterization of workers. For the fiscal year 2017-2018, the Program will ensure that the identification of workload and file selection process decreases the Program focus on box 048 T4A, fees for services by adjusting screening criteria and risk assessment.   In 2015, the Program permitted 60% of the value of any box 48 T4A fees for services to be included in program results. This discount rate will be monitored over time and adjusted as needed. The Program will also use interactions with the regional work planning teams and field managers to monitor the presence of box 048 T4A in overall program results. While this approach will not completely remove Box 048 T4A from the program, it should significantly reduce the percentage of program effort dedicated to T4A. Required adjustments will also be made to program expectations to reflect the renewed program intervention. As mentioned in the response to recommendation 3, the Program will clarify and communicate box 048 T4A requirements to businesses based on a number of inputs including external consultations. Building on the program’s successful track record for outreach, the most appropriate channels to promote compliance with reporting fees for services will be utilized. Results from the consultations are not expected before fiscal year 2018-2019. Once the consultations are completed, additional compliance activities will be undertaken to promote T4A reporting such as letter campaign pilot. PROTECTED Timelines 
Reduction in value of T4A attributed to program results to 50%. 
Emphasis in the 2017-2018 program planning guidelines with respect to the screening of files with a renewed focus on the reporting of taxable benefits and proper characterization of workers.
Monitor the work in progress to ensure a reduction in at least 10% of T4A files that are screened, based on previous year program results.
Communicate with the Regions through the 2017-2018 Planning Guidelines and the Regional Program Advisor conference calls starting in Q4 2016-2017.  
 ECA Program works with internal stakeholders to adopt assumptions that better reflect amounts that are being reassessed. Management response We concur with this recommendation. The ECA Program will work with internal stakeholders to adopt assumptions used to calculate fiscal impact so that it better reflects amounts that are reassessed. Additionally, we will be working with internal stakeholders to determine the availability of data to identify assumptions that better reflect the net fiscal amounts of the program. This work will include the impact of Appeals decisions on the program results. Once the availability of the data to improve the Program’s assumptions has been confirmed, we will revise the calculation of program results accordingly. Detailed business requirements for the needed data elements and custom reports will be provided to the Technology and Business Intelligence Directorate in CVB. Timelines 
Analysis of availability of data to identify assumptions that better reflect amounts that are reassessed – Q1 2017-2018.
Implement a new reporting methodology, subject to the availability of the data elements– Q1 2018-2019. This deliverable may be subject to Information Technology Branch or Shared Services Canada availability, if additional system requirements are needed and coding is required. 



4.2 Collectability of fiscal impact resulting from ECA generated reassessments
4.2.1 Reversals are another factor effecting reassessed ECA results. The CRA provides taxpayers with the opportunity to file a formal Notice of Objection and appeal assessments which they disagree with, or when they think the law has been incorrectly applied. According to Appeals branch representatives, the objections workload resulting from the ECA Program is summarized for 2014-2015 below: 
Approximately 3,400 objections to ECA related reassessments were submitted representing Appeals’ 4.4% of total intake of objections for the fiscal year.
67% of the ECA objections that were disposed were allowed in full or in part in the favour of the taxpayer.
 These concerns have persisted. In the five year period between 2011 and 2016: 
Over 9,700 objections were processed, 83% of which were allowed in full or in part.
The total tax involved in the ECA Program triggered objections was $55 million. Out of this total, 64% has been reversed.
 These findings are likely a result of the systemic difference in level of analysis between the two programs. Recall that the ECA Program typically audits PROTECTED employers per year, but that these audits can impact the taxes of thousands of individual employees. It should be noted that while the Appeals data tracks the number of T1 objections resulting from the ECA Program, it does not currently link those objections to specific cases. This means that it remains unknown whether the 3,400 objections came from one or multiple audited employers. An attempt to do this was made for objections resulting from ECA audits conducted between April and December 2015. As of the end of September 2016 there was $5.6 million in disputed reassessments filed by 388 individual taxpayers affected by an ECA audit. Once these individuals were linked back to their employers, it was found that the disputed amounts were generated by PROTECTED of the audit cases completed during the period. It should be noted that this provides only a partial picture of the downstream impact on Appeals, as objections can take time to process. This one-to-many aspect of ECA audits may also partially explain why the ECA Program and Appeals differ on the breadth of information required to complete their respective work. Recall that ECA auditors are mandated to gather information from employers as it is the employer’s responsibility to have records supporting the taxable benefit amounts provided to their employees. Meanwhile, the Appeals Branch deals directly with, and typically requires audit information from, every taxpayer in order to respond to each individual. The different point of interaction between the two programs has two main consequences: 
The likelihood of an auditor relying on a sample of employee files increases with the number of employees in an organization. While Appeals also does quantum negotiations (i.e. apply a decision to a group based on review of a sample) for high volumes of like-cases, only 7% of disposals of objections to ECA related adjustments were quantum negotiated in the 2014-2015 fiscal year.
Appeals may receive information from employees that was not made available to the ECA auditor at the time of the audit. ECA auditors noted examples where employers were not able to provide logbooks, which are supposed to be kept by employees to track the private and business uses of a motor vehicle for the purposes of calculating auto-standby charges, only to have the employees provide the logbooks to Appeals after the audit adjustments were processed. Since the evidence is produced for the objection, procedure requires the Appeals Branch to consider it in its review of the case, and in these cases it often ends in a partial or full reversal of the reassessment from audit.
 It is systemic differences such as these that tend to explain the reversals of ECA generated reassessments by the Appeals program. To address these findings, both ECA and Appeals HQ are working on implementing a feedback loop initiative which would provide more detail and qualitative information on the facts of cases (i.e. type of disposal, variance, etc.). While this appears to be a positive step, these findings point to systemic differences between the two programs that, at the time of writing, are not yet addressed. The following table represents the amount of federal tax reversed after reassessments in the 2010-2012 and April-December 2015 periods. As noted in Table 3, in the 2010-2012 period, 30% of federal tax from reassessments was reversed by Appeals. The amounts recorded for the more recent years is based on disputed tax compared to the federal tax calculated by the Program rather than what was reassessed, as there had not been sufficient time for the processes to conclude at the time of writing.




Table 3: Amount of federal tax that was reversed after reassessments in 2010-2011 and 2011-2012



Year
Reversals to federal tax reassessed
% of federal tax reassessed




2010-2011
$9.7 million
30%


2011-2012
$7.5 million
30%


April – December 2015
$5.8 million
14%





4.2.2 A review of their collections status at the time of payment reveals that the Agency efficiently collects most of processed ECA reassessments. The impact of increased taxes owing on an account depends on the status of the account at the time the assessment is made. If the account is already under Tax Service Office (TSO) control, the debt will be added to the amount to be worked under the inventory to which the account belongs. If there is no existing debt, or if the existing debt is under automated control, the entire debt will be evaluated and placed in a collections strategy based on the score given to the taxpayer under one or more “risk” models. If payment or a Notice of Objection is not received within an established period following the Notice of Assessment (NOA), accounts that have small balances or are perceived to be low-risk will generally receive a letter as the first collections step. Medium-risk accounts will proceed directly to the Debt Management Call Centre (DMCC), while high-risk accounts will receive a legal warning letter prior to proceeding directly to a TSO inventory. Although many taxpayers were reassessed for multiple tax years, only one collection action at a time would be taken in light of their total debt. Most transactions, including two-thirds of all payments, took place during a period where no collection action was in effect. The remaining third of payments is owed by only 16% of the taxpayers affected by the ECA assessments. After taking into account additional reassessments from other CRA programs on these same taxpayers, it was found that 70% of total debits were paid off by employees impacted by an employer compliance audit. 4.2.3 Summary and recommendation 
The one-to-many structure of the ECA Program is unaligned with the individual level of analysis conducted by the Appeals Branch’s officers. One of the main reasons for the reversals of ECA results is the different level of analysis between the areas: ECA captures records from employers, Appeals from employees.
Affected taxpayers (employers, employees, and contractors) pay the majority of amounts owing with relatively little challenge.
 The above findings resulted in the following recommendation: The ECA Program and Appeals Branch mitigate the factors that contribute to the undesired impacts on ECA program outcomes and monitor the impact of these efforts. Management response We concur with this recommendation. As outlined in the report, the ECA Program is unique given the one to many implications. The employer is the account under audit and the findings may touch the employer, but more importantly there is an impact on the individual employees or workers. The feedback loop will continue to explore ways within the model to alleviate those issues while respecting the mandate of each program. Consultation between the Appeals Branch and the ECA Program will continue to review what procedural changes could be made within the program to compel the employers to provide the requisite backup documentation during the audit stage. This would include making it incumbent on the employer to go back to the individual employees for the required documentation. The ECA Program will also provide guidance to the field staff on how best to document such requests in the audit file. Through the Appeals Feedback Loop, the Program will continue to take action to improve the relationship with the appeals function. The feedback loop provides the program with results of objections, leveraging group codes if and when appropriate to do so. This ensures that like files are grouped together for a consistent approach. We will also continue to liaise with respect to the reasons for changes to assessments through quarterly standardized reports and regular discussions. The goal is to provide the program with the basis for the decisions made by Appeals to help identify issues or trends to be addressed, through a change in policy or procedures or through training to improve audit techniques and practices as well as rules of evidence to uphold audit assessments.   Action plans as a result of discussions between Appeals and ECA will be developed outlining proposed course of action and timelines. File specific post mortems have been instituted on certain files to highlight the uniqueness of the ECA Program, but also to give the program an opportunity to review certain assessing positions taken. This allows the program to revisit certain policies and procedures. Processes are being developed to deal with group files in the most efficient way, including advance notice from the program to Appeals regarding large group reassessments and the use of project codes to ensure consistent treatment of cases. All of this will provide better service to Canadians. The Program has also seconded a staff member from the Employer Compliance Section to Appeals Branch as part of its efforts to strengthen the relationship. Timelines 
Implement the Feedback loop – Q4 2016-2017.
Allocate a specific code for large employees assessments as a result of an employer audit – fiscal 2017-2018.
Review files specific that were reversed – fiscal 2017-2018.
Share the inventory list, files in progress and completed – starting in fiscal 2017-2018.
Share files reassessed and number of employees affected – starting in fiscal 2017-2018.



4.3 Challenges and barriers related to program delivery
The ECA Program faces other external (4.3.1) and internal challenges (4.3.2) that impact the Agency’s effectiveness and efficiency in enforcing employer payroll compliance. 4.3.1 External challenges Non-compliance can occur for a variety of reasons, some of which may be deliberate. While some ECA auditors indicated that the majority of detected non-compliance was a result of misinformation/ misunderstanding of the tax law, including employers disagreeing with what the Agency deemed as “reasonable”, many believed that some employers would wilfully not comply so that their businesses remain competitive. Findings from the consultation with payroll practitioners corroborated these comments as participants cited “organizational culture” (25%) and “boss/senior management” (18%) as among the key factors hindering their ability to report taxable benefits accurately or to properly characterize a worker. Combined, one-third (34%) of the payroll practitioners selected one of these options or both. Demographic analysis revealed that these representatives were disproportionately: 
from public administration, utilities, arts, entertainment and recreation and education services industry sectors;  
employed in larger organizations (33%) compared with those from smaller organizations (fewer than 20 employees) (20%);  and,
likely to report to a payroll supervisor/manager (62%), followed by either a VP Accounting/ Finance (38%). The founder/principal of the company and/or the CEO received the lowest percentage (22%).
 4.3.2 Internal challenges and barriers The internal challenges faced by the ECA Program have been classified in two ways: 
challenges in the communication and support between HQ and the field; and
resources provided for the program.
 4.3.2.1 On balance, the Program renewal addressed some concerns previously faced by the Program, but gaps in support still exist/remain. Prior to 2012, ECA auditors were dispersed across TSOs where they reported to team leaders (TLs) who were accountable for multiple program areas. Considering the relatively smaller size of the ECA Program compared to other programs, TLs under this structure did not develop the specialized expertise required to support their ECA program staff and as a result there was a lack of consistency in program delivery across regional offices. Between 2012 and 2014 the Program went through a renewal which centralized regional management and staff with the aim of: 
providing consistency in file quality;
providing consistency in performance management; and
enhancing communications and developing a sense of community among ECA auditors.
 Those in both HQ and the regions indicated improvements in the program. Specifically, it was recognized that renewal allowed for dedicated TLs to develop program specific expertise which enable them to better support their staff. Having dedicated TLs also made it easier for HQ to identify what people are working on and to provide a consistent national approach. The result is the creation of the National Strategic Objectives (NSOs) which requires regions to plan 30% of their audit inventory over a three-year period on criteria specified by HQ. The purpose of the NSO was to create some degree of consistency in file selection across all regions. It has succeeded in focusing regional efforts on common sectors or risk indicators and encouraged the ECA Program to diversify its coverage beyond the industries they traditionally focused on, thereby decreasing the risk of non-compliance among the non-targeted industries. The renewal also succeeded in improving consistency in performance management across the regions. HQ provides the field with monthly reports on the progress and budget utilization in each of the regions, which allows regions to compare their progress and adapt their regional work plans accordingly. Although the renewal was supposed to provide improved file quality across all regions, data from the Quality Assurance Section (QAS), reveal that the renewal has, at the time of the writing of the report, had limited, if any, improvement of file quality across the regions. While the Program has largely centralized its audit function within the regions, it has not done so in HQ. It is noteworthy that different officials are accountable for the communications, technical inquiries and training functions in support of the ECA Program, areas where the following challenges emerged across all regions:  
Challenges remain with respect to enhancing communications and developing a sense of community.  HQ now communicates directly with dedicated team leaders on a monthly and ad hoc basis to inform them about changes to the ECA Program. However, HQ messages do not appear to be as well understood by auditors as they were intended. PROTECTED Furthermore, ECA staff in the field felt they were not fully consulted with respect to the development of NSOs. This poses concerns for the auditors who felt that the NSOs acted as barriers to their ability to reach their goals. HQ continues to consult regional management teams on NSO development, and believe that they do not pose a significant difficulty to the regions’ meeting their targets given they work out to be just 10% of results per year (30% spread out over three years). Another concern emerged with respect to the sense of community amongst ECA auditors. While those physically in the same office as their team leaders did not raise it, those in remote offices stated that at times they felt isolated. It was also found that region-to-region communication is limited, with few instances of collaboration or sharing of best practices between team leaders. This gap in regional coordination has left some inconsistencies in program procedures, particularly in the way issuance of T4A slips is understood and handled.  
Responsiveness to technical inquiries. HQ also provides field support on technical advice and clarification of issues identified in the field. A national electronic mailbox has been established to respond to regional inquiries. However, HQ indicated that it is infrequently used and regional officials corroborated that they seldom used it, citing concerns around the timeliness of the information provided. It was also noted that there is no mechanism for auditors to receive feedback on or track the status of their requests to this mailbox. The current process requires ECA auditors to contact their team leaders who, in the event that they cannot provide a response to the enquiry, are responsible for escalating the enquiry to HQ through a specified mailbox. HQ then informs the necessary areas (e.g. ITRD in the LPRAB), which have service standards typically ranging from 60 to 90 days. For example, auditors noted concern with the 60 day turnaround time to get rulings on the proper characterization of workers. The concern in the field stems from the risk of losing out on adjustments as a result of statute barred dates. In response CVB and CPP/EI Rulings have agreed on faster processing times (31 days) in cases where there are extenuating circumstances including approaching statute barred dates. HQ’s response time is further impacted by the level of complexity of the enquiries and the ambiguity of some of the rules and policies. Taken together, representatives from each region indicated that they tend to rely on the advice of colleagues, initiating contact with HQ only when necessary. Finally, most regions suggested that implementing regional technical advisors as part of the Program would be beneficial.  
ECA auditors require more timely training. While interviewed auditors noted that they receive relevant training, concern was raised with respect to its timeliness. Regions are accountable for the delivery of in-class training, which tends to be provided when the number of new hires reaches a critical mass, and a trainer is available. Online support was viewed as lacking in some key areas. PROTECTED A review of the data identified a need for further training on how to properly key results and follow audit procedure.
 4.3.2.2 Summary and recommendation The following factors were identified as challenges to ECA Program delivery: 
Timeliness of training for new employees;
Communications between HQ and field, and cross-region communication; and
Timely responses to technical and legislative enquiries, which may result in the premature closure of an audit nearing its statute bar dates.
 The above findings resulted in the following recommendation: ECA Program addresses the timeliness and coordination of its support, training, and communication functions in order to improve consistency and responsiveness to the field. Management response We concur with this recommendation. The support provided to field operations is an important contributor to the success of the employer compliance audit program. The function is currently well positioned to provide the needed support through the PLRS that responds to technical questions and a newly formed, dedicated, field support team that is part of the Business Compliance Directorate.  Where necessary, these Headquarters teams are able to seek the support of the CRA ruling functions and the advice of Justice Canada when issues are beyond their expertise. HQ seeks to keep these teams staffed to the level necessary to provide the support the field needs, recognizing the knowledge needed on the part of the section is quite specialized.    At the time of the program evaluation, employer compliance audit and trust accounts examination were consolidated and reporting to one manager in HQ. After the reorganization and realignment in April 2016, employer compliance audit has a dedicated HQ manager with a field support team that is well positioned to provide the requisite support, communication and responsiveness to field enquiries.  Communication with the field is undertaken through regular calls with the regional programs advisors, semi-annual Operations Committee Meetings held in Ottawa, ad hoc meetings with program staff as well as the presence of headquarters staff and management in the regions. Improvements to communications are always a priority to the program and options to increase the availability of information on the status of requests from the field will be examined.  While the development of training products is the responsibility of the program, the provision of training is a regional responsibility for which they are resourced. Timelines: 
Institute a process for monitoring queries received from the field – Q4 2016-2017.
Inform field staff of the status of their enquiries; such as reasons for delays, escalation to PLRS or LPRAB by Q4 2016-2017.
Collaborate with CVB learning services section to ensure requisite ECA training products (taxable benefit training product is currently under technical review as well as a team leader training product) are updated and released to field staff – Q2 2017-2018. 
Monitor, through the use of quarterly reports, the timeliness of responses to the field – Q1 2017-2018. 



Acknowledgement
We would first like to thank all our CRA colleagues that we interviewed, and in particular the ECA field and HQ staff, who from coast to coast spoke to us about the Program they are so passionate about. We would also like to thank the management team of the Canadian Payroll Association for their professionalism and insights as well as its 1,597 members who took the time to thoughtfully complete our survey. We also want to recognize the support we received from Public Affairs Branch in obtaining approvals and managing the survey contract in a responsive fashion. Finally, we are indebted to the data analysis team whose knowledge, energy, and patience provided us with extraordinary value from start to finish.  


Appendices


Appendix 1: Glossary of terms




Glossary of terms



Term
Definition




ABSB
Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch


AIMS
Audit Information Management System


BECC
Business Enquiries Call Centre


CPA
Canadian Payroll Association


CPP
Canada Pension Plan


CRA
Canada Revenue Agency


CVB
Collections and Verifications Branch


DCPB
Domestic Compliance Programs Branch


DMCC
Debt Management Call Centre


ECA
Employer Compliance Audit


EI
Employment Insurance


EIA
Employment Insurance Act


ETA
Excise Tax Act


Fiscal Impact
Calculated results of the ECA Program including recoveries from federal and provincial taxes, penalties and interest, increases to CPP/EI and associated penalties and interest. Based on assumptions unique to the Program.


FTE
Full-time equivalents


HQ
Headquarters


ITRD
Income Tax Rulings Directorate


ITA
Income Tax Act


LPRAB
Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs Branch


NOA
Notice of Assessment


NOR
Notice of Re-assessment


NSO
National Strategic Objectives


PLRS
Policy and Legislative Research Section


QAS
Quality Assurance Section


RC4157
Deducting Income Tax on Pension and Other Income, and Filing the T4A Slip and Summary


SIN
Social Insurance Number


SIS
Specialty Information Section


SRIMS
Stakeholder Relations, Issues Management and Services


T1
Individual Income Tax


T4 Slip
Statement of Remuneration Paid


T4A Slip
Statement of Pension, Retirement, Annuity, and Other Income to contract workers


TC
Tax Centre


TL
Team Leaders


TSO
Tax Services Office





Appendix 2 - Example of a Statement of Remuneration Paid (T4 slip)








Image description

A T4 slip with the title “Statement of Remuneration Paid” showing all blank fields, such as Employer’s name, employee’s name and address, Year, and box numbers from 14 to 56. You have to fill out a T4 slip to report employment income, taxable benefits or allowances, and deductions withheld during the year (i.e. CPP/QPP contributions, EI premiums).




Appendix 3 - Example of a Statement of Pension, Retirement, Annuity, and Other Income (T4A Slip)








Image description

A T4A slip with the title “Statement of Pension, Retirement, Annuity, and Other Income” showing all blank fields, such as Payer’s name, Recipient’s name and address, Year, and box numbers from 12 to 61. You have to fill out a T4A slip to report self-employed commissions and fees or other amounts for services.





Footnotes

Footnote 1

In the context of the T4A and ‘contract for services’ discussion, “employers” become defined as “payers” for the purposes of the Income tax Act (ITA). However, to maintain the focus on the target population, this report continues to refer to them as employers.

Return to footnote1 Referrer









Report a problem or mistake on this page












Please select all that apply:

A link, button or video is not working



It has a spelling mistake



Information is missing



Information is outdated or wrong



Login error when trying to access an account




I can't find what I'm looking for



Other issue not in this list



Submit



Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries, contact us.










Date modified:
2017-01-27





Evaluation study – Electronic services – Individual compliance behaviour – Tax return filing


Final Report
Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch
November 2017


Table of contents

Executive summary
Introduction
Background
Functional Authority
Evaluation methodologies and approach
Study limitations and constraints
Findings

Electronic tax return processing volumes have increased significantly since 2005
Electronic tax return filing is the most frequently used method for individuals to meet their tax filing obligations
Certain groups profiled showed a lower take-up rate of electronic tax return filing and higher use of registered tax preparers
Compliance validation activities have increased and adjusted to the shift in electronic tax return filing
Organizational structures, work processes and systems have been aligned with advancements in electronic tax return filing


Conclusion
Acknowledgement
Appendices

Appendix A: Logic model
Appendix B: Reasons to file a tax return
Appendix C: Restrictions and exclusions
Appendix D: Profile analysis - methodology and data results by province and territory
Appendix E: Glossary





Executive summary
The Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) promotes and enhances its electronic services as a key component of its commitment to excellence in service delivery. Achieving this goal means keeping pace with the trends that are shaping our environment and transforming the tax administration to align with advancements in electronic services.
The CRA has supplemented the traditional method of paper tax return filing with several paperless electronic options. This provides taxpayers with the ability to use third party software to prepare and file their own tax return using NETFILE or to have their tax return prepared and filed by a registered tax preparer using EFILE. The shift from paper to electronic tax return filing has required the CRA to anticipate, plan, and adjust to the changing nature of the way that Canadians choose to file their tax returns while ensuring that information is protected and used for the purpose for which it was intended.
In June 2016, the Management Audit and Evaluation Committee of the CRA approved the evaluation framework for the Electronic Services – Individual Compliance Behaviour – Tax Return Evaluation Study. The Department of Finance Canada develops and evaluates federal tax policies and legislation, while the CRA is the agency responsible for the administration of tax laws, including the Income Tax Act (ITA) of Canada. As such, the scope of this evaluation was limited to CRA's administration of the provisions of the ITA.
The central focus of this study was to provide CRA senior management with information on the growth and characteristics of T1 individual income tax returns (tax return); and the current state of CRA's tax administration in relation to the shift to electronic tax return filing.
The CRA's administration of tax return filing and compliance validation activities spans multiple programs. The Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch (ABSB) is responsible for receiving and processing both paper and electronic tax returns and issuing a Notice of Assessment (NoA) or Notice of Reassessment (NoR) to the taxpayer advising them of their tax situation. They are also responsible for the registration and monitoring of tax preparers, and providing service and support to tax preparers, software developers, and taxpayers. The Collections and Verification Branch (CVB) is responsible for the validation of information presented in the tax returns, both before and after a NoA or a NoR has been issued. Through the delivery of a national compliance validation program, CVB validates tax returns and benefit entitlements, and promotes compliance with Canada's tax laws for filing, declaring, withholding, registering, and remitting. These activities support CRA's compliance efforts to ensure that individuals meet their tax obligations in fairness to all Canadians.
This evaluation study has confirmed a major shift from paper to electronic tax return filing occurred from 2005 to 2014 with individuals most frequently using registered tax preparers. The number of electronic tax returns processed has increased by 86% from 11.9 million in 2005 to 22.1 million in 2014. During this same period the number of individuals who filed using a registered tax preparer increased by 91% from 7.8 million in 2005 to 14.9 million in 2014. For compliance activities, there has been an increased emphasis on early compliance validation interventions since fiscal year 2005 to 2006 due to the business intelligence gathered in consideration of taxpayer behaviour. In fiscal year 2005 to 2006, $689 million in additional taxes were assessed in the Confidence Validity, Processing Review and T1 matching programs compared to $1.3 billion assessed in fiscal year 2014 to 2015. This represents a 100% increase in total dollars assessed.
For the most part, no administrative constraints, within the CRA's control, were identified as having negatively impacted individuals from using the electronic tax return filing methods. The CRA has transformed its tax administration – organization, work processes and systems - to align with advancements in electronic tax return filing.
It was also observed that individuals consulted as part of this study, both in headquarters and the regions, are professional; resilient; able to adapt to change; and most importantly demonstrate their commitment to excellence in service delivery.
The 2014 tax return profile and compliance validation analysis are positive with no major constraints identified with the shift from paper to electronic tax return filling. However, to better understand how registered tax preparers impact CRA's tax administration and the individuals who pay for their service, an independent study could provide additional insight on the effectiveness of the EFILE tax return filing method. In addition, with the electronic systems working as intended an opportunity exists to promote electronic tax return filing for certain groups as well as to explore the transmission of data on certain tax forms and schedules to support compliance activities and interactions with Canadians. Employees are the cornerstone of CRA's administration and have strongly voiced the need to take stock of system maintenance upgrades in place as a part of the T1SR project. The goal is to mitigate unintended impacts on employees' health and wellness and to ensure a functional work environment that provides accurate and efficient service to Canadians.
Management responses have been developed for the following three recommendations:

ABSB, in consultation with CRA stakeholders, undertake a comprehensive analysis to identify ways to promote electronic tax return filing and increase take-up rate for those groups showing a slower transition from paper to electronic tax return filing.
ABSB, in consultation with CRA stakeholders, explore and assess the feasibility to have data on certain tax forms and schedules transmitted to support compliance activities and interactions with Canadians.
ABSB, in consultation with CRA stakeholders, take stock of system maintenance upgrades and address employee concerns with the T1SR project.

Introduction
In June 2016, the Management Audit and Evaluation Committee of the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) approved the evaluation framework for the Electronic Services – Individual Compliance Behaviour – Tax Return Evaluation Study. This study was included in the Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch (AERB) 2015 to 2018 Risk-Based Audit and Evaluation Plan which was approved by the Board of Management on June 9, 2015.
The Department of Finance Canada develops and evaluates federal tax policies and legislation, while the CRA is the agency responsible for the administration of tax laws, including the Income Tax Act (ITA) of Canada. As such the scope of this evaluation was limited to CRA's administration of the provisions of the ITA.
The evaluation framework identified the following three evaluation issues:
Issue 1: What is the profile and compliance behaviour of individual taxpayers who file paper and electronic tax returns?

What is the growth and profile of tax return filers?
What are the constraints, if any, which impact electronic filing?
What are the impacts of electronic filing, if any, on compliance activities?

Issue 2: To what extent has the CRA transformed its tax administration to align with advancements in electronic tax return filing for individuals?

Have the organizational structures and work processes been aligned to support advancements in electronic filing?
Have systems been aligned to support horizontal tax compliance efforts with advancements in electronic filing?

Issue 3: Are there alternatives or modifications that could enhance the CRA's administration of electronic tax return filing for individuals?

What changes, if any, could improve the CRA's administration of tax return filing?
What alternative approaches or modifications could be adopted from strategies or best practices of other tax administrations with a similar form of tax?
What strategies are in place or planned that could enhance the CRA's administration of tax return filling?

This report summarizes the findings related to these issues and research questions. Findings are to provide CRA senior management with information on the growth and characteristics of T1 individual income tax returns (tax return); and the current state of CRA's tax administration in relation to the shift to electronic tax return filing. The study also identified potential alternatives or modifications that could improve CRA's tax administration. The logic model in Appendix A illustrates the outputs and outcomes related to paper and electronic tax return filing. Appendix E provides definitions of key terms.
Background
Canada's tax system is based on self-assessment. Canada levies personal income tax on the worldwide income of individual residents of Canada and on certain types of Canadian-sourced income earned by non-residents or deemed residents. This means that individuals complete a tax return to report their annual income and claim all deductions or credits that apply to their situation in accordance with the ITA and regulations. Appendix B provides the situations when a tax return is required or when it may benefit an individual to file a tax return.
Generally, tax returns must be filed by April 30 of the year following the tax year. However, in circumstances where an individual, their spouse, or common-law partner carried on a business during the tax year, the tax return must be filed on or before June 15 if there was tax payable or if the individual is claiming a tax credit or benefit. It is important to note that any balance owing is due on or before April 30 regardless of the date the tax return was due to be filed.
The traditional method of paper tax return filing has been supplemented by several paperless electronic options. This provides taxpayers with the ability to use third party software to prepare and file their own tax return using NETFILEFootnote 1 or to have their tax return prepared and filed by a registered tax preparerFootnote 2  using EFILEFootnote 3 . However, certain exclusions for EFILE and restrictions for NETFILE prevent the use of electronic tax return filing (Appendix C).
A Community Volunteer Income Tax Program, which is a collaboration between community organizations and the CRA, also supports tax return filing for individuals who have a modest income and a simple tax situation. The CRA may also file a tax return on behalf of an individual if they were issued a formal request to file and did not do so. This supports compliance with Canada's ITA and regulations.
The CRA promotes and enhances its electronic services as a key component of its commitment to excellence in service delivery. Achieving this goal means keeping pace with the trends that are shaping our environment and transforming the administration to align with advancements in electronic services. This includes allowing Canadians to choose how they file their tax return. This shift from paper to electronic tax return filing has required the CRA to adjust systems and processes to accept and validate electronic returns while ensuring the confidentiality of taxpayer information.
Functional Authority
The filing, processing, and validation of tax returns are primarily the responsibilities of the Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch (ABSB), and the Collections and Verification Branch (CVB). All tax returns submitted to the CRA are subject to varying degrees of validation and are processed with a notification of the result in the form of a notice of assessment (NoA) or a notice of reassessment (NoR) being issued to the taxpayer.
Within the CRA, the ABSB is responsible for receiving and processing of both paper and electronic tax returns and for issuing a NoA or NoR to the taxpayer advising them of their tax situation. They are also responsible for the registration and monitoring of tax preparers, and for providing service and support to tax preparers, software developers, and taxpayers. The ABSB was previously responsible for the validation of information submitted on tax returns; however this responsibility was transferred to the CVB in fiscal year 2015 to 2016.
The CVB is responsible for the validation of information presented in the tax returns, both before and after a NoA or a NoR has been issued. Through the delivery of a national compliance validation program, CVB validates tax returns and benefit entitlements, and promotes compliance with Canada's tax laws for filing, declaring, withholding, registering, and remitting. These activities support CRA's compliance efforts to ensure that individuals meet their tax obligations in fairness to all Canadians.
Evaluation methodologies and approach

A Working Committee was formed with representatives from ABSB, CVB, the Strategy and Integration Branch (SIB) and the Public Affairs Branch (PAB). This committee supported the gathering of branch specific information and the review of preliminary findings and recommendations.
Internal interviews were conducted with CRA managers and staff. Participants were selected from ABSB, CVB, SIB, PAB, AERB, the Information Technology Branch (ITB), the Appeals Branch and regional personnel in the Atlantic, Ontario and Prairie regions.
An examination of CRA policies, procedures, business rules and systems was undertaken with responsible branches.
A series of macro analyses was undertaken on trends in the volume of paper and electronic tax returns, a profile analysis of the 2013 and 2014 tax returns, an analysis of the exclusions and restrictions to electronic filing, trends in validation activities (pre and post assessment), and estimated costs related to tax return processing and compliance validation activities.
An examination of best practices and emerging trends in electronic tax return filing from other countries – United States of America (USA), United Kingdom (UK), Australia and Denmark.

Study limitations and constraints
As this study focused on a macro analysis of CRA's administration, the CRA risk assessment and scoring processes for compliance validation activities were not reviewed as they are closely guarded to protect the integrity of Canada's tax administration. ABSB and CVB programs have also evolved from 2005 to 2014, which impacted the ability to provide a comprehensive cost analysis related to the processing and validation of tax returns. Therefore, the cost analysis in this report is intended to provide information on whether the cost to process or validate a tax return has increased or decreased, and should be considered as a baseline estimate. The costs related to operations and maintenance, capitalFootnote 4  and systems were also not included as they could not be isolated to a specific program activity.
Findings
This study has confirmed a major shift from paper to electronic tax return filing occurred from 2005 to 2014 with individuals most frequently using registered tax preparers. For the most part, no administrative constraints, within the CRA's control, were identified that inhibited individuals from using the available electronic tax return filing methods. The CRA has also transformed its tax administration – organization, work processes and systems – to align with advancements in electronic tax return filing. Compliance activities continue to be an integral part of Canada's self-assessment tax system. It was also observed that individuals consulted as part of this study, both in headquarters and the regions, are professional, resilient, able to adapt to change, and most importantly are committed to ensuring that all taxpayers meet their tax obligations and pay their fair share of tax.
The next section of the report outlines the results of the evaluation study as well as opportunities that could support CRA's tax administration and improve client service.
1. Electronic tax return processing volumes have increased significantly since 2005
Each year individual taxpayers are required to file their tax returns to report their income and deductions to the CRA. In analyzing processing statistics from the 2005 to 2014 tax return filing seasons, it was confirmed that there has been a major shift from paper to electronic tax return filing.
For the 2005 tax return filing season, 25.0 million tax returns were processedFootnote 5  compared to 28.3 million in 2014. This represents a 13% increase in the total volume of tax returns processed. (Figure 1)
Figure 1 – Trend in paper versus electronic tax returns processed – 2005 to 2014 tax return filing season




Image description
Figure 1 – Trend in paper versus electronic tax returns processed – 2005 to 2014 tax return filing season
Tax returns processed in 2005 is 13,083,855 paper returns, 11,908,238 electronic returns for a total of 24,992,093 returns processed
Tax returns processed in 2006 is 12,508,322 paper returns, 12,848,238 electronic returns for a total of 25,356,560 returns processed
Tax returns processed in 2007 is 12,045,807 paper returns, 13,452,488 electronic returns for a total of 25,498,295 returns processed
Tax returns processed in 2008 is 11,737,209 paper returns, 14,411,108 electronic returns for a total of 26,148,317 returns processed
Tax returns processed in 2009 is 10,777,830 paper returns, 15,308,948 electronic returns for a total of 26,086,778 returns processed
Tax returns processed in 2010 is 10,747,649 paper returns, 16,127,647 electronic returns for a total of 26,875,296 returns processed
Tax returns processed in 2011 is 10,167,493 paper returns, 16,873,899 electronic returns for a total of 27,041,392  returns processed
Tax returns processed in 2012 is 9,767,536 paper returns, 17,647,347 electronic returns for a total of 27,414,883 returns processed
Tax returns processed in 2013 is 7,074,741 paper returns, 20,762,373 electronic returns for a total of 27,837,114 returns processed
Tax returns processed in 2014 is 6,162,087 paper returns, 22,134,593 electronic returns for a total of 28,296,680 returns processed



Tax returns processed by the CRA can be electronically filed in several different ways. Individuals can choose free NETFILE software depending on their tax situation or can purchase third party software to prepare and file their own tax return using NETFILE. They may also choose to have their tax return prepared and filed by a registered tax preparer and pay the associated cost. In certain circumstances, individuals with modest incomes and simple tax situations can have their tax return prepared through the Community Volunteer Income Tax Program. To better understand the usage of electronic filing by individuals, a review of the electronic tax return filing methods of NETFILE and EFILE was undertaken for the 2005 and 2014 tax return filing seasons.
This analysis revealed that the number of electronic tax returns processed has increased by 86% from 11.9 million in 2005 to 22.1 million in 2014. During this same period the number of individuals who filed using NETFILEFootnote 6  increased by 76% from 4.1 million to 7.2 million, while EFILE with a registered tax preparer increased by 91% from 7.8 million to 14.9 million.
2. Electronic tax return filing is the most frequently used method for individuals to meet their tax filing obligations
To better understand whether electronic tax return filing was consistent across all provinces and territories in Canada, and to ensure that no one segment of the population had been negatively impacted by the shift to electronic filing, the 2014 tax returns were selected from the Agency Data WarehouseFootnote 7  and reviewed.
The analysis of 27.8 million tax returns filed for the 2014 tax year was undertaken recognizing that the non-resident (NR) filing population, of just over 200,000 individuals, were excluded as they must file their tax returns by paper. This analysis revealed that electronic tax return filing was the most frequently used method in all provinces and territories in Canada with a national level of 84%. (Figure 2)
Figure 2 – Percentage of 2014 tax returns filed by provinces, territories and non-residents and by filing method




Image description
Figure 2 – Percentage of 2014 tax returns filed by provinces, territories and non-residents and by filing method
Percentage of tax returns filed in Alberta in 2014 is 13.70% paper returns and 86.30% electronic returns
Percentage of tax returns filed in British Columbia in 2014 is 15.67% paper returns and 84.33% electronic returns
Percentage of tax returns filed in Manitoba in 2014 is 13.10% paper returns and 86.90% electronic returns
Percentage of tax returns filed in New Brunswick in 2014 is 16.59% paper returns and 83.41% electronic returns
Percentage of tax returns filed in Newfoundland and Labrador in 2014 is 21.44% paper returns and 78.56% electronic returns
Percentage of tax returns filed in the Northwest Territories in 2014 is 10.07% paper returns and 89.93% electronic returns
Percentage of tax returns filed in Nova Scotia in 2014 is 17.75% paper returns and 82.25% electronic returns
Percentage of tax returns filed in Nunavut in 2014 is 8.26% paper returns and 91.74% electronic returns
Percentage of tax returns filed in Ontario in 2014 is 13.45% paper returns and 86.55% electronic returns
Percentage of tax returns filed in Prince Edward Island in 2014 is 15.74% paper returns and 84.26% electronic returns
Percentage of tax returns filed in Quebec in 2014 is 19.52% paper returns and 80.48% electronic returns
Percentage of tax returns filed in Saskatchewan in 2014 is 14.79% paper returns and 85.21% electronic returns
Percentage of tax returns filed in Yukon is 12.01% paper returns and 87.99% electronic returns
Percentage of tax returns filed by Non-Residents in 2014 is 99.52% paper returns and 0.48% electronic returns
Canadian electronic filing average in 2014 is 84%



The national average of 84% for the 2014 electronic tax return filing method, is for the most part, consistent with other countries with similar non-mandatory electronic tax return filing. For exampleFootnote 8, in 2013 the USA achieved an electronic tax return filing rate of 83% and the UK 85%. Literature research also suggests that the introduction of "auto-fill my return" has increased the level of electronic tax return filing as other countries with this capability have reached beyond 90%. For example Australia achieved 93% and Denmark 98%. Canada introduced this capability for the 2015 tax year which may further support the shift to electronic tax return filing.
As Revenu Quebec administers their own provincial tax, a review was undertaken from statistics on their website to determine how they compared with the federal tax returns that are administered by the CRA. This analysis revealed that 79% of Quebec provincial tax returns were filed electronically in 2014, while 81% of the Quebec federal tax returns were filed electronically with the CRA.
The exclusions and restrictions that are in place that prevent an individual from electronically filing a tax returnFootnote 9 have also decreased considerably. In 2016, multiyear tax return filing, pre-bankruptcy, amendments, and newcomersFootnote 10 can file electronically. What this means for Canadians is that more individuals have the option to use the service and file tax returns electronically. The CRA estimatedFootnote 11  that these system modifications will allow 95% of individuals to electronically file their tax return if they choose to do so. The CRA continues to review these exclusions and restrictions to make electronic tax return filing available to more and more Canadians and will make system changes when it makes good business sense to do so.
To understand if the move to electronic tax return filing had an impact on CRA resources for processing of tax returns, a cost analysis was undertaken. This analysis was based on the direct and indirect salary costs according to CRA administrative data that were in existence in 2014 which were then tracked back to 2005. This analysis revealed that the estimated cost of processing a tax return was $1.41 in fiscal year 2005 to 2006 and has decreased to $1.00 in fiscal year 2014 to 2015 or by 29%. This baseline estimate suggests that the tax return processing costs have decreased with the shift to electronic tax return filingFootnote 12.
3. Certain groups profiled showed a lower take-up rate of electronic tax return filing and higher use of registered tax preparers
Profiling of individuals serves as a guide to better understand any variables impacting CRA's tax administration in relation to the shift from paper to electronic tax return filing. For the purposes of this study, seven groups were established and profiled based on the 2014 tax return filing population, CRA interviews and literature research.
Overall the profiled groups were consistent, for the most part, with the national 2014 tax return filing results with electronic at 84% and the use of registered tax preparers at 56%. However, certain groups profiled showed a lower take-up rate of electronic filing and higher use of registered tax preparers. The main observations by group and potential reasons for choosing to use a registered tax preparer are detailed below. Figure 3 provides a summary of the profile analysis for tax year 2014 while Appendix D provides details by province and territory.
Low income
The established Working Income Tax Benefit income values were used to define and segment the low income group from the 2014 tax returns. This program defines low net income thresholds as $37,195 for Nunavut, $20,072 for Quebec, $19,721 for British Columbia, $19,139 for Alberta, and $17,986 for the rest of Canada.
The low income group represented 10 million individuals or 36% of the 2014 tax return filing population. This group had a higher use of paper tax return filing at 22% compared to the national average of 16%; most frequently chose to file electronically at 78% and used a registered tax preparer 55% of the time.
The analysis of the low income group by province and territory revealed that the highest rates for filing a tax return using registered tax preparers were Nunavut (81%) and the Northwest Territories (74%). This may be due to the fact that the northern residence deductions may require more expertise to ensure that the claim is entered correctly which may be preferable to the taxpayer.

Geographic area - Rural and Urban
For the rural and urban group, the postal code, as assigned by Canada PostFootnote 13, was used to define and segment these two groups from the 2014 tax returns.
The rural group represented 4.6 million individualsFootnote 14  or 16% of the 2014 tax return filing population, while the urban group represented 22.4 million individuals or 81%. Both the rural and urban groups most frequently chose to file electronically at 85% and 84% respectively. They also used a registered tax preparer at 62% and 55% respectively.
It is recognized that the availability of broadband internet access, of which the CRA has no control over, has an impact for some Canadians. The Canadian Radio, Television and Telecommunication Commission (CRTC) reportedFootnote 15 that 2 million Canadian households or 18% do not have broadband internet access. The CRTC aims to improve availability of broadband internet access by 8% by 2021 which may further support an increase in electronic tax return filing.

Persons with disabilities
The persons with disabilities group was created by selecting individuals who received a Disability Tax Credit (DTC) on their 2014 tax return.
Persons with disabilities represented 1.1 million individuals or 4% of the 2014 tax filing population. This group most frequently chose to file electronically at 81% and used a registered tax preparer 62% of the time. This may be a result of limitations with a particular disability, the complexity of the DTC, associated medical expense claims, or their need to have the tax return completed by someone having more familiarity with this type of deduction.

Youth and seniors
Youth were defined as those who had filed a 2014 tax return and who were under the age of 20 while seniors were defined as 65 years or older.
Youth represented 1.1 million individuals or 4% and seniors represented 5.8 million or 21% of the 2014 tax return filing population. Both the youth and seniors have a higher use of paper tax return filing at 21% and 22% respectively compared to the national paper tax return filing average of 16%. Youth and seniors most frequently chose to file electronically at 79% and 78%, and also used a registered tax preparer at 56% and 58% respectively.
Reasons for the use of paper tax return filing by seniorsFootnote 16  may be due to computer literacy, access to the internet, or from years of completing paper returns to meet their tax obligations. For the youths it may be because a family member, potentially a senior, are completing their tax return for them, they may not have a permanent address, or if they were filing for the first time and not in the T1 master database they would have to file by paper.

Self-Employed
The self-employed group was created by using the major source of income as reported on the 2014 tax return.
The self-employed group represented 6.6 million individuals or 24% of the 2014 tax return filing population. This group most frequently chose to file electronically at 87% and used a registered tax preparer 68% of the time, the highest of the groups profiled. Within the self-employed group, the analysis also noted that 30% of the individuals who claimed gross rental income over $125,000 filed using paper. This could be the result of the fact that for electronic tax return filing they are only permitted to file a maximum of six (6) T776 - Statement of real-estate rental forms. This population was relatively low with 47,188 tax returns, and modifications to system capability to increase the number of individuals that can electronically file, are regularly reviewed and updated when it makes good business sense to do so.

Newcomers to Canada
For income tax purposes, an immigrant is considered a newcomer to Canada only for the first year that they are a new resident of Canada. The newcomer group was created from data reported on the tax returns in 2013 and the same group was tracked in 2014 to assess any change to their tax return filing behaviour.
The newcomer group represented 217,262 individuals or 0.8% of the 2014 tax filing population. This analysis revealed that 49% of newcomers electronically filed their tax return for their first tax year (2013)Footnote 17, while in their second tax year (2014) this figure rose to 82%, and they used a registered tax preparer 61% of the time. This in part may be due to the fact that they are not familiar with the Canadian tax system or available filing methods, and require assistance to accurately report their income to meet their tax obligations as well as receive all the benefits and credits that they are entitled to.

Gender
The gender group was identified by the gender field in the T1 master database of the 2014 tax return filing population.
This analysis revealed almost a 50-50 split between women and men in the 2014 tax filing population. Within this group, both genders most frequently chose to file electronically at 84% and used a registered tax preparer 56% of the time. This analysis therefore revealed that gender has no impact on the tax return filing method.

The results for the profile analysis suggest that no major variables exist for the groups profiled with the shift from paper to electronic tax return filing however rural, persons with disability, seniors, self-employed and newcomers to Canada (in their second year of filing), had a higher use of a registered tax preparer compared to the national total of 56%. CRA interviews revealed that the choice by all groups to use registered tax preparers may point to a lack of expertise or familiarity with the increasing complexity of the ITA, and an individual's desire to ensure they accurately report their income to obtain all deductions and credits to which they are entitled. The ITA and corresponding legislation is developed by the Department of Finance while the CRA is responsible for the administration of the ITA. The CRA recognizes that the ITA is complex and supports individuals in meeting their income tax return filing obligations by providing:

telephone and written enquiry services;
tax guides, forms and publications; and
Community Volunteer Income Tax Program, outreach and other public communications.

Figure 3 – Summary of the profile analysis for tax year 2014





Groups
Population
Paper
Electronic - Total
Electronic - NETFILE
Electronic - EFILE
Low Income
10,042,303
22%
78%
23%
55%
Rural
4,567,697
15%
85%
23%
62%
Urban
22,382,169
16%
84%
29%
55%
Invalid or missing postal code
885,725
36%
64%
12%
52%
Persons with Disability
1,111,064
19%
81%
19%
62%
Youth
1,120,329
21%
79%
23%
56%
Seniors
5,774,836
22%
78%
20%
58%
Self-Employed
6,592,861
13%
87%
19%
68%
Newcomers to Canada 2013
235,434
51%
49%
7%
42%
Same newcomers to Canada in 2014
217,262
18%
82%
21%
61%
Female
14,235,942
16%
84%
28%
56%
Male
13,511,285
16%
84%
28%
56%
Null and Blank
88,364
91%
9%
2%
7%
National Total
27,835,591
16%
84%
28%
56%



Source: 2014 Tax Returns
An opportunity exists to increase the take-up rate of the electronic tax return filing within certain groups from the profile analysis who show a slower transition from paper to electronic tax return filing. In particular, low income, persons with disabilities, youth and seniors all file paper tax returns at a higher rate than the national total of 16%. It is recognized that ABSB is undertaking initiatives to improve the take-up rate of electronic tax return filing; however a comprehensive analysis to identify ways to promote electronic tax return filing and increase take-up rate for these three groups may improve service to Canadians and help to close the gap between the number of people who can electronically file their tax return and those who choose to do so.
4. Compliance validation activities have increased and adjusted to the shift in electronic tax return filing
Given that the Canadian tax system functions on the basis of self-assessment, the CRA is obliged to review a number of tax returns each year to ensure that taxpayers are entitled to the claims which they have made, and that the amounts have been correctly calculated. These reviews are an important part of CRA's compliance activities to maintain the integrity of and Canadians' confidence in Canada's tax system.
Some tax returns are chosen for review at random, but the majority are selected based on a sophisticated scoring system. This scoring system is designed to incorporate multiple factors to identify those tax returns that carry the highest potential for inaccuracy of certain claims. The CRA neither targets nor excludes any specific category of people or filing method when reviewing tax returns. It treats all Canadians equally by using fair and non-discriminatory criteria in selecting tax returns for review.
Compliance activities serve to validate taxpayer information, at the earliest possible moment and at the lowest possible cost, which supports the assessment and collection of tax in Canada's self-assessment tax system. For issues of non-compliance, the CRA works with individuals to ensure they understand their tax obligations, educate them to accurately file their tax returns by correcting errors, and also identify and take enforcement measures, where necessary, for individuals who choose to avoid the full extent of their tax obligations.
Since 2005 the CRA has had to anticipate, plan, and adjust to the changing nature of the way that Canadians choose to file their tax returns while ensuring that information is protected and used for the purpose for which it was intended.
This section of the report outlines the major compliance activities of the pre and post validation programs related to Confidence Validity (CV), Processing Review (PR), and T1 Matching.
To determine if electronic tax return filing had an impact on compliance validation activities, a trend analysis of the overall CV and PR compliance activitiesFootnote 18  by filing method for fiscal year 2010 to 2011 to fiscal year 2014 to 2015 was undertaken.
The CV program (pre-assessment) selects tax returns for review that have higher risk claims while the remainder are ranked for possible selection by the PR program (post-assessment). This analysis revealed that the PR and CV programs have, for the most part, aligned with the shift from paper to electronic tax return filing. It was noted that the CV activities were not at a level of the PR program; however it is moving in that direction. This may be due in part to the nature of the tax returns selected by CV, and differences in the type of non-compliance identified. This has been recognized by CVB as an area to be addressed as part of their fiscal year 2016 to 2017 planning guidelinesFootnote 19 . (Figure 4)
Figure 4 – Percentage of tax returns processed in relation to compliance verification activity and by filing method – fiscal year 2010 to 2011 to fiscal year 2014 to 2015



Fiscal Year
T1Returns Processed (DAS) - Paper
T1 Returns Processed (DAS) - Electronic
CV - Paper
CV - Electronic
PR - Paper
PR - Electronic
2010 to 2011
40%
60%
56%
44%
28%
72%
2011 to 2012
38%
62%
54%
46%
31%
69%
2012 to 2013
36%
64%
53%
47%
27%
73%
2013 to 2014
25%
75%
40%
60%
19%
81%
2014 to 2015
22%
78%
36%
64%
16%
84%



Source: CVB internal program data
CRA interviews revealed that there has been an increased emphasis on early compliance interventions since fiscal year 2005 to 2006 due to the business intelligence gathered with respect to taxpayer behaviour.
In fiscal year 2005 to 2006, $689 million in additional taxes were assessed in the CV, PR and T1 matching programs compared to $1.3 billion assessed in fiscal year 2014 to 2015. This represents a 100% increase in total dollars assessed through early compliance interventions. (Figure 5)
Figure 5 – Compliance results – CV, PR and T1 Matching – additional dollars assessed, fiscal year 2005 to 2006 to fiscal year 2014 to 2015




Image description
Figure 5 – Compliance results – CV, PR and T1 Matching – additional dollars assessed, fiscal year 2005 to 2006 to fiscal year 2014 to 2015
The additional dollars assessed for fiscal year 2005 to 2006 is 688,500,000$
The additional dollars assessed for fiscal year 2006 to 2007 is 734,700,000$
The additional dollars assessed for fiscal year 2007 to 2008 is 889,600,000$
The additional dollars assessed for fiscal year 2008 to 2009 is 895,000,000$
The additional dollars assessed for fiscal year 2009 to 2010 is 986,200,000$
The additional dollars assessed for fiscal year 2010 to 2011 is 994,000,000$
The additional dollars assessed for fiscal year 2011 to 2012 is 1,034,000,000$
The additional dollars assessed for fiscal year 2012 to 2013 is 1,141,000,000$
The additional dollars assessed for fiscal year 2013 to 2014 is 1,217,000,000$
The additional dollars assessed for fiscal year 2014 to 2015 is 1,344,000,000$



To better understand the individual contribution of the compliance activities of CV, PR and T1 matching results, each program was analyzed separately to determine if there was any impact with the shift to electronic tax return filing. The analysis was undertaken at the macro level as the CRA risk assessment and scoring processes in relation to compliance verification results were not reviewed as part of this study as they are closely guarded to protect the integrity of Canada's tax administration.
Confidence Validity (CV)
The CV program uses various methods to identify high risk claims before the tax return is assessed, and prevents taxpayers from receiving unwarranted refunds. Preventing taxpayers from receiving unwarranted refunds reduces the cost of post assessment compliance activities. Furthermore it sends a strong message to both the taxpayer and their representative that addressing non-compliance is a high priority for the CRA.
The analysis of CV program results from fiscal year 2010 to 2011 to fiscal year 2014 to 2015 revealed that the volume of work and the additional dollars assessed has increased over this five year period. For the fiscal year 2010 to 2011 program, 222,680 returns were reviewed and $162 million assessed which increased to 230,581 returns and $224 million assessed in fiscal year 2014 to 2015. This represents an increase of 4% in the number of tax returns reviewed and a 38% increase in dollars assessed. (Figure 6)
Figure 6 – Confidence Validity Production – number of returns validated for fiscal year 2010 to 2011 to fiscal year 2014 to 2015




Image description
Figure 6 – Confidence Validity Production – number of returns validated for fiscal year 2010 to 2011 to fiscal year 2014 to 2015
For the Confidence validity production, the number of tax returns validated for fiscal year 2010 to 2011 is 222,680
For the Confidence validity production, the number of tax returns validated for fiscal year 2011 to 2012 is 226,831
For the Confidence validity production, the number of tax returns validated for fiscal year 2012 to 2013 is 223,129
For the Confidence validity production, the number of tax returns validated for fiscal year 2013 to 2014 is 229,114
For the Confidence validity production, the number of tax returns validated for fiscal year 2014 to 2015 is 230,581



Processing Review (PR)
The PR program reviews the credits and the deductions claimed on tax returns after a NoA has been issued to the taxpayer. The PR program uses a scoring system to calculate a risk value for each tax return assessed and determines the return's ranking for a possible review. Tax returns selected for review are reassessed, where necessary, and taxpayers are notified of their results through a NoR.
The analysis of PR program results from fiscal year 2010 to 2011 to fiscal 2014 to 2015 revealed that the volume of tax returns reviewed and the additional dollars assessed increased over the five year period. For the fiscal year 2010 to 2011 program, 903,435 returns were reviewed and $232 million was assessed which increased to 1.1 million tax returns being reviewed and $323 million assessed in fiscal year 2014 to 2015. This represents an increase of 22% in the number of tax returns reviewed and a 39% increase in dollars assessed. (Figure 7)
Figure 7 – Processing Review Production – number of returns validated for fiscal year 2010 to 2011 to fiscal year 2014 to 2015




Image description
Figure 7 – Processing Review Production – number of returns validated for fiscal year 2010 to 2011 to fiscal year 2014 to 2015
For the Processing review production, the number of tax returns validated for the fiscal year 2010 to 2011 is 903,435
For the Processing review production, the number of tax returns validated for the fiscal year 2011 to 2012 is 831,821
For the Processing review production, the number of tax returns validated for the fiscal year 2012 to 2013 is 1,089,627
For the Processing review production, the number of tax returns validated for the fiscal year 2013 to 2014 is 1,070,239
For the Processing review production, the number of tax returns validated for the fiscal year 2014 to 2015 is 1,194,686



T1 Matching
The T1 Matching program compares information filed on tax returns with third party information from employers, government departments, and financial institutions as well as with the tax return of their spouse. This allows for the identification of errors or omissions such as:

under-reported income and benefits
over-claimed tax deductions withheld at source
over-claimed credits
over-claimed deductions
net income for the purposes of Canada Child Benefit and Goods and Services Tax Credit, and incorrect Registered Retirement Savings Plan Contribution Limit statements

The T1 Matching program begins in the latter part of the fall to allow for the compilation of all third-party information. Once matches have been found, discrepancies are identified between the amounts claimed by the taxpayer and those provided by the taxpayer's third-parties. For discrepancy cases that are clearly identified, an automatic reassessment may be performedFootnote 20 . For discrepancies meeting certain criteria, but having variable conditions requiring further review, cases are identified for manual review and possible reassessment.
The analysis of T1 Matching program results from fiscal year 2010 to 2011 to fiscal year 2014 to 2015 revealed that the volume of work and the additional dollars assessed increased over the five year period. For the fiscal year 2010 to 2011 program, 2.2 million returns were reviewed and $600 million was assessed which increased to 2.3 million returns and $797 million being assessed in fiscal year 2014 to 2015. This represents an increase of 5% in the number of tax returns reviewed and a 33% increase in dollars assessed. (Figure 8)
Figure 8 – T1 Matching Production - number of returns validated for fiscal year 2010 to 2011 to fiscal year 2014 to 2015




Image description
Figure 8 – T1 Matching Production - number of returns validated for fiscal year 2010 to 2011 to fiscal year 2014 to 2015
For the T1 matching production, the number of tax returns validated for the fiscal year 2010 to 2011 is 2,170,986
For the T1 matching production, the number of tax returns validated for the fiscal year 2011 to 2012 is 2,174,630
For the T1 matching production, the number of tax returns validated for the fiscal year 2012 to 2013 is 2,101,025
For the T1 matching production, the number of tax returns validated for the fiscal year 2013 to 2014 is 2,274,034
For the T1 matching production, the number of tax returns validated for the fiscal year 2014 to 2015 is 2,341,261



To understand if the shift to electronic tax return filing has had an impact on CRA resources for compliance validation activities, a cost analysis was undertaken. This analysis was based on the salary costs and the activity codes for the CV, PR and T1 Matching from CRA administrative data and compared to program production volumes.
The compliance validation activities costs, have for the most part, been stable from fiscal year 2010 to 2011 to fiscal year 2014 to 2015Footnote 21 . CV decreased from $21.74 to $19.54 (-$2.20 or 10%), PR increased from $16.22 to $16.29 ($0.07 or 0.4%) and T1 Matching increased from $5.58 to $6.26 ($0.68 or 12.1%). However as previously noted in Figure 4, the dollars assessed has substantially increased by 35% from $994 million assessed in fiscal year 2010 to 2011 to $1.3 billion in fiscal year 2014 to 2015Footnote 22 .
This analysis has confirmed that both overall and individual results for the CV, PR and T1 Matching programs have adjusted to the shift to electronic tax return filing, and are integral to CRA's tax administration and support Canada's self-assessment tax system.
With respect to changes that could improve compliance activities, regional interviews with CVB and the Appeals Branch strongly expressed that having certain tax forms and schedules transmitted at the time of tax return filing could enhance the taxpayer experience and support compliance activities.
Prior to electronic tax return filing, tax forms and schedules were included with the tax return when filed on paper; however this is not the case with the move to electronic tax return filing. EFILE and NETFILE software provides tax forms and schedules that supports taxpayers in completing and filing their tax return, however they are not transmitted to the CRA. The absence of this information has had an unintended impact on the taxpayer and on CRA's administration of compliance validation activities.
From a taxpayer's perspective they are often confused when the CRA asks them for a form or schedule that they completed and understood was already submitted to the CRA as part of their electronic tax return filing transmission. The inclusion of certain forms or schedules could result in more tailored communication with a taxpayer and improve client service as a result.
From a compliance perspective, including the collection of outstanding amounts, the additional information contained in tax forms and schedules could provide for better business intelligence and risk scoring of taxpayer returns to identify errors and omissions. The availability of this information at the time of tax return filing, would assist CRA with early intervention measures which are the most cost effective methods to address non-compliance.
It is recognized that the CRA can request receipts at any time; thus the decision to not include all data on forms and schedules was based on the low volume of compliance activities that are undertaken in relation to the overall volume of tax returns filed. Now that the system has been working as intended, and there is no issue with electronic storage, an opportunity exists to explore the transmission of data on certain tax forms and schedules to support CRA's tax administration as well as to potentially improve interactions with taxpayers. More importantly, this would send a strong message to both taxpayers and their representatives on the importance of having receipts to support their deductions.
5. Organizational structures, work processes and systems have been aligned with advancements in electronic tax return filing
With the advancements in electronic tax return processing, the CRA recognized the need to modify its organizational structure, work processes and systems.
Organizational Structures
No major organizational restructuring occurred from the period 2005 to 2015; however recognizing the advancements in electronic tax return filing, a CRA renewal initiative was introduced in November 2016. This resulted in the consolidation of tax processing sites and the establishment of new National Verification and Collections Centres (NVCC). This means the CRA went from nine processing centres and two specialized Ottawa sites (International Tax Services Office and the Ottawa Technology Centre) to seven processing centres of which four will remain processing centres and three will become NVCCs.
This service renewal is relatively new, thus was not measureable as part of this study. However, the expected benefits are that it would:

create a more efficient organization, which maximizes economies of scale;
modernize internal operations to improve service and deliver better results;
increase capacity to verify returns and collect tax debts;
provide greater certainty to a continued presence in all regions;
better reflect the increasingly digital nature of business processes; and
fully leverage people.

Work processes
CRA interviews with employees and review of documents revealed that modifications have occurred to work processes with the shift to electronic tax return filing. First and foremost, the protection of taxpayer information is paramount, thus the CRA restricts changes to addresses, banking and direct deposit information through EFILE or NETFILE to minimize identity theft. Programs are also in place, such as the Special Assessment Program to prevent identity theft and fraud through the review of electronically transmitted tax returns prior to processing.
The CRA also developed and implemented work processes to register, and monitor tax preparers as well as a directory of the registered tax preparers for use by Canadians. CRA interviews revealed some concerns with the practices of registered tax preparers, and how they support CRA's tax administrationFootnote 23  and individuals who pay for this service. Concerns were raised on the competencies of the registered tax preparers to complete tax returns in accordance with the ITA and regulations. Others mentioned that some of the registered tax preparers do not use the system as intended. For example, they will file a tax return on behalf of their client as self-employed in order to meet the tax return filing deadline and to avoid a late filing penalty. The registered tax preparer will then follow-up and correct the tax return through a reassessment request once they have time to review the income and receipts. For the CRA, this could result in the need for reassessment of the tax return, additional scrutiny of income, expenses and receipts, and may also result in interest and penalty being charged to a taxpayer if a balance is outstanding as a result of the reassessment.
With 56% of individuals using registered tax preparers to file their tax returns, an opportunity exists to undertake an in-depth review to provide insight on how they support individuals in meeting their tax obligations as well as CRA's tax administration.
Systems
CRA tax administration systems are built, based on Agency IT best practices, to allow for the receipt, verification, processing, validation, third party matching and the assessment or reassessments of individual tax returns. This information also supports collection, appeal and audit activities. As stated earlier, protecting taxpayer information is paramount and all threats to government systems – real or perceived – are taken seriously and responded to with established protocols. This includes suspension of service when warranted.
To ensure systems meets the operational needs of the future, the CRA is also undertaking a T1 system redesign (T1SR) which is a multi-year project that will mitigate the risks associated with an aging T1 Suite by modernizing its software, data and technology components.
Interviews with CRA personnel revealed some strong opinions about the T1SR project and the unintended impacts on employees. A reoccurring comment was that the font on the computer screen is extremely small and many are worried about the impact on their vision and ability to process or validate tax returns accurately and efficiently. ABSB was under the impression that this was an issue with older computers; however the Information Technology Branch advised that this issue resides in the application coding. It was also strongly voiced that the CRA needs to address the current problems with the system prior to further releases, and most importantly increase consultation with the end users. It is recognized that the T1SR is a multi-year project and that system changes are based on system conversion timelines and implications with tax legislative modifications.
The AERB undertook an independent reviewFootnote 24  of business analyst capacity which revealed that the CRA requires significant improvements in this area which may have attributed to the unintended impacts identified as part of this study. The AERB also plans to undertake an independent review of the T1SR project in fiscal year 2017 to 2018 to provide assurance that controls are in place to support the successful implementation of the project phases.
To mitigate the unintended impacts on employee's accuracy, efficiency, health and wellness identified as part of this study, an opportunity exists to take stock of system maintenance upgrades in place as part of the T1SR project, and ensure that application coding provides a sufficient font size for employees.
Conclusion
The 2014 tax return profile and compliance validation analysis are positive with no major constraints identified with the shift from paper to electronic tax return filling. Considering the higher use of registered tax preparers, and to better understand how the registered tax preparers support CRA's tax administration, an independent study would provide additional insight on the EFILE tax return filing method and the individuals who pay a fee to use this service. This study will be considered in the development of the AERB 2018 to 2021 Risk-based Audit and Evaluation Plan.
In addition, with the electronic systems working as intended an opportunity exists to promote electronic tax return filing for certain groups as well as to explore the transmission of data on certain tax forms and schedules to support compliance activities and interactions with Canadians. Employees are the cornerstone of CRA's administration and have strongly voiced the need to take stock of system maintenance upgrades in place as a part of the T1SR project, and to ensure that application coding provides a sufficient font size for employees. The goal is to mitigate unintended impacts on employee's health and wellness while ensuring accurate, efficient service is provided to Canadians.
Recommendation 1
ABSB, in consultation with other stakeholders, undertake a comprehensive analysis to identify ways to promote electronic tax return filing and increase take-up rate for those groups showing a slower transition from paper to electronic tax return filing.
Management Response:
The CRA's success in promoting and enhancing electronic filing has allowed us to reach an 86% electronic filing rate to date. However, it is understood that some taxpayers may never switch from paper to electronic filing due to many factors, including complexity of their tax situation, technological limitations or socio-economic situation. ABSB is working with Agency stakeholders and gathering information related to the remaining groups of paper filers to ensure we are doing what we can to help those that wish to electronically file, as well as support taxpayers who chose to continue to paper file. We will complete this analysis by Q1 of fiscal year 2018 to 2019. A report detailing the results of this analysis and proposed action plan will be shared with senior management by Q2 of fiscal year 2018 to 2019.
Recommendation 2
ABSB, in consultation with CRA stakeholders, explore and assess the feasibility to have data on certain tax forms and schedules transmitted to support compliance activities and interactions with Canadians.
Management Response:
ABSB actively participates, on an ongoing basis, on an inter-branch working group and DG steering committee (DISC) that formally reviews data that is captured and transmitted on the T1 Return. The working group (led by SIB) balances the value of obtaining and holding tax data vs. the cost, burden and impact of collecting that data. At the next working group meeting, ABSB will work with other CRA stakeholders to assess the feasibility and impacts of transmitting more data to support compliance activities and interactions with Canadians. ABSB will provide an update in June 2018, following the May 2018 DISC meeting.
Recommendation 3
ABSB, in consultation with CRA stakeholders, take stock of system maintenance and upgrades and address employee concerns with the T1SR project.
Management Response:
ABSB recognizes that field users are adapting to new technological tools and will continue to support them by working with local management to identify improvements and corrections that will assist them with the transition. As display irritants remain for some users, specifically with the T1 Case system, ABSB, in consultation with CRA stakeholders, will reassess the instructions provided to the field, modify if necessary, and reissue to field users by Q4 of fiscal year 2017 to 2018. We will also continue to support regional management in implementing local ergonomic improvements as identified in a study by the National Health and Safety Committee.
Moving forward, after assessing the impact of display changes included in the February 2018 release, ABSB will work with ITB and other CRA stakeholders to prioritize further enhancements for the February 2019 and if necessary, the February 2020 release. This is the earliest possible timing as these system releases are aligned with the release calendar for the T1 Suite of programs which occurs once a year in February. ABSB will provide status updates on the February 2019 T1 Case system enhancements in Q1 of fiscal year 2019 to 2020 and Q1 of fiscal year 2020 to 2021, if necessary.
Acknowledgement
We would like to acknowledge and thank all CRA stakeholders interviewed for their support during the evaluation study. We observed that employees, both in headquarters and the regions, are professional, resilient, able to adapt to change, and most importantly are committed to providing quality service to Canadians and to ensuring that all taxpayers meet their tax obligations and pay their fair share of tax.
Appendices
Appendix A: Logic model




Image description
Appendix A – Logic Model
April 25, 2016
Electronic and Paper Tax Return Filing – Individual Compliance Behaviour
Individual (NETFILE, Paper)
Third Party Tax Preparers (EFILE, Paper)
Community Volunteer (EFILE, Paper)
Major Activities

Program Management and Business Intelligence

Sub-Activities

Legislative review, policy and procedures development
Resource and workload planning
Performance monitoring and reporting
Stakeholder consultation
Functional direction, technical advice and training
Research, risk assessment and strategy development
e-Services initiatives that support innovation and CRA’s sustainable development strategy


Outputs

Legislation, policy and procedures
Resource and workload allocation
Sharing of information, advice and guidance with CRA stakeholders
Guidance, manuals, training courses and tools
Performance monitoring reports
System and program delivery changes


Immediate Outcomes

Effective legislative tax framework
Improved use of CRA business intelligence
Knowledgeable and trained personnel
Consistent application of policies and procedures
Improved ability to identify risks and implement strategies to address non-compliance
Improved system and program delivery


Intermediate Outcomes

Improved effectiveness of the T1 filing program to detect and address non-compliance
Optimize resource utilization


Ultimate Outcomes

Canadians have access to a secure and modern way to meet their T1 tax return filing obligations
Tax base is protected




IT System and Security

Sub-Activities

Design and development
Testing  and deployment 
Maintenance and monitoring
Security assessment and  authorization


Outputs

System available to electronically file tax returns
Taxpayer information is protected
System monitoring reports  
System maintenance, upgrades  and changes made


Immediate Outcome

System integrity is optimized


Intermediate Outcome

Increased confidence of taxpayers and  representatives in the use of electronic filing services


Ultimate Outcomes

Canadians have access to a secure and modern way to meet their T1 tax return filing obligations 
Tax base is protected




Communication

Sub-Activities

Telephone and written enquiry services
Forms and publication development
Outreach and other public communications
Community Volunteer Income Tax Program
Website development
Ministerial and media enquiry services


Outputs

Information and guidance provided
Electronic and paper based information and publications
Outreach presentations and public communications (e.g. media, tweets)
Responses to ministerial and media enquiries


Immediate Outcome

Increased level of understanding of tax filing obligations 


Intermediate Outcome

Improved taxpayer compliance behaviour with T1 tax return filing obligations


Ultimate Outcomes

Canadians have access to a secure and modern way to meet their T1 tax return filing obligations 
Tax base is protected




Compliance

Sub-Activities

Pre assessment validation 
Tax return processed 
Post assessment validation
Leads and referrals to audit


Outputs

Tax returns validated
Tax returns assessed 
Debt, refund or no balance due  established
Notice of Assessment or Reassessment issued 
Non-filers identified
Tax schemes identified
Leads and referrals sent to Audit


Immediate Outcome

Increased taxpayer awareness of their tax situation and actions required


Intermediate Outcome

Improved taxpayer compliance behaviour with T1 tax return filing obligations


Ultimate Outcomes

Canadians have access to a secure and modern way to meet their T1 tax return filing obligations 
Tax base is protected








Appendix B: Reasons to file a tax returnFootnote 25




Image description
Appendix B: Reasons to file a tax return
Do you have to file a return?
You must file a return for 2016 if:

You have to pay tax for 2016.
We sent you a request to file a return.
You and your spouse or common-law partner elected to split pension income for 2016. See lines 115, 116, 129, and 210.
You received working income tax benefit advance payments in 2016.
You disposed of capital property in 2016 (for example, if you sold real estate, your principal residence, or shares) or you realized a taxable capital gain (for example, if a mutual fund or trust attributed income to you, or you are reporting a capital gains reserve you claimed on your 2015 return).
You have to repay any of your old age security or employment insurance benefits. See line 235.
You have not repaid all amounts withdrawn from your registered retirement savings plan (RRSP) under the Home Buyers’ Plan or the Lifelong Learning Plan. For more information, go to Home Buyers’ Plan (HBP) or see Guide RC4112, Lifelong Learning Plan (LLP).
You have to contribute to the Canada Pension Plan (CPP). This can apply if for 2016 the total of your net self-employment income and pensionable employment income is more than $3,500. See line 222.
You are paying employment insurance premiums on self-employment and other eligible earnings. See lines 317 and 430.

Even if none of these requirements apply, you should file a return if:

You want to claim a refund.
You want to claim the working income tax benefit for 2016.
You want the goods and services tax/harmonized sales tax (GST/HST) credit (including any related provincial credits). For example, you may be eligible if you turn 19 before April 2018.
You or your spouse or common-law partner want to begin or continue receiving Canada child benefit payments, including related provincial or territorial benefit payments.
You have incurred a non-capital loss (see line 236) in 2016 that you want to be able to apply in other years.
You want to carry forward or transfer the unused part of your tuition, education, and textbook amounts. See line 323.
You want to report income for which you could contribute to an RRSP and/or a pooled registered pension plan (PRPP) to keep your RRSP/PRPP deduction limit for future years current.
You want to carry forward the unused investment tax credit on expenditures you incurred during the current year See line 412.
You receive the guaranteed income supplement or allowance benefits under the old age security program. You can usually renew your benefit by filing your return by April 30. If you choose not to file a return, you will have to complete a renewal form. This form is available from Service Canada.

Deceased persons
If you are the legal representative (the executor, administrator, or liquidator) of the estate of a person who died in 2016, you may have to file a return for 2016 for that person. For more information see T4011, Preparing Returns for Deceased Persons and Information Sheet RC4111, Canada Revenue Agency - What to Do Following a Death.



Appendix C: Restrictions and exclusionsFootnote 26




Image description
Appendix C: Restrictions and exclusions
Eligibility
NETFILE is available to most taxpayers. However some types of tax returns can’t be sent electronically. For a list of exceptions, see “Restrictions” and “Other restrictions” below.
Tax preparation service providers can’t use NETFILE to file tax returns for their clients. They have to use EFILE.
Restrictions
There are certain types of tax returns that can’t be sent to the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) electronically:

an amended tax return;
a return for any taxation year other than 2013, 2014, 2015 or 2016; or
a tax return for another person (for example, if a taxpayer prepared a spousal/family return, each taxpayer must send his or her return separately).

You can’t use NETFILE to file your tax return if:

you are filing an income tax and benefit return for the first time with the CRA and the CRA does not have your complete date of birth on record;
you went bankrupt in 2016 or 2017 (does not include a proposal for bankruptcy);
you are a non-resident of Canada; or
Review our list of other restrictions below.

You can’t use NETFILE to change personal information such as your:

name
address
direct deposit information (nor can you request direct deposit)

To learn more about updating personal information, go to:

How to tell the CRA about your change of name
How to change your address






Image description
Other restrictions
The following is a list of specific situations that prevent you from filing a tax return through the NETFILE service:

Your tax return was discounted by a third party.
You are considered a deemed resident (that is, you don’t have to pay provincial or territorial tax).
You are filing a tax return for an individual who died in 2016 or 2017.
Your social insurance number or individual tax number begins with 09.
You are an emigrant or non-resident of Canada. This excludes the following income and tax forms: Schedule A, Schedule B, Schedule C, income from NR4 slips, T4A-NR slips, NR-OAS slips, and NR-CPP/QPP slips, section 116 income, section 216 income, section 217 income, taxable capital gains from disposing of Canadian property if received as a non-resident, and Old Age Security Return of Income.
Your address is outside Canada.
You are electing to defer tax on a distribution of spin-off shares by foreign corporations.
You are claiming less than the maximum federal foreign tax credit.

You are reporting any of the following:

Canadian-source income from Lloyds of London;
registered disability savings plan income in field 125 and you are not eligible for the disability amount for self for the current tax year and for the first and second immediately preceding tax years (that is, there is no valid Form T2201, Disability Tax Credit Certificate, on record for at least one of these three years).Note: This exclusion is only meant to prevent an amount from being reported incorrectly in field 125 when it should have been reported in another income field on the return;
employment income earned from an international organization;
lump-sum pension income accrued to December 31, 1971;
more than six sets of financial statements;
an Ontario, Saskatchewan, British Columbia, or Yukon qualifying environmental trust tax credit (may also be referred to as a mining reclamation trust tax credit); or
a statement of qualifying retroactive lump-sum payments (Form T1198).

You are claiming any one of the following:

a federal non-business foreign tax credit for more than three countries;
a federal business foreign tax credit for more than three countries;
a deduction for scientific research and experimental development expenses;
an Alberta stock savings plan tax credit (Form T89);
a Saskatchewan royalty tax rebate (Form T82);
a Nova Scotia research and development tax credit recapture;
a claim that involves more than 22 children;
a Newfoundland and Labrador research and development tax credit (Form T1129); or
a deduction in field 207 that includes amounts calculated from a combination of at least two of the following forms:






Image description

Form RC269, Employee Contributions to a Foreign Pension Plan or Social Security Arrangement for 2013 – Non-United States Plans or Arrangements;
Form RC267, Employee Contributions to a United States Retirement Plan for 2013 – Temporary Assignments;
Form RC268, Employee Contributions to a United States Retirement Plan for 2013 – Cross-Border Commuters.

You are reporting farming income with an AgriStability and/or AgriInvest Program application which involves:

farming income from a partnership reported on a T5013 slip or a partnership that includes a corporate partner;
a Canadian Indian reporting self-employed income which is "tax-exempt income";
Selected financial data type 9 with more than 10 occurrences in section 7 and/or 8 from page 7 of Form T1273; or
Selected financial data type 9 with more than 8 occurrences in section 10, 11, and/or 12 from page 7 of Form T1273.

If you have to file an amended or previous-year tax return, or any other tax return that doesn’t qualify for NETFILE, go to Where to mail your paper T1 return.





Image description
Exclusions
You cannot use EFILE web service to file an initial T1 return for any tax year except 2013, 2014, 2015 and 2016. In addition, you cannot file a return electronically in any of the following situations:

The taxpayer is a deemed resident (not subject to provincial or territorial tax).
The taxpayer died prior to the current tax year. Early filed and Elective deceased returns also remain as exclusions.
The taxpayer's social insurance number begins with a 0. Only newcomers to Canada with a SIN starting with 0 are eligible to use EFILE.
The taxpayer is coded bankrupt according to Canada Revenue Agency's records and is filing an in-bankruptcy or post-bankruptcy return. Only pre-bankruptcy returns that are not early-filed are accepted through EFILE.
The taxpayer is an emigrant or a non-resident. This excludes the following income and tax forms: Schedule A, Schedule B, Schedule C, income from NR4 slips, T4A-NR slips, NR-OAS and NR-CPP slips, Section 116 income, Section 216 income and Section 217 income, taxable capital gains from disposing of Canadian property if received as a non-resident and OASRI.
The taxpayer's address is outside Canada.
The taxpayer is reporting:

Canadian source income from Lloyds of London; 
employment income earned from an International Organization; 
lump-sum pension income accrued to December 31, 1971; 
more than 6 SFD records; 
an Ontario, Saskatchewan, British Columbia or Yukon qualifying environmental (mining reclamation) trust tax credit; 
a statement of qualifying retroactive lump-sum payment (T1198); or, 
a Nova Scotia research and development tax credit recapture.


The taxpayer is electing to defer tax on a distribution of spin-off shares by foreign corporations.
The taxpayer is claiming:

less than the maximum federal foreign tax credit; 
foreign taxes paid to more than three countries; 
business foreign taxes paid to more than three countries; 
a deduction for scientific research and experimental development expenses; 
an Alberta stock savings plan tax credit (T89).


The taxpayer is reporting farming income with the AgriStability and AgriInvest programs application, which involves:

farming income from a partnership reported on a T5013 slip or a partnership that includes a corporate partner; 
a Canadian Indian reporting self-employed income that is "tax-exempt income”; 
more than 50 occurrences for either crop and livestock inventory (SFD type 9 only).


The taxpayer is filing Form RC199, Voluntary Disclosures Program (VDP), Taxpayer Agreement or the taxpayer is making a request to the Voluntary Disclosures Program.




Appendix D: Profile analysis - methodology and data results by province and territory
Low Income
The established WITB income values were used to define and segment the low income group from the 2014 tax returns. This program defines low net income thresholds as $37,195 for Nunavut, $20,072 for Quebec, $19,721 for British Columbia, $19,139 for Alberta, and $17,986 for the rest of Canada. (Figure D.1)
Figure D.1 – Number and percentage of tax returns filed for low income by filing method and by province and territory for tax year 2014



Province and Territory
# of Returns Filed
% of Paper
% of Electronic - Total
% of Electronic - NETFILE
% of Electronic - EFILE
AB
914,181
20%
80%
26%
54%
BC
1,394,812
20%
80%
27%
53%
MB
337,767
15%
85%
19%
66%
NB
213,528
24%
76%
21%
55%
NL
155,313
33%
77%
24%
43%
NT
10,777
12%
88%
14%
74%
NS
258,351
25%
75%
26%
49%
NU
13,126
9%
91%
10%
81%
ON
3,727,000
17%
83%
23%
60%
PEI
37,900
21%
79%
27%
52%
QC
2,547,685
25%
75%
22%
53%
SK
266,972
23%
77%
20%
57%
YT
7,779
19%
81%
20%
61%
Non-Resident
157,112
99%
1%
0.02%
0.08%
Total persons with low income
10,042,303
22%
78%
23%
55%
National total
27,835,591
16%
84%
28%
56%



Source: 2014 Tax Returns
Geographic area - Rural and Urban
For the rural and urban group, the postal code, as assigned by Canada PostFootnote 27, were used to define and segment these two groups from the 2014 tax return population to better understand their filing behaviour. (Figure D.2)
Figure D.2 – Number and percentage of tax returns filed by geographic area - rural and urban and by filing method for tax year 2014



Province
# of returns Filed
% of Paper
% of Electronic - Total
% of Electronic - NETFILE
% of Electronic - EFILE
Rural
4,567,697
15%
85%
23%
62%
Urban
22,382,169
16%
84%
29%
55%
Invalid or missing postal code
885,725
36%
64%
12%
52%
National total
27,835,591
16%
84%
28%
56%



Source: 2014 Tax Returns
Persons with disabilities
The persons with disabilities group was created by selecting individuals who received a DTC on their 2014 tax return. (Figure D.3)
Figure D.3 – Number and percentage of tax returns filed by persons with disabilities by province and territory and by filing method for tax year 2014



Province and Territory
# of Returns Filed
% of Paper
% of Electronic – Total
% of Electronic - NETFILE
% of Electronic - EFILE
AB
92,945
19%
81%
21%
60%
BC
164,003
18%
82%
19%
63%
MB
65,558
16%
84%
17%
67%
NB
32,287
20%
80%
19%
61%
NL
24,124
25%
75%
22%
53%
NT
657
21%
79%
16%
63%
NS
47,497
21%
79%
23%
56%
NU
170
12%
88%
13%
75%
ON
495,008
17%
83%
19%
64%
PEI
7,460
19%
81%
23%
58%
QC
148,792
24%
76%
17%
59%
SK
30,987
19%
81%
17%
64%
YT
658
17%
83%
17%
66%
Non-Resident
918
100%
N/A
N/A
N/A
Total person with disabilities
1,111,064
19%
81%
19%
62%
National total
27,835,591
16%
84%
28%
56%



Source: 2014 Tax Returns
Youths and seniors
Youths were defined as those who had filed a tax returns who were under the age of 20 while seniors were defined as 65 years or older. This criteria was selected as CRA commonly uses these thresholds to determine eligibility for various benefits and services such as the CVITP. (Figure D.4)
Figure D.4 – Number and percentage of tax returns filed by youth and seniors and by filing method for tax year 2014



Age Category
# of Returns Filed
% of Paper
% of Electronic – Total
% of Electronic – NETFILE
% of Electronic - EFILE
Less than 20
1,120,329
21%
79%
23%
56%
65 +
5,774,836
22%
78%
20%
58%
National total
27,835,591
16%
84%
28%
56%



Source: 2014 Tax Returns
Self-Employed
The self-employed group was created by using the major source of income as reported on the 2014 tax return. (Figure D.5)
Figure D.5 – Number and percentage of tax returns by filing method for self-employed individuals for tax year 2014



Income Type
# of Returns Filed
% of Paper
% of Electronic – Total
% of Electronic – NETFILE
% of Electronic - EFILE
Business
1,986,783
13%
87%
15%
72%
Capital Gain/Loss
28,482
13%
87%
12%
75%
Commission – Sales
711,363
10%
90%
30%
60%
Farmers
311,898
9%
91%
5%
86%
Fisherman
26,695
17%
83%
8%
75%
Investment Income over $3,000
1,691,323
14%
86%
18%
68%
Professionals
332,757
17%
83%
31%
52%
Rentals up to $125,000 gross
1,456,372
14%
86%
19%
67%
Rentals over $125,000 gross
47,188
30%
70%
6%
64%
Total self-employed
6,592,861
13%
87%
19%
68%
National total
27,835,591
16%
84%
28%
56%



Source: 2014 Tax Returns
Newcomers to Canada
For income tax purposes, an immigrant is considered a newcomer to Canada only for the first year that they are a new resident of Canada. The newcomer group was created from data reported on the tax returns in 2013 and the same group was tracked in 2014 to assess any change to their tax return filing behaviour. (Figure D.6)
Figure D.6 – Number and percentage of tax returns filed for newcomers by province and territory and by filing method for tax years 2013 and 2014



Province and Territory
# of Returns Filed in 2013
# of Returns filed in 2014
% of Paper in 2013
% of Paper in 2014
% of electronic – Total in 2013
% of Electronic – Total in 2014
% of Electronic – NETFILE for 2013
% of Electronic – NETFILE for 2014
% of Electronic – EFILE for 2013
% of Electronic – EFILE for 2014
AB
40,692
39,079
47%
13%
53%
87%
7%
24%
46%
63%
BC
38,319
34,931
54%
20%
46%
80%
8%
23%
38%
57%
MB
9,356
8,813
51%
16%
49%
84%
7%
26%
42%
58%
NB
1,656
1,480
41%
13%
59%
87%
5%
15%
54%
72%
NL
1,155
1,094
41%
15%
59%
85%
7%
27%
52%
58%
NT
173
156
65%
8%
35%
92%
9%
20%
26%
72%
NS
2,781
2,401
48%
21%
52%
79%
8%
21%
44%
58%
NU
22
20
55%
40%
45%
60%
9%
20%
36%
40%
ON
92,068
84,108
47%
17%
53%
83%
7%
19%
46%
64%
PEI
579
499
47%
16%
53%
84%
9%
22%
44%
62%
QC
38,139
35,142
65%
23%
35%
77%
5%
23%
30%
54%
SK
8,714
8,021
40%
12%
60%
88%
6%
21%
54%
67%
YT
176
167
55%
11%
45%
89%
12%
29%
33%
60%
NR
1,604
1,351
93%
99%
7%
1%
1%
0.1%
6%
0.9%
Total newcomers
235,434
217,262
51%
18%
49%
82%
7%
21%
42%
61%
National total
 
27,835,591
 
16%
 
84%
 
28%
 
56%



Source: 2013 and 2014 Tax Returns
Gender
The gender group was identified by the gender field in the T1 master database of the 2014 tax return filing population. (Figure D.7)
Figure D.7 – Number and percentage of tax returns by filing method and gender for tax year 2014



Gender
# of Returns Filed
% of Paper
% of Electronic – Total
% of Electronic – NETFILE
% of Electronic - EFILE
Female
14,235,942
16%
84%
28%
56%
Male
13,511,285
16%
84%
28%
56%
Null and BlankFootnote 28
88,364
91%
9%
2%
7%
National total
27,835,591
16%
84%
28%
56%



Source: 2014 Tax Returns
Appendix E: Glossary



Term
Definition
Auto-fill my return
Allows individuals and authorized representatives to automatically fill in parts of their 2015 and 2016 income tax and benefit return with information that the CRA has available at the time of filing the return
Deemed-Resident
You are considered a deemed-resident of Canada if:
you lived outside Canada during the tax year, you are not considered to be a factual resident of Canada because you did not have significant residential ties, and you are a government employee, a member of the Canadian Forces including their overseas school staff, or working under a Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) assistance program. This could also apply to the family members of an individual who is in one of these situations.
you sojourned in Canada for 183 days or more (the 183-day rule) in the tax year, do not have significant residential ties with Canada, and are not considered a resident of another country under the terms of a tax treaty between Canada and that country.


Disability Tax Credit
The disability tax credit (DTC) is a non-refundable tax credit that helps persons with disabilities or their supporting persons reduce the amount of income tax they may have to pay. An individual may claim the disability amount once they are eligible for the DTC. This amount includes a supplement for persons under 18 years of age at the end of the year.
There are different ways for which a person can be eligible for the disability tax credit (DTC). The person must meet one of the following criteria:
is blind
is markedly restricted in at least one of the basic activities of daily living
is significantly restricted in two or more or the basic activities of daily living (can include a vision impairment)
needs life-sustaining therapy

In addition, the person's impairment must meet all of the following:
is prolonged, which means the impairment has lasted, or is expected to last for a continuous period of at least 12 months
is present all or substantially all the time (at least 90% of the time)


EFILE
EFILE is an automated service that allows approved tax preparation service providers and discounters to send individual income tax return information to the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) directly from EFILE–certified tax preparation software.
Taxpayers may take their tax slips and supporting documents to a registered tax preparer and for a fee, the tax preparer will prepare their return and send it to us electronically using EFILE.
Fiscal year
A fiscal year runs from April 1 to March 31
NETFILE
NETFILE is an electronic tax-filing service that allows taxpayers to send their individual income tax and benefit return directly to the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) using the Internet and a NETFILE-certified software product.
Non-Resident
You are considered a non-resident of Canada if you normally, customarily, or routinely live in another country and are not considered a resident of Canada; do not have significant residential ties in Canada; and live outside Canada throughout the tax year; or stay in Canada for less than 183 days in the tax year.
Registered tax preparer
Any firm, organization, or individual providing tax preparation services who has met the definition and requirements of an applicant and who has successfully met all the suitability screening criteria will be given access to the full suite of EFILE Online services. Screening criteria includes that the applicant has:
not been convicted under the Income Tax Act or the Excise Tax Act or an income tax act of a province or territory;
not been assessed a penalty under the Income Tax Act, the Excise Tax Act, or an income tax act of a province or territory;
not failed to file personal, corporate, GST/HST, or information returns as required, under the Income Tax Act, the Excise Tax Act, or an income tax act of a province or territory;
not failed to comply with the requirement to pay, collect, or remit taxes as required under the Income Tax Act, the Excise Tax Act, or an income tax act of a province or territory;
not failed to comply with the requirement to register under the Excise Tax Act;
not failed to comply with the requirement to keep adequate books and records under the Income Tax Act or Excise Tax Act;
no tax liability under the Income Tax Act, the Excise Tax Act, or an income tax act of a province or territory, or the applicant has a tax liability and has reached a repayment agreement with the collections section of the tax services office, or a similar provincial authority, and has not breached the repayment agreement;
not been convicted of an offence under the Tax Rebate Discounting Act;
not made any misrepresentations on their application or renewal form or in any correspondence, conversations or updates submitted relevant to the application or renewal;
not engaged in any activities that resulted in suspension of electronic filing or SEND privileges in a previous year, or that would have led to suspension if they had been discovered during the program;
not been rejected for EFILE in either of the previous two filing seasons (other than one that was conditionally rejected but later met the required conditions);
not or does not knowingly, directly or indirectly, employ or accept help from any person who has been, or who would have been, denied acceptance into the program or who has been suspended from the program. This includes any individual whose actions resulted in the rejection or the suspension of a corporation or a partnership from the program; and
not engaged in fraud, dishonesty, breach of trust, or other conduct of a disreputable nature.


Request to File (TX11 and
TX14)
When a taxpayer fails to file a return, it is possible that the CRA will ask him to do so. CRA will first send a TX11, Request to File a Return, asking the taxpayer to file his return for a specific year. The TX11 does not give the taxpayer a due date to file. However, if the taxpayer does not respond within 40 days the CRA will then send a TX14, Second Request to File a Return or a TX14D, Demand to File a Return.
Residency Status
Under Canada's tax system, the liability for income tax in Canada is based on the status as a resident or non-resident of Canada. The residence status must be established before the tax liability to Canada can be determined.
A determination of residence status can only be made after all the factors have been considered. The circumstances have to be reviewed in their entirety to get an accurate picture of the residence status.
The residential ties a taxpayer have or establish in Canada are a major factor in determining residence status. Residential ties to Canada include:
A home in Canada;
A spouse or common-law partner or dependants in Canada;
Personal property in Canada, such as a car or furniture;
Social ties in Canada; and
Economic ties in Canada.


Other ties that may be relevant include:
A Canadian driver's licence;
Canadian bank accounts or credit cards; and
Health insurance with a Canadian province or territory.


Residential ties that is maintained or established in another country may also be relevant.
Working Income Tax Benefit
The working income tax benefit (WITB) is a refundable tax credit intended to provide tax relief for eligible working low-income individuals and families who are already in the workforce and to encourage other Canadians to enter the workforce.





Footnote 1


					   Introduced in 1998.
					

Return to footnote1 Referrer


Footnote 2


					   Accountants, tax preparers, discounters, financial institutions and others who have received CRA approval to file returns electronically.
					

Return to footnote2 Referrer


Footnote 3


					   Introduced in 1990 and called EOL (Efile Online) and EOL Plus (Efile Online Plus) until 2013.
					

Return to footnote3 Referrer


Footnote 4


					   Over $10,000
					

Return to footnote4 Referrer


Footnote 5


					   Individuals may have filed more than one tax return in a tax filing season, i.e. prior year tax returns
					

Return to footnote5 Referrer


Footnote 6


					   Includes TELEFILE statistics
					

Return to footnote6 Referrer


Footnote 7


					   Downloaded on October 26, 2016
					

Return to footnote7 Referrer


Footnote 8


					   OECD (2015), Tax Administration 2015: Comparative Information on OECD and other Advanced and merging Economies, OECD Publishing, Paris
					

Return to footnote8 Referrer


Footnote 9


					   Refer to appendix D
					

Return to footnote9 Referrer


Footnote 10


					   Must be in the CRA T1 master records
					

Return to footnote10 Referrer


Footnote 11


					   E-services for individuals, March 22, 2017
					

Return to footnote11 Referrer


Footnote 12


					   As outlined in Section 5 - Study limitations and constraints, the costs related to operations and maintenance, capital and systems were not included as they could not be isolated to a specific program activity.  
					

Return to footnote12 Referrer


Footnote 13


					   Provinces and territories are determined by the first letter in the postal code, and the 2nd digit if a “0” is considered a rural address and any other character is considered urban.
					

Return to footnote13 Referrer


Footnote 14


					   885,725 or 3% had invalid or missing postal codes recorded on their 2014 tax return
					

Return to footnote14 Referrer


Footnote 15


					   CRTC December 21, 2016, Telecom Regulatory Policy CRTC 2016-496 – Modern telecommunications services – The path forward for Canada’s digital economy
					

Return to footnote15 Referrer


Footnote 16


					   Employment and Social Development Canada - Summative evaluation of the Canada Pension Plan Retirement and Survivor Benefits, Evaluation of the Guaranteed Income Supplement Take-up Measures and Outreach and the Evaluation of the New Horizons for Seniors 
					

Return to footnote16 Referrer


Footnote 17


					   Newcomer is in the T1 master database 
					

Return to footnote17 Referrer


Footnote 18


					   The matching program was not included as part of this analysis as filing type is not recorded in the Matching Action Review System (MARS) 
					

Return to footnote18 Referrer


Footnote 19


					   dated June 2016
					

Return to footnote19 Referrer


Footnote 20


					   For example, an individual did not include a T4 on their tax return
					

Return to footnote20 Referrer


Footnote 21


					   CAS data was not considered reliable from fiscal year 2005 to 2006 to fiscal year 2009 to 2010
					

Return to footnote21 Referrer


Footnote 22


					   As outlined in Section 5 - Study limitations and constraints, the costs related to operations and maintenance, capital and systems were not included as they could not be isolated to a specific program activity.   
					

Return to footnote22 Referrer


Footnote 23


					   consistent application of the ITA and use of the EFILE software 
					

Return to footnote23 Referrer


Footnote 24


					   Business Analyst Capacity Review, November 2017
					

Return to footnote24 Referrer


Footnote 25


					   As of January 5, 2017
					

Return to footnote25 Referrer


Footnote 26


					   As of August 22, 2017 
					

Return to footnote26 Referrer


Footnote 27


					   Provinces and territories are determined by the first letter in the postal code, and the 2nd digit if a “0” is considered a rural address and any other character is considered urban. 
					

Return to footnote27 Referrer


Footnote 28


					   Value entered was not recognized as being a valid or left empty.
					

Return to footnote28 Referrer









Report a problem or mistake on this page












Please select all that apply:

A link, button or video is not working



It has a spelling mistake



Information is missing



Information is outdated or wrong



Login error when trying to access an account




I can't find what I'm looking for



Other issue not in this list



Submit



Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries, contact us.










Date modified:
2018-01-24





Formative Evaluation of the Charities Partnership and Outreach Program


Corporate Audit and Evaluation Branch
April 2008 




Table of Contents  
 Executive Summary 
 Introduction

 Background 
 Program description 
 Evaluation context 
 Methodology 
 
 Findings

 Program is relevant within context of Charities Regulatory Reform Initiative 
 Progress on funding projects 
 Original program design has not been fully realized 
 Limited progress in measuring program performance 
 Practices to consider for program improvements 
 
 Conclusion and Recommendations 
 Appendix A 
 Appendix B 



  Executive Summary
The Corporate Audit and Evaluation Branch conducted a formative evaluation of the Charities Partnership and Outreach Program (CPOP) to provide information and advice to senior management of the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) on whether the program is well positioned to meet its objectives and identify areas for improvement. As outlined in the Terms of Reference approved by the Agency Management Committee (AMC) in February 2007, the evaluation focused on program relevance within the context of the CRA and the federal government, program design, implementation and delivery, and program modifications. The scope of the evaluation included fiscal years 2004‑2005 to the second quarter of 2007-2008. The rationale for the program can be traced back to the Voluntary Sector Initiative, a joint undertaking launched in June 2000 by the Government of Canada and the voluntary sector to enhance their relationship and strengthen the capacity of the sector to better serve Canadians. In May 2003, the federal government released its report, Strengthening Canada’s Charitable Sector: Regulatory Reform, which included a total of 75 recommendations for improvement, of which several focused on the need for the federal regulator to be more proactive in providing information and education to the sector. In March 2005, Treasury Board (TB) approved the terms and conditions and released funding of $1 million in 2005‑2006, $1 million in 2006‑2007, $2 million in 2007-2008 and $3 million in subsequent years for CPOP. The program was to be phased-in through an incremental approach as was detailed in the Results-based Management and Accountability Framework (RMAF) included in the TB Submission. The Policy, Planning and Legislation Division, Charities Directorate, was originally responsible for program. On April 1, 2006, this responsibility was transferred to the Directorate’s newly created Client Interface and Service Division (CISD). We understand that the Charities Directorate established this program as part of its ongoing effort to inform and educate registered charities of their obligations under the Income Tax Act. The program is relevant to the CRA and to the federal government because CRA has a responsibility to maintain public confidence in the fairness and integrity of the tax system. This means providing ample support to those who wish to comply with the law in addition to taking the appropriate measures to identify and deal with cases of non-compliance. Registered charities that do not comply with the law are compromising the work of legitimate organizations by reducing public confidence and diverting funds that would otherwise be spent to benefit Canadians. In pursuing the program design issue, the evaluation found little analysis or documentation that led to the choice of policy instrument, i.e., a contribution program, as the most effective approach to implement the program. We expected that CRA’s decision to select this instrument to carry out the program’s objectives would be based on comprehensive analysis of existing outreach activities and the alternatives available to improve the sector outreach and consultation activities. We did not find evidence that such analysis had been undertaken. A more thorough assessment of program results, through a subsequent summative evaluation, is required to determine the impact of this program on compliance, and if the policy instrument was the most appropriate choice for implementing the program. Although the RMAF recognized that the CRA is not normally in the business of administering and managing contribution programs, it estimated that the Charities Directorate would be managing 5 to 10 agreements per year. At the time of the evaluation, the program was in its fourth year of operation and the third year that contribution funding has been available. Two calls for applications had been held and, with a new contribution agreement being entered in September 2007, three contribution agreements were in place. The first two contribution recipients had only recently begun delivering training sessions to the voluntary sector in the Fall of 2007. With an additional 3 agreements being entered into in January 2008 a total of six agreements are now in place; however, this would only be for a limited time period. The evaluation found that the program was not fully implemented as detailed in the original design approved by TB. While the activity of putting in place the contribution agreements has clearly been the focus of CPOP, this is to the exclusion of other key activities including promoting the program, collaborating with the voluntary sector and measuring performance. A performance measuring strategy, as required by the TB Policy on Transfer Payments, has not been implemented. Performance measurement data is required to support the summative evaluation committed by CRA in advance of the renewal of the terms and conditions for this program in March 2010. If performance data is not available, the value of conducting a summative evaluation is questionable.   We believe that the program area will continue to make program improvements based the knowledge and experience gained, including the examination of best practices, as the program progresses. In our evaluation report, we identified some practices for the program to consider and put forward 4 recommendations to be addressed by program management. The recommendations, in brief, are as follows: 
 revisit the original program design to reassess the feasibility of implementing the program in terms of what was planned as detailed in the TB Submission that was used to obtain funding for this program; 
 focus on developing and implementing a performance measurement strategy that will identify the baseline data that is required to measure performance and report on the success of this program; 
 develop and implement a communication strategy that clearly identifies the steps that will be taken, both in terms of collaboration and promotion, to help achieve the program objectives; and 
 implement the policies, procedures and information system(s) necessary to ensure that quality information is available to support decision-making, the measurement of performance as well as accountability and transparency of the program. 



 Introduction 


 Background 
1.1   The Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) regulates registered charities under the Income Tax Act (ITA). There are approximately 83,000 registered charities in Canada that are required to file an annual return with the CRA and meet certain requirements of the ITA concerning their expenditures and activities. The ITA exempts registered charities from paying income tax and allows for the issuance of tax receipts for donations that, in turn, can be claimed as tax credits by the donor to obtain partial tax relief. In addition, under the ITA, the CRA has responsibility for determining which organizations are eligible to be registered as charities and ensuring that registered charities comply with established rules and regulations. 1.2   The Charities Directorate is positioned within the Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs Branch (LPRAB) of the CRA. Its reported mission is “to promote compliance with the income tax legislation and regulations relating to charities through education, quality service, and responsible enforcement, thereby contributing to the integrity of the charitable sector and the social well being of Canadians.”  1.3   Over the last few years, the Charities Directorate has been concentrating on developing and implementing a comprehensive reform package designed to strengthen the regulatory environment for charities. Following the Directorate’s “education-first” approach to compliance, the Charities Partnership and Outreach Program (CPOP) was initiated in 2004.


 Program description 
1.4   The overall objective of CPOP is to ensure that the charitable sector is better educated concerning its regulatory obligations under the ITA, and therefore, better able to comply voluntarily. The main objectives of the program are to: 
raise awareness among the charitable sector of regulatory obligations under the ITA; 
increase the capacity of the charitable sector in meeting regulatory compliance requirements in a sustainable fashion; and
improve the capacity of the sector to develop and deliver sustainable compliance-based education programs.
 1.5   Within the broader context of regulatory reform, the Charities Directorate chose to pursue CPOP’s objectives by way of establishing a contribution program. Under the Treasury Board (TB) Policy on Transfer Payments, transfer payments in the form of grants and contributions can be used to assist the government in meeting its public policy objectives. 1.6   In March 2005, TB approved incremental funding of $12 million per year, beginning in 2004-2005, for the Charities Directorate to implement the Charities Regulatory Reform Initiative, which is aimed at improving the regulatory framework for charities while increasing public and voluntary sector confidence in the regulation of charities. Of this funding, TB specifically approved $1 million in 2005‑2006, $1 million in 2006‑2007, $2 million in 2007-2008 and $3 million in subsequent years for the CPOP. As stated in the terms and conditions included in the TB Submission, the costs of managing and administering the program are funded from existing reference levels. 1.7   As a contribution program, CPOP is administered by the CRA and provides funding, in the form of contribution payments, to eligible registered charities and non-profit organizations serving the charitable sector. Contribution recipients are then responsible for developing and delivering training and education to registered charities on how to comply with the ITA. As indicated in the program objectives above, the program intends to increase the capacity of the sector to meet regulatory compliance requirements in a sustainable fashion so that gains made during the funding stage will be maintained after the investment by government.  1.8   Originally, the Policy, Planning and Legislation Division (PPLD) of the Charities Directorate was responsible for the design and early implementation of the program. On April 1, 2006, responsibility for the ongoing management and administration of this program was transferred to the Directorate’s newly created Client Interface and Service Division (CISD). 1.9   Since the start-up of the program, there have been a number of full-time equivalents (FTE) at different levels assigned in various capacities to manage and administer the program. Currently, 2.2 FTEs, consisting of 2 FTEs at the program officer level (PM-05) and .2 of a FTE at the manager level (MG-05) are allocated to the program. Program costs for 2007-2008 are projected to be $170,437 in salaries and $11,998 in other operating and maintenance costs. The evaluation was not able to obtain historical data on program costs. 


 Evaluation context 
1.10   In the terms and conditions, the Charities Directorate committed to undertake a formative evaluation in April 2006. Formative evaluations are normally conducted a few years into the program and focus on the extent to which the program has been implemented as planned. In April 2006, although the program had been operational for two years, the contribution funding was phased-in and did not begin until the second year. Upon consultation with the TB, the evaluation was delayed until January 2007 to allow for additional progress to be made on the implementation of contribution agreements. 1.11   The purpose of the evaluation was to provide information and advice to the Commissioner and Agency Management Committee (AMC) on whether the program is well positioned and on track to meet its objectives as well as identify areas for improvement. As approved in the Terms of Reference (TOR) that were presented to AMC in February 2007, the evaluation focused on program relevance within the context of the CRA and the federal government, program design, implementation and delivery, and program modifications. The scope of our work included fiscal years 2004‑2005 to the second quarter of 2007-2008.  1.12   The CRA is also committed to conducting a summative evaluation, focused on the achievement of results, and reporting on the findings in advance of the renewal of the terms and conditions in March 2010. 1.13   Further details on this evaluation and the evaluation requirements of this program can be found in Appendix A: About the Evaluation and Appendix B: Glossary of Terms.


 Methodology 
1.14   Multiple lines of evidence were used to address evaluation issues. Evaluators conducted a review of files and documentation associated with the administration and management of the program with particular emphasis on the application and review process. A literature review of publications and other documentation related to registered charities, non‑profit organizations and the voluntary sector as well as grant and contribution (G&C) programs was also conducted. The first two contribution agreements were used as case studies to gain additional insight into the funding process. 1.15   The evaluation relied extensively on interviews with applicants, agreement holders, committee members and representatives of other federal government departments. The breakdown is provided in Exhibit 1 below. Exhibit 1:  Breakdown of Interviews 





 
 National Capital Region  
 Other Major City Centres  


 CRA Representatives  


 Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs 
 13 
 0 


 Finance & Administration 
 2 
 0 


 Committee Members  


 Application Review Committee (ARC) 
 3 
 5 


 Charities Advisory Committee (CAC) 
 0 
 6 


 Applicants  


 Whose applications were not referred to ARC 
 1 
 3 


 Whose applications were referred to ARC (including current agreement holders) 
 2 
 4 


 Other Government Departments  


 Human Resources & Social Development Canada 
 1 
 0 


 Transport Canada 
 1 
 0 


 Department of Justice Canada 
 2 
 0 


 Canadian Heritage 
 2 
 0 


 Health Canada 
 2 
 0 


 Total Interviews  
 29 
 18 





1.16   Based on a review of applications received, the evaluation team was able to identify a cross‑section of interviewees from across major Canadian city centres. In addition to their location, applicants were also selected based on how their application was assessed. Within the CRA, interviews were conducted with representatives of LPRAB and the Finance and Administration (F&A) Branch. In total, we conducted 47 interviews with 58 interviewees.


 Findings 


 Program is relevant within context of Charities Regulatory Reform Initiative 
2.1   Government-wide initiative supported regulatory reform of charities .   As identified in the TOR, the evaluation intended to assess the extent to which CPOP is relevant to the CRA and the federal government. Consequently, the rationale for this program was examined and traced back to the Voluntary Sector Initiative (VSI). The Government of Canada and the voluntary sector launched the VSI in June 2000 to enhance their relationship and strengthen the capacity of the sector to better serve Canadians. The VSI resulted in the establishment of the Joint Regulatory Table (JRT) in November 2000, a working group that was co‑chaired by the Director General, Charities Directorate, and a representative of the voluntary sector. 2.2  The JRT was asked to study and make recommendations to improve the legislative and regulatory environment in which the voluntary sector operates. In August 2002, JRT released an interim report and then held public consultations in 21 cities across the country. People from a wide range of voluntary sector organizations, their advisors, provincial government departments and the general public offered their views on the interim report and its recommendations. In total, 524 representatives from 388 organizations participated in the consultations. 2.3   In May 2003, the JRT released its report, Strengthening Canada’s Charitable Sector: Regulatory Reform, which included a total of 75 recommendations for improvement. Due to the number of comments received during the consultation on the issue of education, several of the recommendations focused on the need for the federal regulator to be more proactive in providing information and education to the sector. 2.4   CRA identified strategic measures for enhanced compliance-based outreach and education.  As described above, in 2003 the federal government recognized and recommended that CRA take measures for improving educational activities directed at registered charities. Following this, CRA’s Charities Directorate developed a 2003-2004 Business Case on “Public Awareness and Sector Outreach (Partnership Activities)”, as one of several business cases related to regulatory reform. 2.5   The issue put forward in the business case was the determination and implementation of the most effective means available to improve the voluntary sector outreach and consultation activities of the CRA. The business case reported that efforts to date to educate the sector about its compliance responsibilities had achieved only a degree of success, and innovative ways of reaching out to the sector had not been sought out. Furthermore, the case stated that efforts had not been made to consult extensively with the sector to seek input as to the best means of increasing compliance through education and outreach. 2.6   The document made references to the “widely held views that the current sector outreach and consultation activities, although useful, are insufficient”. The business case did not include, or make reference to, analysis that supported these statements. In addition, the business case stated that improved training and education would assist registered charities in meeting their filing requirements, improve the quality of the information received, and for CRA, reduce the current workload associated with these issues. A new strategy was proposed for education and outreach that would be based on enhanced communications and partnerships with the sector, and establishing a G&C program (the contribution program that became CPOP). 2.7   Sector outreach identified as a key area for regulatory reform.  In April 2004, the Charities Directorate announced a five-year action plan to initiate the Charities Regulatory Reform Initiative in response to the JRT recommendations. The action plan identified public awareness and sector outreach as a key area for regulatory reform. As documented in a media fact sheet issued in April 2004, improved sector outreach was important because registered charities had asked for CRA’s assistance in understanding the rules and obligations associated with being a registered charity. The same fact sheet identified the implementation of a strategic funding program that would provide funds to the voluntary sector to deliver training and education to registered charities as well as supplement other outreach activities as part of an expanded sector outreach program. 2.8   In addition to the findings of the JRT, the Charities Directorate points to selected CRA data, such as annual return, revocation and audit data, as evidence of the need for enhanced outreach activities. For example, the Directorate cites data on the number of registered charities that have their status revoked every year, and suggests that there is a need for outreach. Over the past five fiscal years, 10,336 charities had their registered status revoked, either voluntarily by the charity itself, or by the CRA as a result of the registered charity not filing its annual return, or in other serious instances of non-compliance with the law, for what is termed “for cause”. 2.9    As demonstrated in Exhibit 2 below, the majority of charities have their registered status revoked for failure to file their annual return. An average of 1,181 charities or 1.45% of registered charities lost their registered status over the past five fiscal years. In addition, the 2003-2004 business case also stated that the majority of charities, whose registered status is revoked due to failure to file, reapply to the CRA for registered status. 2.10   The Charities Directorate also points to audit data to support the ongoing need for outreach. As detailed in the Registered Charities Newsletter published in August 2007, of the audits completed in 2006-2007: 
52% resulted in education letters to the charity to explain the rules and suggest appropriate corrective actions;
22% required no changes;
20% resulted in compliance agreements, which are negotiated between the CRA and the charity, to address issues of non-compliance; 
3% resulted in revocation; and
3% were comprised of annulments, pre-registration audits, and voluntary revocations.
 Exhibit 2:  Revocation of Registered Charity Status 





Fiscal Year
Registered Charities
Revocations


 
Reason / % of Registered Charities


Total
Voluntary
%
Failure to File
%
Cause
%


2002-2003
80,517
1,946
880
1.09%
1,058
1.31%
8
0.01%


2003-2004
80,419
2,013
  717
   0.89%
1,292
  1.61%
4
0.00%


2004-2005
81,417
   1,801
  802
   0.99%
  989
  1.21%
10
0.01%


2005-2006
82,596
   1,799
  918
   1.11%
  871
  1.05%
10
0.01%


2006-2007
82,423
   2,777
1,057
   1.28%
1,693
  2.05%
27
0.03%


Total over 5 years
10,336
4,374
5.36%
5,903
  7.24%
59
0.07%


    Average over 5 years
   2,067
  875
   1.07%
1,181
  1.45%
12
0.01%


  Source:  Client Interface and Service Division, Charities Directorate.





  2.11   Limited analysis and documentation to support choice of policy instrument.  The decision to implement a contribution program was likely based on the JRT’s recommendation that the CRA find new, innovative ways of delivering education to charities by building partnerships with the sector. However, the evaluation team did not find any evidence that additional research and analysis had been undertaken in relation to the implementation of the contribution program. There was no evidence that existing outreach activities as well as different alternatives and the risks, costs and benefits of each were assessed and compared. The 2003-2004 business case stated that CRA’s existing approach to outreach was ineffective but did not include, or make reference to, research and analysis identifying the reasons why and the recommendations for improvement. 2.12   Furthermore, the TB Policy on Transfer Payments imposes certain requirements as part of the approval process for the terms and conditions of contribution programs. Particular emphasis is placed on the need for the program to measure, report and be accountable for program results. We found that, although a Results-based Management and Accountability Framework (RMAF) was prepared as part of the TB Submission, a performance measurement strategy was not implemented and this has impacted on the program’s ability to report on results. Performance measurement is discussed in greater detail later in this report. 2.13   It should be noted that current program management approached Program Evaluation with concerns regarding the feasibility of implementing the performance measurement strategy and evaluation plan that was included in the RMAF prior to the commencement of this evaluation. Nonetheless, the evaluation team was still required to use the TB Submission, including the RMAF, to assess the extent to which the program had been implemented as planned.  2.14   This program is consistent with the Charities Directorate on-going effort to inform and educate registered charities of their obligations under the law. The need to educate and inform remains relevant because CRA has a responsibility to maintain public confidence in the fairness and integrity of the tax system. This means providing ample support to those who wish to comply with the law in addition to taking the appropriate measures to identify and deal with cases of non-compliance. Registered charities that do not comply with the law are compromising the work of legitimate organizations by reducing public confidence and diverting funds that would otherwise be spent to benefit Canadians. 2.15   Although the program is considered relevant in terms of the formative evaluation, a more thorough assessment of program results, which is not planned until the summative evaluation, is required to determine the impact of this program on compliance and if the policy instrument was the most appropriate choice for implementing the program.


 Progress on funding projects 
2.16   As a contribution program, CPOP is administered by the CRA and provides funding, in the form of contribution payments, to eligible registered charities and non‑profit organizations serving the charitable sector. Contribution recipients are then responsible for developing and delivering projects that will increase compliance and build a responsive charitable sector. 2.17   Three contribution agreements are in place.  The program is now in its fourth year of operation and the third year that contribution funding has been available. At the time of the evaluation, two calls for applications had been held and, with a new contribution agreement being entered in September 2007, three contribution agreements were in place. The funding priority for the first call, which was focused on the Registered Charity Information Return (T3010A), resulted in two agreements:  a 32‑month regional agreement in the amount of $237,903 and a 32‑month national agreement in the amount of $1,353,400. 2.18   The second call had two different funding priorities:  (1) fundraising, receipting and maintaining books and records; and (2) foreign activities. At the time of the evaluation, the second call had resulted in a 30‑month national agreement in the amount of $693,830 that was signed on September 1, 2007. Due to the timing of the third agreement, it was not examined in any detail as part of the evaluation. Exhibit 3 on the following page provides an overview of the activities associated with entering into these agreements. 2.19   From the time the first call closed on July 15, 2005, it took approximately 10 and 12 months respectively to enter into the first two contribution agreements. The third agreement was signed approximately 8 months after the second call closed on December 22, 2006. It should be noted that discussions with contribution recipients were put on hold at the request of senior management for a period of time in the Fall of 2007. Exhibit 3:  Overview For Establishing Agreements 





 Time Period  
  Activity  


May 2005 to August 2006


CRA announced the first call for applications
Call was open from May 17 to July 15, 2005
Call resulted in 57 applications
PPLD (CISD) referred 14 applications to the Application Review Committee (ARC)
ARC recommended 2 of the top 10 applicants pursue a joint application
CRA entered into discussions with these applicants
Applicants worked together but did not submit a joint application (resulted in 1 applicant going forward with their application)
CRA entered into discussions with 2 applicants (another applicant was recommended from top 10)
CRA entered into 2 contribution agreements to provide education on the annual return in May and August of 2006
 


October 2006 to  September 2007


CRA announced the second call for applications
Call was open from October 31 to December 22, 2006
Call resulted in 51 applications
CISD referred 16 to ARC 
ARC recommended 7 applications for funding
CISD requested approval from the Assistant Commissioner of LPRAB to enter into discussions with 5 applicants
CISD entered into discussions on a phased-in basis
Senior management put discussions on hold
CRA enters into contribution agreement to provide education on fundraising, receipting and maintaining books and records in September 2007
 


October 2007 to January 2008


CRA enters into 2 contributions agreements to provide education on fundraising, receipting and maintaining books and records in January 2008
CRA enters into 1 agreement to provide education on foreign activities in January 2008
 





2.20    The RMAF, within the context of discussing data collection issues, recognized that the CRA is not normally in the business of administering and managing contribution programs. It also estimated that the Charities Directorate would be managing 5 to 10 agreements per year and identified that this was a low and manageable volume of agreements. We have recently been advised that a total of four agreements have been entered into as a result of the second call since the completion of the examination phase of the evaluation. If there is overlap between the agreements resulting from the first and second calls, there may be a total of six agreements in place at one time; however, this would only be for a limited time period. 2.21   One of the reasons stated repeatedly by the program area for the number of agreements in place was the newness of contributions programs to the CRA and the need to educate resources both within and outside CISD. In addition, current and former program managers interviewed emphasized that a particularly cautious approach to implementation was taken given the uniqueness of the program within CRA and the high profile nature and risks associated with G&C programs in general. 2.22   Documentation was in place to assist applicants in applying to the program as well as to assist the program in the management and administration of the contribution agreements. In contrast, a lack of program documentation was in place to support the overall management of the program and ensure knowledge is transferred. When documentation was available, it was not always easily accessible or clear as to when the document was created and finalized. This caused some unease as to the reliability and completeness of the documentation. 2.23   Training and education activities by contribution recipients are underway.  Based on information provided by the contribution recipients during the examination phase, a total of 31 sessions were scheduled for completion by November 14, 2007. Based on 11 sessions that have been completed to date, the average number of participants per session was 15. It is not known at this time exactly how many sessions will ultimately be delivered; however, based on the original applications submitted by the contribution recipients and an average of 15 participants per session, it is possible that 3375 participants will attend the 225 targeted sessions by December 2008.  2.24   It should be noted that both contribution recipients plan to use technology to make the training and education available to a greater number of individuals, thereby increasing the potential reach of each project. One of the contribution recipients has 140 participants registered for telephone learning sessions that will be held in January and February 2008. Again, the final numbers and the success of this type of training are not known at this time. 2.25   Use of available funding.  As the first year of the program (i.e., 2004-2005) was dedicated to planning, contribution funding was made available in the second year of the program (i.e., 2005-2006). Contribution funding started at $1 million in 2005‑2006 and 2006-2007, increased to $2 million in 2007-2008 and will further increase to $3 million in 2008-2009 and subsequent years. For grants and contribution programs, money not spent in one fiscal year can be carried-forward up to the amount of the allocation for the given fiscal year; if the money cannot be carried over to the next fiscal year, it is considered a lapse. Given this, the program spent $501,200 and had a lapse of $498,800 in 2006-2007. Recent confirmation of 2007-2008 expenditures revealed that the program spent $939,244 and will lapse an estimated $60,756 in 2007-2008. Exhibit 4 below provides an overview of contribution funding for the program. Exhibit 4:  Contribution Funding 





 Fiscal Year  
 Allocation (Vote 5)  
  Carried Forward from Previous Year  
 Current Year Expenditure/ Commitment  
 Potential Carry-Forward/  Lapse  


2004-2005
0
0
0
0


2005-2006
$1,000,000
0
0
$1,000,000


2006-2007
$1,000,000
$1,000,000
$501,200
$1,498,800


2007-2008
$2,000,000
$1,000,000
$939,244
$2,060,756


2008-2009
$3,000,000
$2,000,000
$1,918,686
$3,081,314


2009-2010
$3,000,000
$3,000,000
 $1,142,143
$4,857,857


   Data Source:  Client Interface and Service Division, Charities Directorate and validated by the Finance and Administration Branch (April 2008). 





 Original program design has not been fully realized 
2.26   As described earlier, little documentation was found detailing the original program design. Given this, the RMAF was used to assess the extent to which the program had been implemented as designed. A copy of the logic model provides additional information on the expected program activities, outputs and outcomes and is included (see Exhibit 5 below). As noted previously, prior to the start of this evaluation, the program area had raised questions regarding the appropriateness of the RMAF and wanted to revise it accordingly. Given that the start date had already been delayed, the evaluation team proceeded with the evaluation and committed to providing CISD advice and guidance with respect to updating the RMAF. Program Evaluation, in consultation with CISD, will develop a revised evaluation plan for the summative evaluation upon conclusion of the formative evaluation.   Exhibit 5:  Charities Partnership and Outreach Program Logic Model   Results-Based Management and Accountability Framework (RMAC), Treasury Board Submission, Approved March 2005 







2.27   Collaboration and promotion activities have not taken place.  Collaborating with the charitable sector and other stakeholders and program promotion were two key activities in the original RMAF. We found little evidence of formal collaboration activities that had been undertaken to engage the charitable sector and key stakeholders to conduct a needs assessment and identify funding priorities. The Charities Advisory Committee (CAC), identified as a key stakeholder, met 7 times from April 2004 to February 2006 before it was cancelled in September 2006. The evaluation team was recently advised that a series of consultations with small and rural charities were held in October 2007 but this initiative was not included in the scope of the evaluation. 2.28   The RMAF identified a number of activities that would be developed as part of a comprehensive communication plan. Examples included the use of targeted distribution lists to notify eligible recipients of calls for applications and the integration of CPOP in existing CRA communication products. Although some work had been done on a draft marketing strategy and communications plan, neither of these tools had been fully established at the time of the evaluation. 2.29   To date, much of the program promotion activity has focused on the calls for applications. Information, such as the funding guide and application (RC4411), assessment criteria, terms and conditions, and frequently asked questions are posted on the CRA Website. The Minister of National Revenue formally launched each call for applications and a news release was issued to that effect. Subsequent news releases were issued to announce the signing of the first two contribution agreements. 2.30   With the exception of interviewees from other federal government departments, all interviewees had some knowledge of the program, and consequently, the interviews could not be used to assess awareness of the program. In spite of this, eight interviewees felt that overall awareness of the program was low within the sector. At least four interviewees were not aware of recent program developments, such as the second call for applications, or the status of the training and education being delivered by contribution recipients. 2.31   Information on the program was also included in three issues of the Registered Charities Newsletter that, as of May 2007, had 14,035 subscribers on its electronic mailing list. However, a total of 34 publications, information circulars and interpretation bulletins related to registered charities are currently published on the CRA website and could potentially be used to further promote the program. One example is the Registered Charities:  What’s New – Important Changes to the Law Affecting Registered Charities (RC4414) that was updated in May 2007. 2.32   CISD is also responsible for the management and administration of the charities roadshows. Roadshows are free information sessions provided to registered charities on a yearly basis on topics of interest, changes to the law and common compliance issues. The evaluation team had discussions with the program area on how roadshows could best be used to promote or complement the CPOP. Exactly how the two programs will work together is not known at this time. 2.33   Program promotion needs to be better targeted.  The eligible recipients for this program include two distinct groups: (1) registered charities as defined by the ITA;and (2) non‑profit organizations serving the charitable sector. The evaluation team found that CISD had access to information that could be used to promote the program to each and every registered charity. The same type of information for non-profit organizations was not available to CISD and subsequently cannot be used in the same manner to promote the program, or to assist CISD in determining the risks associated with non-profit organizations that apply for funding. An analysis to further breakdown the two broad types of eligible recipients into target audiences for promotional purposes has not been undertaken. 2.34   It is also not clear how many eligible recipients would actually be in a position to apply for contribution funding as compared to those that need training and education. We were informed on various occasions of the disparate needs and capacity levels of the charitable sector and that many registered charities do not have the capacity in place to deliver projects of this scope. Criteria is in place to assist with the assessment of applications for funding; however, the program area has not defined expectations that could be used by CRA to determine if an applicant has the capacity to work in partnership with the CRA and deliver the training in a sustainable fashion.


 Limited progress in measuring program performance 
2.35   As identified in the TOR, this evaluation planned to examine whether the existing performance measurement strategy is appropriate to ensure that program management is able to measure its success in achieving its objectives, and whether this strategy is sufficiently developed and implemented to allow ongoing measurement of program performance. As indicated previously, the TB Policy on Transfer Payments imposes certain requirements on contribution programs and of particular importance is the need for the program to measure and report on results. Results-based performance measurement data is required to support the summative evaluation committed by CRA in the TB Submission. If the required performance measurement data is not in place, the value of conducting a summative evaluation is questionable. 2.36   Contribution recipients are required to report on performance.   Contribution recipients, as part of their agreements, are currently required to provide CISD with an evaluation framework, a mid‑term evaluation report and a final evaluation report. The first two contribution recipients have worked together to develop a feedback questionnaire to be administered to participants upon completion of each training session. Both contribution recipients intend to follow‑up with selected participants after the sessions; however, this will only be done once and will not cover multiple filing periods. Contribution recipients are basically required to self-assess and evaluate the results of their projects. 2.37   Additional program performance measurement is required.   The nature of this program, which relies on third parties to deliver training and education, and its objectives make performance measurement a challenge. CPOP’s objectives focus on increasing awareness of ITA regulatory obligations and the capacity of the charitable sector to meet its obligations and deliver sustainable education. The evaluation team found that the program objectives were not well-defined, measurable or realistic given the nature and size of the program. We also found that the program is not independently assessing performance and measuring results in terms of these objectives. The Independent Blue Ribbon Panel (BRP) on Grants and Contributions, in its report of July 2006, stressed the importance of independent performance measurement and noted that, while G&C programs are designed to achieve public policy objectives, it is rare that a single recipient is in a position to meet these objectives alone. 2.38   The evaluation team found that limited analysis and documentation was available to support the selection of funding priorities and of the data necessary for future performance measurement. Data in relation to the funding priority established for the first call for applications is available from other areas within the Charities Directorate and could be used to establish baselines and assess whether there has been any changes over time. However, it is unclear as to what data is available to the program area that could be used to measure and assess the impact of these funding priorities on compliance behaviour. The results of audits could be used; however, a total of 847 audits were conducted in 2006‑2007 and the number of audits that would be conducted on registered charities that received training is not known at this time.  2.39   The program area has raised concerns with respect to the costs of implementing a performance measurement strategy and the confidentiality and privacy of data collected by contribution recipients during the course of their projects. These concerns will need to be taken into consideration in the development of the performance measurement strategy. Regardless, the program needs to be in a position to measure performance and demonstrate its impact to CRA senior management and be in accordance with the TB Policy on Transfer Payments. It should also be noted that, given the limited reach of this program in terms of the overall population of registered charities, it might be difficult to attribute changes in compliance behaviour to this program.    2.40   As part of updating the RMAF, Program Evaluation is willing to provide CISD with advice and guidance on the development and implementation of a performance measurement strategy upon conclusion of the formative evaluation.


 Practices to consider for program improvements 
2.41   In addition to the issues of program relevance, design and implementation to date, the evaluation pursued alternatives or modifications to the current program. This section puts forward practices for consideration by program management for program improvement. 2.42   The BRP reported that over 50 departments and agencies spend some $27 billion each year on 800 grants and contributions to individuals, corporations and non-government organizations. G&C programs are used to assist the Government of Canada in meeting its public policy objectives by entering into funding partnerships with organizations that deliver programs and services to Canadians. 2.43   Interviews with selected representatives of Department of Justice Canada, Canadian Heritage, Health Canada, Transport Canada, and Human Resources and Social Development Canada who were responsible for the management, administration and evaluation of G&C programs were conducted as part of this evaluation. As a result of these interviews, it became apparent to the evaluation team that management and administration practices of these programs were quite diverse. In fact, the BRP reported that  “…the manner in which G&C programs are currently managed and administered in the federal government is as diverse as the public policy objectives for which they are put in place to achieve”. Despite the differences, there are many other practices that could be considered by CISD in the ongoing implementation of the program. 2.44   It should be noted that during the evaluation, the program area was reflecting on lessons learned from the first call for applications, and had identified potential modifications to the program for future calls. In particular, the information gathered and experience gained as a result of the first call was used to make improvements to the second call for applications (e.g., revised contribution agreement template). 2.45   As indicated previously, the evaluation team conducted interviews with representatives of the voluntary sector. These interviews, combined with the interviews conducted with other government departments, identified a number of modifications that, upon further investigation, could be made to improve the application process. For example, it was suggested that a 2-tier application process be implemented that would first require the submission of a letter of intent, and then based on the CRA’s assessment of the letter of intent, only then require the submission of a detailed application. It was felt that a 2-tier process would benefit both the CRA and applicants by streamlining the process and prevent applicants from putting significant time and effort into an application that is unlikely to receive funding. 2.46   Another area where applicants felt CRA could make improvements is in the provision of information to applicants at various stages of the application process in order to improve transparency. It was felt that additional feedback could have been provided to applicants on the quality of their applications and areas for improvement. It was also felt that additional information on successful applicants, the status of the projects, and subsequent calls for applications would be beneficial. 2.47   The ARC, which included representatives from the voluntary sector and other government departments, assessed applications and made recommendations for funding. Many interviewees noted that the use of the ARC was a positive feature of the program as it added to the value and credibility of the process and the quality of applicants selected. Building on this practice, it has been suggested that there are areas associated with the ARC that could be formalized (e.g., operating guidelines, feedback to the ARC members on funded projects). 2.48   Other interviewees questioned whether CRA has made full use of organizations (e.g., philanthropic foundations) that are well established in the sector and are already providing training and education on the ITA to their members. These organizations could be used to expand on existing training and education, in particular within specific groups within the voluntary sector, as well as provide a forum for collaboration. 2.49   The program area has also identified areas in which it would like to make modifications. One of these includes having an open call for funding to eliminate the need for applicants to submit applications within a specified period of time. CISD would also like to allow funding to be used for research, and in the 2006‑2008 funding guide, added research and technical studies to the list of projects that are provided as examples that would be eligible for funding.  2.50   Finally, the BRP provides an additional source of information for potential modifications. In response to the BRP recommendations, the President of the TB announced a series of immediate actions in February 2007 that had led to the development of an action plan to reform the administration of G&C programs, including the creation of a G&C Centre of Expertise. In June 2007, the Charities Directorate advised the evaluation team that a gap analysis of BRP recommendations would be undertaken to identify opportunities for program modifications. We were also advised that the Charities Directorate would continue to monitor the activities of the G&C Centre of Expertise to determine if additional program modifications could be made.


 Conclusion and Recommendations 
3.1    The creation of CPOP was based on a government-wide initiative that supported strategic initiatives that aimed to improve, through projects, compliance with the regulatory environment in which charities operate. We found that CPOP is relevant to the CRA and the federal government, and the program area points to selected CRA data to demonstrate the need for enhanced outreach and compliance-based education. The evaluation found little analysis or documentation that led to CRA’s choice of policy instrument, i.e., a contribution program, as the most effective approach to implement the program. A more thorough assessment of program results, through a subsequent summative evaluation, is required to determine the impact of this program on compliance and if the policy instrument was the most appropriate choice for implementing the program. 3.2   At the time of the evaluation, three agreements were in place and training within the sector had only recently begun. Little of the approved funding has been spent, and there was a lapse in the first two years that contribution funding was available. Our review of CPOP’s current operations found various deviations from the original program design that was approved by TB. While the activity of putting in place the contribution agreements has clearly been the focus of CPOP, this was to the exclusion of collaboration and promotion activities. More importantly, a strategy to assess and measure overall program performance has not been developed and this raises significant concerns with respect to the CISD’s ability to determine if the program is on track to achieve their objectives. As stated previously, if the required performance measurement data is not in place, the value of conducting a summative evaluation is questionable. 3.3   We believe that CISD will continue to make improvements as knowledge and experience is gained. In the section below, we put forward some recommendations that might assist the program in this respect. Nevertheless, as the CRA is currently committed to conducting a summative evaluation and results‑based data is needed in order to conduct such an evaluation, it is essential that CISD work on developing and implementing a performance measurement strategy to measure the impact of the program. These program results are partic  ularly important due to the renewal of the terms and conditions that is required for this program in March 2010.


 Recommendations 
Recommendation No.1 
Program management should revisit the original program design to reassess the feasibility of implementing the program in terms of what was planned as detailed in the TB Submission that was used to obtain funding for this program. The current state of the program should be documented as well as the activities that are needed to ensure that the program is fully implemented. If there are activities that are not deemed feasible, the impact of not implementing these activities should be assessed in anticipation of the renewal of the terms and conditions in March 2010. 
Management Response The Charities Directorate agrees with this recommendation. The Directorate plans to modify the Program design as articulated in the RMAF. In addition, the Directorate will continue to build on the significant progress that has been made since implementing the program in 2005-2006. In particular, the Charities Directorate will continue to review and update administrative and program management policies, directives and practices based on Treasury Board policies, recommendations from the Centre of Expertise on Grants and Contributions, once established, as well as legislative amendments and other applicable government policies and practices. Recommendation No. 2  
Program management should focus on developing and implementing a performance measurement strategy that will identify the baseline data that is required to measure performance and report on the success of this program. Given that CRA has committed to conduct and report on the results of the summative evaluation to TB, this data is needed from both an ongoing program management perspective as well as to ensure that the evaluation team has the data necessary to evaluate the achievement of program objectives during the summative evaluation. 
Management Response The Charities Directorate agrees with this recommendation. The Directorate recognizes the importance of implementing a performance measurement strategy. In the months that follow, the Directorate will study how to strengthen performance measurement to ensure that a strategy is implemented that reflects both the size of the program and the need to demonstrate results. This will include the collection of reliable data to support the on-going administration of the Program as well as any assessments and program evaluations necessary to meet both legal and policy requirements.  Recommendation No. 3 
Program management should develop and implement a communication strategy that clearly identifies the steps that will be taken, both in terms of collaboration and promotion, to help achieve the program objectives. 
Management Response The Charities Directorate agrees with the importance of promoting the Program. As such, the Charities Directorate will revise its communication strategy to promote program activities consistent with administrative milestones (i.e., calls for proposals, the signing of agreements, projects up-dates and completion). In addition, the Charities Directorate will continue to promote the Program through sector specific presentations, Charities Information Sessions, the Charities Directorate’s external Newsletter and the What’s New publication.  Recommendation No. 4 
Program management should implement the policies, procedures and information system(s) necessary to ensure that quality information is available to support decision-making, the measurement of performance as well as accountability and transparency of the program. 
Management Response The Charities Directorate agrees with this recommendation and will continue to strengthen its efforts to promote greater accountability and transparency. A new Charities Tracking System has been developed and is currently being implemented across the Directorate. Once the system has been aligned to meet the Program’s needs, staff will be able to more effectively track activities relating to the administration of the Program, which will further assist with decision-making, reporting and overall accountability.   Final Comments from Program Management In support of the above Management Response, Program Management will continue to work with Program Evaluation in order to develop an action plan. The Charities Directorate has benefited from the evaluation report. Once the recommendations have been implemented, the Program should realize further efficiencies, increased effectiveness and strengthened accountability. In closing, the Charities Directorate would like to take this opportunity to thank everyone involved in the Formative Evaluation.


 Appendix A 
About the Evaluation  Purpose  The purpose of this evaluation was to provide information and advice to the Commissioner and senior management on whether the CPOP is well positioned and on track to meet its objectives, and to identify areas for improvements. Evaluation Issues  This evaluation focused on the three following issues: 
To what extent is the program relevant to the CRA and the federal government? This issue examined the rationale for the program in order to determine whether the program is relevant in terms of the current strategic objectives and priorities of the CRA and the federal government.
To what extent has the program been successfully designed, implemented and delivered to achieve expected benefits? This issue examined the design and implementation of the program to determine if it was delivered as planned; the extent to which key stakeholders were aware of the program and were involved in program design and delivery; the effectiveness of application, selection and subsequent monitoring processes; and the adequacy of the program resources. This included an examination of the performance measurement strategy to ensure that the program is able to measure progress against its objectives, in particular, in light of the upcoming summative evaluation.
Are there alternatives or modifications to the current program that would enhance the realization of Agency objectives?
 This issue examined whether the program should undertake a different direction or make modifications to the current design and delivery of the program. It will explore alternative approaches, best practices and potential modifications to the program. Evaluation Requirements    In March 2005, Ministers approved the terms and conditions, as part of the TB Submission, for the CPOP. As stipulated in the Policy on Transfer Payments, the TB Submission also included, in the RMAF, the evaluation criteria that would be used to assess the effectiveness of the program. The CRA committed to undertake a formative evaluation that would report in December 2006. As a formative typically focuses on processes, such as performance measurement, to identify areas for program improvement, the evaluation was planned to begin in 2006‑2007 after the program had been operational for a full year. CRA also committed to undertake a summative evaluation that would report in September 2008 in advance of the renewal of the terms and conditions for this program in March 2010. It should be noted that the evaluation issues for both the formative and summative evaluation identified in the original RMAF were refocused. As approved in the Terms of Reference, issues related to program relevance and program alternatives or modifications were brought forward and examined as part of the formative evaluation. In addition, an assessment of program results will not take place until the summative evaluation. As a result, a revised evaluation strategy to reflect these changes will be developed as part of this evaluation.


 Appendix B 
Glossary of Terms  Application Review Committee (ARC) – Applications received through the CPOP that meet the screening criteria are forwarded to an Application Review Committee (ARC). The ARC includes representation from the CRA and the sector. Depending on the nature of the applications, representatives from other federal departments, the provinces, territories, and academia may also be involved in the review. The Committee considers factors such as innovativeness, sustainability, and scope of the project when evaluating the applications. Blue Ribbon Panel (BRP) – The Blue Ribbon Panel was an independent   panel commissioned in June 2006 by the President of the TB. The panel conducted a six-month review of the administration of federal G&C programs and recommended measures to make the delivery of these programs more efficient while ensuring greater accountability. Charitable sector – The charitable sector is defined by those charities that are federally registered under the Income Tax Act.  Contribution agreement – Each application that is approved for funding will be subject to a formal agreement specifying the responsibilities of each party; the conditions under which payments will be made in accordance with the TB Policy on Transfer Payments and the Financial Administration Act; and mutually agreed upon measures to assess the success of the activities in achieving the objectives of the project. Formative evaluation – A formative evaluation is a type of evaluation that has the purpose of ongoing program improvement. It is usually conducted early in the implementation of a program, and used to evaluate if the program is on the right track to achieving its objectives. This type of evaluation usually focuses on issues such as implementation, relevance and possible alternatives or modifications. Non-profit organization – Under the Income Tax Act, a non-profit organization is an association, club, or society operating exclusively for social welfare, civic improvement, pleasure, recreation, or any other purpose except profit. It is not a charity. Performance measurement strategy – The selection, development and ongoing use of performance measurements to guide decision-making. The range of information in a performance measurement strategy could include: reach/target group, outputs and outcomes, performance measurements, data sources, methodology and costs. Results‑based Management and Accountability Framework (RMAF) - A document which serves as a blueprint for managers to help them focus on measuring and reporting on outcomes throughout the lifecycle of a policy, program or initiative. The RMAF includes: program profile, logic model, ongoing performance measurement strategy, evaluation strategy, evaluation issues and questions, and reporting strategy. Registered charity – A registered charity refers to a charitable organization, public foundation, or private foundation that was established in Canada and is resident in Canada. It is operated for charitable purposes and must devote its resources to charitable activities. A registered charity has received a registration number from the Canada Revenue Agency and is exempt from paying tax on its revenue. It can issue donation receipts for gifts that it receives. Summative evaluation – Summative evaluations are typically conducted further into the implementation of a program and focus on the achievement of results. This type of evaluation focuses on program results, especially for making decisions about program continuation, expansion, reduction and funding. It addresses outcomes in order to evaluate the program in terms of effectiveness as compared with similar type programs. Treasury Board Policy on Transfer Payments – A policy developed by TB to ensure sound management of, control over, and accountability for transfer payments. Transfer payments are made on the basis of an appropriation for which no goods or services are directly received, but which may require the recipient to provide a report or other information subsequent to receiving payment. Three types of transfer payments are grants, contributions, and “other transfer payments”. Voluntary sector – The voluntary sector is one of the three pillars, along with the public and private sector, that make up Canadian society. The voluntary sector, in its broadest sense, is composed of all non-profit organizations (including registered charities) that exist in Canada.





Report a problem or mistake on this page












Please select all that apply:

A link, button or video is not working



It has a spelling mistake



Information is missing



Information is outdated or wrong



Login error when trying to access an account




I can't find what I'm looking for



Other issue not in this list



Submit



Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries, contact us.










Date modified:
2008-07-11





2008-2009 Annual Report


Corporate Audit and Evaluation Branch April 2009 




Table of Contents  
 Introduction 
 Mandate 
 Financial Resources 
 Branch Performance 
 Follow-up Activities 
 Business Advisory Activities 
 OAG Liaison 
 Professional Practices and Corporate Services 
 Internal Disclosure 
 Appendix A 



 Introduction 
Corporate Audit and Evaluation Branch (CAEB) carries out independent, objective assurance and business advisory activities designed to add value and improve Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) operations. CAEB helps CRA accomplish its objectives by bringing a systematic, disciplined approach to evaluate programs and improve the effectiveness of risk management, control, and governance processes. It operates in accordance with the CRA Internal Audit Policy, CRA Program Evaluation Policy and the International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Audit and the Treasury Board Secretariat (TBS) Program Evaluation Standards. The CRA Internal Audit and Program Evaluation policies require the head of the CAEB to periodically report to senior management and the audit committee on authority, responsibility and performance relative to an established plan. This is met through in-year reports, a follow-up report, an annual business plan, as well as this annual report that provides an overview of the branch’s performance for the 2008-2009 fiscal year. Information is presented on program delivery results as measured against the objectives set out in the 2008-2009 CAEB Business Plan, as well as branch developments and accomplishments. In addition to this report and to further promote transparency, internal audit and program evaluation budgets and major activities are reported to Canadians through the annual CRA Departmental Report on Plans and Priorities, and all approved final internal audit and program evaluation reports are proactively posted to the Agency website. The Director General (DG) of Corporate Audit and Evaluation Branch is accountable to both the CRA Commissioner and the Agency’s Board of Management (BoM) Audit Committee. The DG is responsible for the Branch’s Internal Audit (IA), Program Evaluation (PE), Professional Practices and Corporate Services (PPCS), and Office of the Auditor General (OAG) Liaison functions. In addition, the DG of CAEB is the Senior Officer for Internal Disclosures for the CRA pursuant to the Public Servants Disclosure Protection Act.  CAEB operates within a well-defined governance framework that includes: a Management Audit and Evaluation Committee (MAEC) chaired by the Commissioner and comprised of CRA senior executives; the BoM Audit Committee comprised of external members that are independent of the Agency; and DG participation as a member of the Agency Management Committee (AMC). The DG is also a member of the Agency’s Resource and Investment Management Committee (RIMC) and has established working relationships with other CRA senior management and BoM committees.  The MAEC is the reporting committee for the Internal Audit and Program Evaluation functions. Appendix A provides a list of CAEB contacts.


  Mandate
The CAEB mandate is to support the achievement of the Agency's strategic goals by providing the Commissioner and senior management with independent and objective information, advice and assurance on the soundness of the Agency's management framework and on the effectiveness, efficiency and economy of its strategies, programs and practices. The work of the Branch supports the oversight role played by the Board of Management, through its Audit Committee, for those Agency activities falling within the Board’s sphere of responsibility in accordance with the Canada Revenue Agency Act. CAEB provides BoM with regular and timely assurance and information on Agency activities through presentations of MAEC approved reports in addition to progress-to-plan status reports and briefings on work being conducted in key risk areas. IA contributes to management and cost effectiveness of program delivery, and to strengthening accountability by providing information on the adequacy and effectiveness of the Agency’s internal control systems. Information provided by PE supports decision-making related to program relevance, design, resourcing and performance and, in addition, supports improved management accountability. PE also serves as a centre of expertise providing advice and guidance to program areas on evaluation methodologies and performance measurement. Audits and evaluations are identified using a risk-based approach that includes consideration of Agency-wide risks, Corporate Business Plan priorities, the Treasury Board Secretariat (TBS) Management Accountability Framework as well as CAEB’s risk assessment of the Agency’s activities. The risk assessment includes environmental scanning and consultation. Consultation with the Commissioner, senior management, BoM Audit Committee, and the OAG facilitates the identification of key stakeholder needs when developing the business plan. Risks are examined through an analysis of the Agency’s Corporate Risk Inventory (CRI), Corporate Business Plan (CBP), and the Branch understanding of CRA risks. The CAEB OAG Liaison function provides ongoing support and guidance to Agency management and staff regarding OAG audit activity including:  working with branches and OAG representatives to ensure that CRA results are fairly and accurately reported; ensuring CRA responds appropriately to recommendations; preparing material for CRA executive and ministerial briefings on Auditor General (AG) reports; and providing CRA senior management with assistance for Public Accounts Committee appearances pertaining to AG reports.


  Financial Resources
CAEB delivered its mandate in 2008-2009 within a 2% variance tolerance level from an operating budget of approximately $10.2 million representing 122 full-time equivalents (FTE). Program evaluators, internal auditors, professional practices, corporate services and OAG Liaison staff are located in the National Capital Region (NCR). CAEB internal auditors are also located in the regions (Pacific, Ontario, Quebec, and Atlantic).


  Branch Performance
The Corporate Audit and Evaluation Branch 2008-2011 Business Plan was aligned with the priorities of the 2008-2009 to 2009-2010 CRA Corporate Business Plan. The Agency’s business capacity relies on a robust financial infrastructure, responsible tax administration, effective governance and a capable workforce. To support the Agency, CAEB conducted internal audits, evaluations and other reviews. Final audit and evaluation reports were tabled at MAEC for approval and reviewed by the Audit Committee of the BoM. The reports presented findings on strengths and weaknesses, along with recommendations for corrective measures. The reports included management action plans from the program or branch under review. The purpose of these reports was to provide management with assurance regarding the effective and efficient delivery of CRA programs, policies, and initiatives and the accuracy of the information reported to central agencies and Parliament. The ultimate goal of the audits and evaluations was to enhance CRA management capacity and program delivery. During 2008-2009, seventeen final audit reports and three final evaluation reports were approved.  The audits and evaluations conducted by CAEB during 2008-2009 examined areas for improvement and best practices across the spectrum of the CRA Program Activity Architecture (PAA). They focussed on areas such as financial and other controls, information technology, governance, program delivery and effectiveness. Summary of Selected Reviews  The objective of the Audit of Physical Security was to determine whether the key activities linked to the security of the Agency’s facilities were conducted in compliance with the applicable Agency policies and directives. Emphasis was placed on the security fit-up of and controlled access to facilities, including internal and external CRA perimeters. The audit did not include the protection of employees or protected and classified information.  The audit concluded that the CRA has physical security policies, guidelines, procedures and technical guides. If the standards contained in these were respected and applied consistently, they would ensure an appropriate level of protection at CRA facilities. However, the control, detection, monitoring and surveillance measures set forth were not always appropriately applied at all facilities.  The purpose of the formative evaluation of the Charities Partnership and Outreach Program was to provide information and advice to the Commissioner and Agency Management Committee (AMC) on whether the program is well positioned and on track to meet its objectives as well as identify areas for improvement. The evaluation focused on program relevance within the context of CRA and the federal government, program design, implementation and delivery, and program modifications. The evaluation resulted in four recommendations to management related to the feasibility of implementing the program in terms of what was planned; the need to focus on developing and implementing a performance measurement strategy; the implementation of a communications strategy and the implementation of policies, procedures and information system(s) necessary to ensure that quality information is available for decision making, the measurement of performance and accountability. In April 2007, new GST/HST business processing applications and systems were migrated onto the corporate suite of platforms. This conversion required close to one billion data elements to be moved from the legacy systems to the new applications. The objective of the GST/HST Data Conversion audit was to review the data conversion and migration of the account balances and to determine whether the posting of this data was complete and accurate, and supported by the aggregate account sub-ledger balances. The review covered the period leading up to and including the actual conversion of the data.  The audit concluded that the migration and transfer of data was successfully carried out. The few variances identified during account reconciliations could be reasonably explained and remedial action was taken to address them. The purpose of the GST/HST Compliance Evaluation Study - Non-Registration was to provide information and advice to the Commissioner and Agency Management Committee (AMC) to support decisions on any changes that may be required to improve program delivery and enhance the Agency’s effectiveness in ensuring compliance with the requirement to register for the GST/HST. The evaluation found that while registration targets are being met they are not linked to risk factors. The evaluation recommended that the Agency move to a more risk-based, intelligence led process in identifying and dealing with GST/HST non-registration.  The objective of the E-Procurement Activities audit was to determine whether this initiative and associated activities are being managed to achieve Agency goals and objectives, and whether e-procurement and acquisition card transactions were in compliance with policies, procedures, and guidelines. The audit highlighted that the CRA acted upon the new flexibilities supported by its agency status by introducing a new approach to administer and manage purchases of low risk, low dollar value of goods and services. E-procurement is in many ways an easier and more cost-effective way for the Agency to procure goods and services, as it streamlines internal procurement processes and encourages the use of strategic suppliers catalogues. Information gathered from interviews and analysis of data revealed that e‑procurement is used widely in the CRA, stakeholders like it, and they want more commodities to be added. Based on file review results, key controls tested were not always functioning effectively in regards to acquisition card transactions for non-catalogue items. The types of errors and compliance issues show that emphasis needs to be placed on managers and cardholders to exercise their due diligence in the e-procurement and acquisition card processes.  The objective of the Compensation Management audit was to determine whether the controls in place for managing and processing compensation transactions were adequate and operating as intended, and whether pay actions were timely, accurate, and in compliance with policies, regulations and relevant collective agreements. The audit found that the majority of key management and processing controls are in place. A framework that identifies all processes and responsibilities has been put in place and its implementation has been reviewed regularly. However, processing pay actions in a timely and accurate fashion while implementing this significant organizational change has been a challenge. Opportunities for improvement were noted in the areas of training, workload management processes, performance measuring, monitoring and quality assurance. Corporate Compensation provided information on current actions and a further management action plan that demonstrates they are taking concrete action.  Several audits were conducted related to Memoranda of Understanding for the Exchange of Information. The audits focused on the sharing, use and safeguarding of the personal information. The audits found that CRA was generally in compliance with the terms and conditions of the MOUs related to the security and safeguarding of information. There was no evidence to indicate that information was being used for other purposes or disclosed to parties outside the terms of the MOUs.  The focusof the Taxpayer Relief (TR) audit was on taxpayer requested penalty and interest cancellations and waivers. Since each request for relief must be considered on its own merits, the audit did not focus on the consistency of the decisions themselves. Instead, examinations focused on whether controls to enhance consistency in the processes supporting the decisions were in place and being followed. Automated waivers were reviewed with respect to reporting obligations to the Public Accounts of Canada. The audit concluded that the CRA has control structures in place to ensure that TR requests are resolved with due care and diligence. Despite these controls, the audit found that processing inconsistencies existed, between offices and between different work areas within offices. Although some of the processing inconsistencies could be resolved through regular updates and improvements to the division website, or further enhancements to the monitoring and reporting processes, there is a clear need to simplify and strengthen the existing governance structure.  The objective of the Underground Economy Initiative (UEI) audit was to assess the implementation of the 2004 UEI strategy; assess the management controls in place to identify sectors, projects and taxpayers; and determine whether the audit process used by UEI is appropriate.  The audit concluded that the Compliance Programs Branch (CPB) has made reasonable progress in the implementation of the 2004 UEI strategy. However, processes and controls can be improved to identify and select the highest risk files or to ensure the audit process is followed to address the specific characteristics of taxpayers who engage in UE activities.  The objective of the Integrated Revenue Collections (IRC) Pre-Implementation audit was to assess whether the necessary design, governance, and project management controls were in place to support the Project in meeting its objectives.  The audit concluded that there is good control over the construction of the technology changes planned for the current release of IRC. The Project team incorporated a number of useful controls to guide project progress and manage developmental risk in terms of on-time, on-budget implementation of functionality. Continuing the use of these controls, with some improvements, will help ensure the successful delivery of future releases and phases. Due to the nature of the risks and the level of expenditure, it is imperative that the controls currently in place be continued, and improved based on lessons learned as future phases are implemented. A post-implementation audit has been recommended for the 2011-2012 fiscal year. The objective of the Distributed Computer Environment (DCE) Server Lifecycle Management audit was to assess the extent to which key management controls are established for DCE server lifecycle management.  The audit concluded that CRA has policies in place to address materiel management lifecycle and security requirements for servers and Information Technology Branch (ITB) has an established governance framework to direct, control and support DCE server lifecycle management but there are groups managing servers that are not included within this framework. There is no single point of accountability for all servers in the Agency, and there is no consensus as to what is considered a DCE server. To better manage servers, the Agency needs to improve and expand the established governance framework to include all areas that manage servers, strengthen controls to manage servers in a consistent manner, improve inventory control, and ensure that security of confidential data is not jeopardized. The final reports for the preceding and all other CAEB reports approved in 2008-2009 are available on the CRA website at the following link: Internal Audit and Program Evaluation. 


  Follow-up Activities 
Internal audit professional standards require the Internal Audit (IA) function to perform follow-up activities to determine if management action plans have been effectively implemented. CAEB’s annual follow-up process is based on self-assessment by CRA management, supplemented by more in-depth procedures where warranted. CRA management is responsible for reporting the progress made in implementing their action plans. In areas of greatest risk, CAEB requests additional supporting information or documentation to ensure an accurate conclusion is drawn. The annual follow-up report is presented to the MAEC and to the Audit Committee of the Board of Management (BoM).  This year’s process encompassed the action plans from the 14 internal audit reports approved by the Internal Audit Management Committee (IAMC) in 2005-2006, now known as the Management Audit and Evaluation Committee (MAEC) and action plans that had not been fully implemented in 13 reports from years prior to that.  The follow-up process concluded that, overall, CRA management have implemented or made progress towards implementing the action plans committed to. In total, 94% of action plans approved by the IAMC throughout 2005-2006 and prior years have made satisfactory progress, have been implemented, or actions/circumstances have overtaken the need to do further work. 


  Business Advisory Activities
Internal Audit provided advice, guidance and examination services to the Finance and Administration Branch (FAB) during the preparation of the report on the design and implementation of CRA’s controls over the T2 program ( the Section 5970 audit).The work performed by CAEB contributes to the readiness reviews to prepare the Agency for audits of control procedures that the Office of the Auditor General (OAG) conducts pursuant to the Tax Collection Agreements (TCA) with the provinces and territories. These reports provide the provinces with independent assurance that the controls at CRA supporting the administration of provincial taxes are suitably designed and are operating effectively. Program Evaluation continued to respond to requests for assistance on results measurement from other branches. The expansion of the Division’s advisory role over the past year has created the challenge of finding the right balance between providing meaningful support to program areas while effectively delivering core evaluations. Much of the advisory work was related to the measurement requirement for RIMC projects. A paper authored by Program Evaluation entitled “Measuring the Benefits of RIMC Projects” was tabled at RIMC. In addition, Program Evaluation Division will be developing a guide for RIMC business case owners to support them in developing benefit measurement plans for their projects. This guidance document will help to standardize the advice the Program Evaluation Division provides and also provide managers with a tool that they can use in meeting the measurement requirements required by the RIMC process. 


  OAG Liaison
The OAG Liaison function continued to work closely with the OAG and with the branches/regions of the CRA to facilitate the fulfilment of the Auditor General’s responsibility as Parliament’s auditor. As such, CAEB contributed to the dissemination of performance information on the CRA by ensuring that, in the reports made by the Auditor General of Canada to Parliament, the information concerning the CRA was presented fairly and accurately. The OAG Liaison was involved in a number of key 2008-2009 OAG reports that have been tabled including Use of New Human Resources Authorities, Managing Information Technology Investments, Managing Identity Information and Auditing Small and Medium Enterprises. Additionally, the liaison worked with the OAG and Agency management on several other audits that will be tabled in 2009-2010 and subsequent years.  The Office of the Privacy Commissioner (OPC) performed audit work within CRA related to Managing Identity Information in Selected Federal Institutions; the OAG Liaison function provided full liaison services to the OPC and CRA management during all phases.  In February 2008, the OAG advised agencies and departments that it was modifying its annual update process. The OAG asked chief audit executives to coordinate departments and agencies self-assessment of progress in implementing the recommendations contained in previous OAG audit reports. This required analysis and vetting to assess extent of implementation of OAG recommendations. CAEB sought input from senior management of the auditee branches requesting that they provide narratives for each recommendation that was not previously assessed as fully implemented. The branches were also required to provide a self-assessed rating on their progress. Upon receipt of the narratives and ratings, CAEB IA staff in conjunction with the OAG liaison section queried to provide further explanations or documentation to support the branches’ updates and proposed ratings. After analysis and discussion, modifications were made where necessary. The results of the monitoring exercise were presented to the BoM at the September 2008 meeting.  Further information on OAG reports to Parliament is available at this link: to the OAG website: OAG Audit Reports to Parliament 


  Professional Practices and Corporate Services
The Professional Practice and Corporate Services Division (PPCS) provided branch-wide guidance, advice and support services to CAEB. This included branch planning and reporting, quality review, quality assurance, training and methodologies, financial, human resource, administrative and linguistic services.  The 2008-2009 Business Plan and 2007-2008 Annual Report were approved by the Audit Committee of the Board of Management in June 2008. A CAEB 2008-2011 Workforce Plan was completed which includes recruitment and retention strategies, as well as action plans for Competency Based Human Resource Management (CBHRM) priorities. Enhancements were made to training materials including the provision of interpretation and instruction related to the recently revised International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Audit. The quality review (QR) process for IA was further refined to include pre-QR consultations for managers and staff with Professional Practices staff.  The automated working paper module of TeamMate™, a software package designed for auditors was fully implemented. In addition, PPCS has taken the lead to ensure the management of information in the Branch will be in compliance with legislative/legal requirements and meet the business needs of the Branch while reducing paper, electronic and web content storage. In addition to the CAEB Workforce Plan strategic recruitment efforts were made to attract staff with a mix of academic backgrounds and program experience, including specialized financial and information technology backgrounds. Thirteen selection processes were undertaken during 2008-2009. In support of CBHRM the Branch has completed Job Competency Profiles for all positions in CAEB and has made progress on the Observe and Attest initiative. In support of continuing positive union-management relations, all Managers have participated in the Phase I workshop of the Union Management Initiative (UMI) and the majority have completed Phase II. To promote awareness and encourage compliance with key Agency policies, all CAEB staff participated in the Agency Prevention and Resolution of Harassment and Security Awareness workshops.


 Internal Disclosures 
The Agency established the Office for Internal Disclosures as a result of the Public Servants Disclosure Protection Act (PSDPA) coming into force in April 2007. Commonly referred to as whistle blowing, the purpose of the Act is to encourage employees of the public sector to come forward if they believe in good faith that serious wrongdoing has taken place or will take place and to provide protection to them against reprisal when they do so.  In 2008, the DG CAEB was appointed the Senior Officer for Internal Disclosure for the Agency. During 2008-2009, many steps were taken to establish the Office for Internal Disclosures. A dedicated website was established to provide information about the PSDPA as well as a dedicated e-mail address to submit general enquiries. The DG, CAEB held information sessions across the country during 2008-2009, including over 40 presentations being made to over 2500 employees and managers. The presentations raised awareness of the legislation and CRA’s internal procedures. Liaisons have been established with key stakeholders within and outside of the CRA, including the Human Resources Branch, the Public Sector Integrity Commissioner’s Office and the Office of the Chief Human Resources Officer.


  Appendix A
CAEB Contacts  Patricia A. MacDonald Director General, Corporate Audit and Evaluation Branch Telephone (613) 957–7522 Janique Caron Director, Internal Audit, Corporate Functions Telephone (613) 954–7817 Gita Bhatt Director, Internal Audit, Tax Operations Telephone (613) 941–5664 Myles Kennedy Director, Program Evaluation Telephone (613) 954–7881 Maura Butko Director, Professional Practices and Corporate Services Telephone (613) 954–7840







Report a problem or mistake on this page












Please select all that apply:

A link, button or video is not working



It has a spelling mistake



Information is missing



Information is outdated or wrong



Login error when trying to access an account




I can't find what I'm looking for



Other issue not in this list



Submit



Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries, contact us.










Date modified:
2009-07-10





Evaluation - Audit yield


Final Report
Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch
January 2020
 


Table of contents

Executive summary
1. Introduction
2. Background
3. Methodologies
4. Findings, recommendations, and management response

4.1. The extent to which audit reassessments materialize into cash recoveries is measurable for income tax and GST/HST audit programs.
4.2. Audit yield is a relevant and useful measure for CRA performance monitoring.
4.3. There are barriers that limit the CRA’s ability to automate monitoring and reporting on a measure such as audit yield.

5. Conclusion
6. Acknowledgements
7. Appendices

Appendix A: Evaluation issues and methodology
Appendix B: Glossary




Executive summary
The purpose of this report is to provide the Commissioner, Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) management, and the Board of Management with an independent assessment of the CRA’s ability to measure the extent to which audit reassessments materialize into cash recovered. The evaluation considers cash recovered as amounts that are either paid by the taxpayer voluntarily or acquired through collections activities.
The CRA annually publishes the results of the previous fiscal year’s audit activities. One of these results is called “fiscal impact” and is determined based on tax assessed, tax refunds reduced, interest and penalties, and present value of future federal tax assessable arising from compliance actions. Currently, the CRA does not monitor and report on the extent to which the dollars associated with audits are actually collected though the CRA has recently committed, and launched initiatives, to identify and use models that would link reporting and payment compliance behaviours. Without this information, the CRA has a limited view of its performance across functions.
One way the CRA can improve its performance monitoring and reporting is through a measure such as audit yield. The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development uses the term “audit yield” to refer to the additional tax liabilities identified and collected through audit activities. It is a measure that accounts for appeals activities and uncollected amounts on fiscal impact results. Measuring audit yield provides a more fulsome and transparent performance story and understanding of the CRA’s results because it reports on the dollars coming into government coffers as a result of its audit efforts. It complements and supplements other measures, such as fiscal impact, by providing insight into CRA-wide results and outcomes.
The extent to which audit reassessments materialize into cash recoveries is measurable for income tax and GST/HST audit programs. As of July 2019, the CRA had recovered an estimated 60-64% of the income tax audit debit reassessments closed in fiscal year 2016 to 2017 and an estimated 71% of the GST/HST audit debit reassessments closed in fiscal year 2015 to 2016.
It is expected that the results will change as more time passes and appeals rights are exhausted or collections activities are concluded. Complex objections and appeals involving high-dollar value reassessments might take years to finalize and may not have been decided at the time of the analysis. The results presented in this report are a snapshot from single fiscal years and should not be used to draw conclusions on performance. Expanding the analysis to multiple years will enable the CRA to identify a reasonable target or benchmark for its performance.  
An integrated performance measure like audit yield is useful and relevant for a variety of stakeholders. Linking audit cases to downstream activities, such as objections and collections, shows how audit files impact other workloads. Recently, the CRA has implemented system and procedural modernizations that impact the way work is processed. This may be contributing to the current level of manual intervention required to match audit results across systems. This intervention limits the ability of the CRA to implement repeatable processes using queries, which would lead to more efficient and automated performance monitoring and reporting.
Summary of recommendations
The CRA should adopt an integrated measure that periodically calculates the cash collected from audits and that takes into account the results of downstream activities. The CRA should also make changes to achieve more efficient and automated performance monitoring.
Management response
The Compliance Programs Branch and the Service, Innovation, and Integration Branch agree with the recommendations in this report and have developed related action plans. The Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch has determined that they appear reasonable to address the recommendations.
1. Introduction
This evaluation is included in the most recent Board of Management (Board) approved Risk-Based Audit and Evaluation Plan 2019-2022 under the Evaluation Study - CRA’s Management of Closely-Held Business. The evaluation framework was approved following the Management Audit and Evaluation Committee meeting in May 2019. It contained a series of thematic topics that were heavily reliant on data analysis and queries. The framework identified the following issues to be examined through various thematic topics (see Appendix A for more details):

What outcomes are being achieved?
In what ways could a full taxpayer view impact the CRA’s administration?

This evaluation report provides insight into the CRA’s performance once income tax and GST/HST audits are closed. It is not limited to audits of closely-held businesses as it was determined to be more valuable to consider the entire population of audits. The next report identified in the framework will examine the labels and definitions surrounding “business” at the CRA and elsewhere.
2. Background
The purpose of this report is to provide the Commissioner, CRA management, and the Board with an independent assessment of the CRA’s ability to measure the extent to which audit reassessments materialize into cash recovered. The evaluation considers cash recovered as amounts that are either paid by the taxpayer voluntarily or acquired through collections activities.
The CRA annually publishes the results of the previous fiscal year’s audit activities. One of these results is called “fiscal impact” and is determined based on tax assessed, tax refunds reduced, interest and penalties, and present value of future federal tax assessable arising from compliance actions. It does not account for the impact of appeals reversals and uncollected amounts. In other words, fiscal impact reports on results as of when an audit closes, and the results of other CRA activities are reported separately. It is important to note the CRA undertakes audit activities for a variety of reasons, of which revenue generation is one. These objectives are:

generate revenue
build trust in the vigilance of the tax administration
determine the true amount of taxpayers’ liability
provide a disincentive to non-compliance
gather intelligence and improve the CRA’s understanding of non-compliance
identify areas of the law that require clarification

An audit might result in no change to taxes owing or might identify that the taxpayer has reported too much or too little tax. When additional taxes are identified as being owed, a “debit reassessment” is raised. From a taxpayer perspective, this means that their obligation is incomplete until they pay the taxes owing or exhaust their right to redress. Because it can take years to finalize amounts, the CRA’s ability to report the outcome of these accounts in the annual reporting cycle is limited. Currently, the CRA does not monitor and report on the extent to which the dollars associated with audits are actually collected though it has recently committed, and launched initiatives, to identify and use models that would link reporting and payment compliance behaviours. Without this information, the CRA has a limited view of its performance across functions.
In response to various internal and external assurance engagements in recent years, the CRA has begun to review its performance measures and increase the transparency of its audit results. For example, in response to Report 7 - Compliance Activities - Canada Revenue Agency (external link) of the 2018 Fall Reports of the Auditor General of Canada to the Parliament of Canada, the CRA committed to enhancing its performance indicators so that it could fully measure and report on the results of compliance activities and the actual collected tax revenues.
One way the CRA can do this is through a measure such as audit yield. The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development uses the term “audit yield” to refer to the additional tax liabilities identified and collected through audit activities.Footnote 1 Other tax administrations, including the Australian Tax Office and Revenu Québec, publish estimates of cash collected relative to compliance liabilities. Each tax administration calculates and reports their results differently and provides explanations on what is included.

Australia reports cash collected from direct compliance activities. The amount of collected liabilities to raised liabilities was 65.4% in fiscal year 2016 to 2017.
Revenu Québec reports the ratio between resolved amounts (including write-offs) and total debts generated from audit debit reassessments. This ratio was 66.9% in fiscal year 2016 to 2017.

At the CRA, several branches have roles to support efficient and accurate performance monitoring and reporting. The Service, Innovation, and Integration Branch is responsible for coordinating results and reporting them internally and externally. They receive performance information from program branches who are responsible for monitoring the results of activities delivered in headquarters and the regions. Program branches include the Compliance Programs Branch; the Appeals Branch; the Collections and Verification Branch; and the Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch. The Service, Innovation, and Integration Branch is also responsible for leading the effective management of the CRA's data and optimizing its business value as a strategic asset for use in advanced analytics.
3. Methodologies
In this evaluation, audit yield is defined as a measure of the rate of recovery on accounts receivable. In other words, calculations are based on actual cash (collectible amounts) paid or collected that could be directly attributed to audit activities. Audit yield is, therefore, considered a subset of the broader fiscal impact measure since it removes the non-cash portions calculated as part of fiscal impact. Non-cash items include things such as future taxes which is when an audit adjustment has a future year tax implication, such as a decrease of credits available to claim in the future.
For income tax results, 2 sets of analyses were completed on audit files that resulted in a debit reassessment. One analysis involved a query approach that covered 85% of the total number of corporate income tax audit files closed in fiscal year 2015 to 2016. A second analysis used a sample-based approach that manually reviewed a total of 713 audit files closed in fiscal year 2016 to 2017. The 713 files include a detailed review of all files with debit reassessments equal to or over $5 million which represented 64% of the total collectible federal taxes. A representative sample was drawn from all other files with debit reassessments less than $5 million.
For GST/HST results, the total number of audit files with a debit reassessment closed in fiscal year 2015 to 2016 were analyzed with a query approach.
Appendix A provides more details on the evaluation issues and methodologies. Appendix B provides a glossary of terms used in this report.
4. Findings, recommendations, and management response
The recommendations presented in this report address issues of high significance or mandatory requirements.
The stakeholders agree with the recommendations in this report and have developed related action plans. The Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch has determined that they appear reasonable to address the recommendations.
4.1. The extent to which audit reassessments materialize into cash recoveries is measurable for income tax and GST/HST audit programs.
In addition to collectible taxes, income tax fiscal impact also includes an estimation of future taxes and reassessments. Because the estimated future taxes do not generate any collectible amount when the audit closes, these estimates of future taxes are excluded from the audit yield analysis but are nonetheless important measures of audit activities. The audit yield calculation is based solely on cash values and the taxes owing at the time an audit case is closed.
Income tax audit programs reported a combined fiscal impact of $9.6 billion for fiscal year 2016 to 2017.Footnote 2 Overall, the evaluation estimated that between $6.4 billion and $6.8 billionFootnote 3 (67-71%) of the income tax fiscal impact was collectible cash. Of this amount, it is estimated that 60-64% has been recovered. Table 1 provides a detailed breakdown of the collectible cash portion of fiscal impact as of July 2019.

Table 1: Results of income tax debit reassessments completed in fiscal year 2016 to 2017
Income tax results
Dollar amount
(‘000,000)
%
 Table 1 Notes

Table 1 Note * It is expected that amounts under dispute, once settled, will result in additional recoveries, reversals, and write-offs
Return to table 1 note * referrer
 Table 1 Note ** Collections officers may determine that some of the collectible amounts are uncollectible such as in the case of bankruptcy, resulting in additional write-offs
Return to table 2 note ** referrer


 Recovered (paid/collected)
$3,960 - $4,224
60 - 64%
Reversed
$594 - $792
9 - 12%
Written off
$33 - $99
< 0.5 – 1.5%
Under disputetable 1 note *
$990 – $1,122
15 - 17%
In collectionstable 1 note **
$660 - $858
10 - 13%
TOTAL
$6,606
100%

GST/HST fiscal impact is also calculated to include items that do not generate any collectible amount. For example, many GST/HST audits result in a reduction of refunds before they are issued. These protected amounts are excluded from the audit yield analysis to arrive at a calculation that is based solely on cash values and the taxes owing at the time an audit case closes.
GST/HST audit programs reported a combined fiscal impact of $2.60 billion for fiscal year 2015 to 2016Footnote 4. Overall, the evaluation team found that $1.77 billion (68%) of the GST/HST fiscal impact was collectible cash. Of this amount, 71% has been recovered. Table 2 provides a detailed breakdown of the collectible cash portion of fiscal impact as of July 2019. Ranges are not provided for GST/HST results because the evaluation reviewed the full population of audit files.

Table 2: Results of GST/HST debit reassessments completed in fiscal year 2015 to 2016
GST/HST results
Dollar amount
(‘000,000)
%
 Table 2 Notes

Table 2 Note * Collections officers may determine that some of the collectible amounts are uncollectible such as in the case of bankruptcy, resulting in additional write offs
Return to table 1 note * referrer


 Recovered (paid/collected)
$1,251
71%
Reversed
$212
12%
Written off
$79
4%
In collectionstable 2 note *
$227
13%
TOTAL
$1,769
100%

It is expected that the income tax and GST/HST results will change as more time passes and appeals rights are exhausted or collections activities are concluded. Complex objections and appeals involving high-dollar value reassessments might take years to finalize and may not have been decided at the time of the analysis.
4.2. Audit yield is a relevant and useful measure for CRA performance monitoring.
The measurement of audit yield allowed for a variety of comparisons and analyses that provided greater insight into the CRA’s performance after an audit closes. As opposed to a measure of individual program performance, a measure such as audit yield allowed a more holistic view of how various programs interact to deliver results. Select comparisons and analyses are described below.
A cost-benefit analysis in Table 3 compares the direct costs of audit programs to the estimated overall federal audit yield on debit reassessments. This is simply an example of a ratio to illustrate how the metric may be useful; the CRA could identify other ones to measure and monitor its performance across one or several program activities.

Table 3: Estimated cost effectiveness by audit type
 
Income Tax
(2016-2017)
GST/HST
(2015-2016)
 Table 3 Notes

Table 3 Note * Direct costs for audit (salary and O&M), does not include employee benefits; figures provided by the Compliance Services Directorate, ILBIB
Return to table 1 note * referrer
 Table 3 Note ** Total recovered on federal collectible amounts after removing provincial collectible amounts
Return to table 2 note ** referrer


 Total costtable 3 note *
$633 million
$211 million
Total federal audit yieldtable 3 note **
$3.09 billion
$1.25 billion
Federal return
4.9 : 1
5.9 : 1

When an audit adjustment results in a debit reassessment, different outcomes emerge. For example, a taxpayer might pay voluntarily, raise an objection to dispute the amount, or withhold payment on an undisputed debt.
A downstream analysis provided insight into how audit adjustments that result in taxes owing can impact appeals and collections workloads. The analysis showed that audit files closed in the fourth quarter account for a higher proportion of the total value of reassessments than files closed in any of the 3 other quarters (Figure 1). The fourth quarter GST/HST audits are more likely to be disputed and are reversed more often.Footnote 5 Monitoring these results on a regular basis would provide useful information for resource planning and allocation.


Figure 1: Proportion of the estimated total dollar value of reassessments completed in the fourth quarter










This figure presents the proportion of the estimated total dollar value of Income Tax reassessments closed in the fourth quarter, which is 43%.









This figure presents the proportion of the estimated total dollar value of GST/HST reassessments closed in the fourth quarter, which is 38%.





Select examples of how audit yield could be used to measure and monitor different aspects of performance have been provided above; however, other uses were also identified. Based on stakeholder consultations, the level of relevance and value of each application would change depending on the CRA activity or function that would use it.
4.3. There are barriers that limit the CRA’s ability to automate monitoring and reporting on a measure such as audit yield.
The calculation of audit yield, or a similar measure, can be automated for the population of GST/HST audit files using Business Number as a common identifier. For GST/HST, 99% of files in the audit case management system matched with a reassessment; this indicates that automated processes can be implemented with a high degree of confidence in the GST/HST results.
In the case of income tax audit files, the evaluation team encountered several instances where manual intervention was required to match audit files closed in either the Audit Information Management System (AIMS) or in the Integrated Audit Management System (INTEGRAS) to reassessments and accounting information. Common identifiers in systems, such as the audit file number, were difficult to match due to incomplete or inaccurate data entries. Additional matches were identified using transaction data, such as amounts or dates.
For personal income tax (T1) audit files, 8% of all files with a debit reassessment closed in INTEGRAS in fiscal year 2017 to 2018 did not have a matching audit file number in the T1 assessing system. For the purpose of population-level matching, the evaluation did not review T1 files closed in AIMS since it has been gradually replaced by INTEGRAS and new files are no longer created in AIMS.
For corporation income tax (T2) audit files, based on the stratified random sample, 15% of files with a debit reassessment closed in AIMS in fiscal year 2016 to 2017 did not have a matching audit file number in the corporate tax assessing system known as CORTAX. These files account for 22% of the total value of federal taxes and are more difficult to force match than T1 files due to the complexity of corporation audits. A small number of T2 files were closed in INTEGRAS during that fiscal year; they were not reviewed since they accounted for 0.17% of the total T2 debt.
Interviews with stakeholders noted that, in many cases, reassessments are processed manually rather than automatically with a data transfer. For example, there is a need to process certain reassessment in the sub-ledger or certain reassessments fail to transfer electronically. Additionally, the CRA has recently implemented system and procedural modernizations that impact the way work is processed and which may be contributing to lags linking inter-branch data.
Measuring audit yield or a similar measure, requires tracking an audit file to one or several reassessments. Audit file number is a unique identifier that links with certainty an audit file to an associated reassessment. Once the reassessments are found, it becomes possible to subsequently trace the information downstream to the accounting transactions and the activities undertaken by other areas of the CRA in relation to the file, such as collections or appeals.
The challenges noted above would need to be addressed in order to implement reliable automated processes for monitoring purposes. Repeatable processes using queries would support regular and timely monitoring of performance and increase the feasibility of calculating and using a measure such as audit yield regularly for operational monitoring.
Recommendation 1
For monitoring and reporting purposes, the Service, Innovation, and Integration Branch should work with the Compliance Programs Branch and others to adopt and report on an integrated measure that periodically calculates the cash collected from audits and takes into account the results of downstream activities
Recommendation 2
The Compliance Programs Branch should work with the Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch, and the Service, Innovation, and Integration Branch to undertake changes required to achieve more efficient and automated performance monitoring
Management response
The Compliance Programs Branch and the Service, Innovation, and Integration Branch agree with the recommendations in this report.
The CRA had previously committed in response to Report 7 – Compliance Activities – Canada Revenue Agency, of the 2018 Fall Reports of the Auditor General of Canada to “develop a performance measurement framework for its compliance programs, including a measure that factors in appeals and collections, by March 2020” and the work is underway.
For example, the CRA has developed a methodology to measure to the final resolution (including reversals, write-offs and collections) of GST/HST audits through its actions in response to the 2018 Evaluation Study - Horizontal Compliance Management - GST HST Audit Program. In addition, it had previously prototyped a methodology to do the same for audits of individuals (T1). And plans are currently underway to shortly begin prototyping a methodology for audits of corporations (T2) that considers a longer timeframe (than 2016-2017) and a complete set of data (in contrast to the data sample in this evaluation).
In order to adopt and report on an integrated measure that periodically calculates the cash collected from audits and takes into account the results of downstream activities the following work remains to be done:

Create repeatable processes to automatically link the data among the various inter-branch systems

Determine the best strategic approach to adopting and reporting on this new indicator, in collaboration with the Appeals Branch that takes into account the characteristics of the different compliance programs and the cultural impact on audit staff by introducing a new performance measure.


This work can be done in parallel.
For recommendation #1: As Office of Primary Interest, the Service, Innovation, and Integration Branch will build on previous progress by working with other implicated branches to develop a holistic strategy and timeline for implementing a new measure for compliance activities’ results and actual collected tax revenues for GST/HST, T1 and T2. This will take into account audit, appeals and collection actions on given taxpayers accounts, the existing reporting environment, strategic program considerations, and the impact on the organizational culture. The plan will identify who will adopt and report on any measures and by which means.
The expected completion of this work is June 30, 2021, given its reliance on the outcome of the action plan to recommendation #2. The resulting plan will be reviewed by the Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch and subject to the annual follow-up process.
For recommendation #2: The Compliance Programs Branch will continue to work with the Service, Innovation, and Integration Branch and other implicated branches to analyze the requirements for undertaking the changes to achieve a more efficient and automated approach to linking the data in the various inter-branch systems in order to refine performance indicators as articulated in the response to the Office of the Auditor General of Canada, including estimates of net audit impacts. This work will involve:

analyzing the data gaps in case management, assessing, and accounting systems (T1 and T2) between the following branches: Compliance Programs, Collections and Verification, Appeals, and Assessment, Benefit and Service.
in consultation with the Information and Technology Branch, developing a multi-year plan to address the inter-branch data gaps.

The expected completion of this work is December 31, 2020.
Note: due to the T3 system re-design, this revenue line is out of scope for audit yield at this time.
5. Conclusion
Measuring audit yield provides a more fulsome and transparent performance story and understanding of CRA results by reporting on the dollars coming into government coffers as a result of its audit efforts. It provides insight into CRA-wide results and outcomes to complement and supplement other measures such as fiscal impact and it supports and informs decision-making. The results presented in this report are a snapshot from single fiscal years and it is not possible to draw conclusions on performance. It is expected that results will change as more time passes and appeals rights are exhausted or collections activities are concluded. Expanding the analysis to additional years would enable the CRA to establish a baseline and make year-over-year judgements on its performance.
An integrated measure is relevant and useful for a variety of stakeholders. Currently, manual intervention is required to match audit results across systems. This intervention limits the ability of the CRA to implement repeatable processes using queries for more efficient and automated performance monitoring and reporting. 
An outcome-based measure such as audit yield is important because it combines the results of functionally separated activities to help the CRA tell a more comprehensive and transparent performance story.
6. Acknowledgements
In closing, we would like to acknowledge, recognize, and thank the branches, who dedicated time and provided information during the course of this engagement: the Appeals Branch, the Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch; the Collections and Verification Branch; the Compliance Programs Branch; and the Service, Innovation, and Integration Branch.
7. Appendices
Appendix A: Evaluation issues and methodology
Issue 1: What outcomes are being achieved?

What occurs after an audit is closed?
What trends are observed in the population?

Issue 2: In what ways could this view impact the CRA’s administration?

In what ways could it impact current monitoring and reporting approaches?
Can current operating assumptions be validated?

Methodology
The methodology for examination included the following:
Data analysis – Income tax

sample-based analysis of 23,146 individual income tax (T1), corporation income tax (T2), trust (T3), and non-resident audit files closed in fiscal year 2016 to 2017 that resulted in a positive amount of income tax being assessed.
Segment 1: convenience sample of all audit files where the federal tax change was above $5 million; this segment of 102 files represents approximately 64% of the total collectible federal taxes
Segment 2: stratified random sample of 611 files from the remaining debit audit files based on Region, Tax Services Office, Audit Program and Federal Tax Change amount – this segment represents approximately 6% of the total collectible federal taxes and results are statistically valid to the rest of the population with a 95% confidence level


population-based analysis of T2 audit files closed in fiscal year 2015 to 2016; 85% of T2 files accounting for 94% of total collectible taxes and penalties

Data analysis – GST/HST

population-based analysis of 20,979 audit files closed in fiscal year 2015 to 2016 that resulted in a positive amount of GST/HST being assessed; adjustments affecting refunds only were excluded, such as most of the Refund Integrity Program cases
includes all GST/HST cases for which a valid GST ‘line of business’ identifier was captured in INTEGRAS and which could be matched to a positive GST/HST assessment in the Standardized Accounting data – the matching process used data from various systems, was tested and was found to be accurate and reliable

Internal interviews were conducted with management and employees who have responsibilities and participate in activities related to conducting audits and the downstream impacts.
File and document reviews were conducted of CRA files and documents related to processes, procedures, and performance reports.
Appendix B: Glossary

Glossary
Term
Definition
Audit Information Management System (AIMS)
A case management system used by audit programs, which contains historical audit information; files were no longer created and managed in this system with the introduction of INTEGRAS
audit yield
The additional tax liabilities identified and collected through audit activities
collectible
Amounts raised by an audit that have the potential to be collected; while amounts outstanding are collectible, it should not be assumed that they will all be collected
Corporation Tax Processing System (CORTAX)
The Corporation Tax Processing System captures, assesses, and reassesses the Corporation Income Tax Return (T2)
debit reassessment
The amount that is collectible after removing non-cash items from the reported fiscal impact such as future assessable taxes
downstream
Processes, activities, or functions that occur later in a sequence or series; any process occurring after another is considered downstream
fiscal impact
A publically reported measure composed of tax assessed, tax refunds reduced, interest and penalties, and present value of future federal tax assessable arising from compliance actions; it does not account for the impact of appeals reversals and uncollected amounts
future taxes
Audit adjustments with a future year implication, such as the decrease of credits available to claim in the future
Integrated Audit Management System (INTEGRAS)
A recently introduced audit case management system that replaced AIMS
reversal
Amounts that are either fully or partially allowed; it includes both the objections to the Appeals Branch and the disputes to the tax courts
tax recovered
Any payment made to completely or partially offset a debt, including applying available credits and refunds; it includes both voluntary payment by the taxpayer and interventions that lead to debt collection
write-off
An accounting action that removes uncollectible debts to the Crown from the accounts receivable records; it does not release the debtor from their obligation to pay, and does not affect the Crown’s right to collect the debt in the future (section 25 FAA)




Footnotes

Footnote 1

OECD, 2004. Measures of tax compliance outcomes: A practical guide
Return to footnote 1 referrer

Footnote 2

2016-17 Departmental Results Report, pages 47 and 56
Return to first footnote 2 referrer

Footnote 3

The margin of error is ± 2.9%, 19 times out of 20.
Return to footnote 3 referrer

Footnote 4

Departmental Performance Report 2015-16, page 60
Return to footnote 4 referrer

Footnote 5

It was not possible to complete a quarterly analysis of the extent of disputes and reversals for income tax audits since the stratified random sample did not include “quarter” as a stratification variable.
Return to footnote 5 referrer








Report a problem or mistake on this page












Please select all that apply:

A link, button or video is not working



It has a spelling mistake



Information is missing



Information is outdated or wrong



Login error when trying to access an account




I can't find what I'm looking for



Other issue not in this list



Submit



Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries, contact us.










Date modified:
2020-02-14





Debt Management Call Center Evaluation


Final Report


Corporate Audit and Evaluation Branch Program Evaluation Division June 2010





 Executive Summary 
 Introduction 
 Background 
 Evaluation Methodology 
 Limitations and Constraints 
 Findings from the Evaluation

 2008-2009 protocol agreement met 
 DMCC activities extend beyond arrangements and referrals 
 DMCC arrangements contribute to compliance 
 Differences identified between personal income tax (T1) and business revenue lines (T2 and GST/HST) to resolve filing and/or remitting non-compliance 
 Opportunities exist for DMCC to enhance client awareness of their tax filing and remitting obligations 
 Information on CRA collections continuum is not easily accessible 
 Analytics and research are being refined to better understand program performance for all levels of the collections continuum 
 
 Recommendation 
 Conclusion 



  Executive Summary
This report presents the findings of the Debt Management Call Centre (DMCC) evaluation. The purpose of this evaluation was to assess the ability of DMCC to achieve its mandate, assess the DMCC contribution to compliance and to identify opportunities for improvement which would assist DMCC in achieving program objectives. An internal audit was originally planned to be conducted in fiscal year 2010-2011; however, Taxpayer Services and Debt Management Branch (TSDMB) management requested that Corporate Audit and Evaluation Branch (CAEB) undertake both an internal audit and an evaluation of the DMCC in 2009-2010. By undertaking both an audit and evaluation at the same time CAEB was able to provide a more comprehensive review of the DMCC, including assessments of both program management and internal controls (audit) and program effectiveness (evaluation). A separate report has been prepared on the results of the internal audit.  The TSDMB is responsible for this program. Other branches within the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) play a significant role in supporting TSDMB in achieving its objectives. This includes activities such as payment and return processing, communications and technology platforms.  For this evaluation, we undertook a trend analysis on the total volume of DMCC activities for the 2008-2009 year and analyzed a statistically valid sample of taxpayer accounts where arrangements were made for payment, returns and/or both for the T1, T2 and Goods and Services Tax/Harmonized Sales Tax (GST/HST) revenue lines. Through CRA interviews and an examination of CRA policies, procedures and performance reports, and DMCC complaints, and literature research, we gathered information from DMCC and TSDMB and other tax jurisdictions.  The 2008-2009 Protocol Agreement outlines the objectives, mandates, partners, roles, responsibilities and performances measures the DMCC. This agreement was met for 2008-2009.  We completed a trend analysis of the total volume of DMCC activities for 2008-2009 which revealed that DMCC does a considerable amount of work that may not be directly attributable to either an arrangement or referral[footnote1]. We recognize that these other DMCC actions do provide a benefit to the CRA as a whole in that they assist in resolving taxpayer enquiries at the earliest point of contact with the CRA. The unanswered question is whether these actions are within the responsibility of DMCC or whether they would be better served through activities in other areas of the CRA such as general enquiries or business window.  Our data analysis revealed that DMCC arrangements contribute to compliance. We found that arrangements on T1 accounts were successful in 64% of cases, T2 84% and GST/HST 60%; however, differences were identified in the method of payment to resolve non-compliance. While the majority of T1 were resolved by taxpayer submitted payments from their ongoing financial resources, 54% of the successful T2 arrangements and 42% of the GST/HST arrangements were the result of credit transfers within the taxpayers account. Although this did successfully resolve the accounts for a period of time there is potential that the result is a temporary resolution and may not have a positive effect on overall long term compliance. Arrangements for overdue GST/HST returns were successful in 85% of cases however 23% of these contacts were to clients that had already filed the outstanding return. During the course of the evaluation, documentation was provided by TSDMB to indicate that enhancements have been made to the Revenue Enforcement Management Information Tracking System (REMITS) which will reduce the potential for DMCC contact with taxpayers who have resolved non-compliance related to unfilled returns. No comparison could be made to other tax administrations as our literature research revealed that this type of analysis and research had not been undertaken. Furthermore we noted that information related to CRA collection policies and procedures are not easily accessible and that opportunities exist for DMCC to enhance client awareness of their tax filing and remitting obligations. TSDMB introduced a new organization structure on April 1, 2008 which included the new Debt Management Research and Analytics Directorate (DMRAD) to pursue a more global analysis of program data. This is intended to bring together analytics, research and the use of the Integrated Revenue Collections (IRC) data environment to manage front-end activities. We agree that these new analytics and research initiatives should provide valuable information to TSDMB to identify and adjust the program to improve DMCC performance. This evaluation identified other opportunities to improve program effectiveness and to change the behaviour of non-compliant taxpayers. We therefore recommend that TSDMB, as part of their analytics and research plans, should explore:  
Analysing DMCC disposition codes to gain insight into direct vs. indirect collection activities to support workload management and decision making; 
Conducting a periodic review of the arranged accounts to determine their success; 
Enhanced training to DMCC agents to improve their understanding of their mandate relative to other levels of the collections continuum;
Providing information to DMCC agents to assist them in informing taxpayers of their filing and remitting obligations; and
Enhancing accessibility to CRA collections procedures, in conjunction with outlining the steps in the collections continuum, to inform taxpayers of their legal obligations to file and remit on time. 



  Introduction
In June 2009, the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) Management Audit and Evaluation Committee approved the evaluation framework for the Debt Management Call Centre (DMCC) Evaluation. The framework identified the following three issues for the evaluation: 
To what extent is the DMCC achieving its mandate?
To what extent has the DMCC contributed to achieving compliance?
Are there alternatives or modifications to current program delivery that will assist the DMCC in achieving its mandate?
 It should be noted that an internal audit was originally planned to be conducted in fiscal year 2010-2011; however, Taxpayer Services and Debt Management Branch (TSDMB) management requested that Corporate Audit and Evaluation Branch (CAEB) undertake both an internal audit and an evaluation of the DMCC in 2009 - 2010. By undertaking both an audit and evaluation at the same time CAEB was able to provide a more comprehensive review of the DMCC, including assessments of both program management and internal controls (audit) and program effectiveness (evaluation). This report summarizes the evaluation findings and recommendations. A separate report has been prepared on the results of the internal audit. 


 Background 
The TSDMB is responsible for returns compliance and the collection of all outstanding taxes, levies, duties, and non-tax accounts administered by the CRA. The CRA collections continuum is comprised of strategies ranging from the use of lower cost front-end actions such as routine automated letters and/or telephone contact made through the DMCC, to more complex enforcement activities which represent a higher cost to the CRA such as issuing requirements to pay, demands to file, and conducting seizure and sale activities. More complex enforcement actions are carried out by collection and compliance staff located in National Collection Pools, National Compliance Inventory Centres, and/or Tax Services Offices (TSOs). According to the CRA Annual Report to Parliament for 2008-2009 (Annual Report), the Agency resolved approximately $35.1 billion of tax unpaid at time of assessment. Approximately $17.5 billion of this amount was resolved by “automated and DMCC strategies”. TSDMB estimates that the DMCC actions resulted in total payment arrangements of more than $1.5 billion.  According to the CRA Annual Report to Parliament 2008-2009, Accounts Receivable and Returns Compliance spending totalled $724 million of which $498 million was for net program expenditures and $226 million was allocated for Program activity for internal services. For the same period, TSDMB's Full Time Equivalents (FTEs) totalled 10,472 of which 9,539 were located in regional field offices. For 2008-2009, the DMCC had a total operating budget of approximately $11 million and 216 FTEs. Cumulative taxpayer debt including penalties and interest owed to the CRA was $24.4 billion. According to the TSDMB, of the $24.4 billion outstanding, $3.8 billion is categorized as low to medium risk, $18.1 billion is high risk, $1.5 billion is an established GST/HST receivable from the Ministry of Revenue Quebec, and $1.0 billion represents other receivables. The Annual Report acknowledges that Canada, along with other tax administrations around the world, is experiencing marked increases in tax debt inventories. Between 2007-2008 and 2008-2009, total accounts receivable increased by 5.2% ($1.2 billion).  In April 2008, the TSDMB underwent an organizational realignment which resulted in the DMCC being placed under the direction of the newly formed Debt Management Research and Analytics Directorate (DMRAD). DMRAD hosts the Front-end Operations that are responsible for the prevention and detection of taxpayer's non-compliance with filing and remitting obligations, and the early resolution or diversion of compliance and collections accounts (cases) prior to their entry into the resource intensive workflows of Debt Management (DM) programs. DMRAD responsibilities include modernizing core business functions by developing and implementing the Integrated Revenue Collections (IRC) technology platform in order to enhance its ability to analyze taxpayer behaviour, report on debt components, and assess risk.  Using a predictive dialler, the DMCC initiates outbound calls identified by a front-end case management system - the Revenue Enforcement Management Information Tracking System (REMITS). The DMCC also answers inbound calls resulting from several sources including DMCC outbound calls, and taxpayers who are responding to a notice of assessment form, or an automated collection letter issued by the REMITS system. REMITS is the primary workload management tool used by the DMCC. The main responsibility of the DMCC is to communicate with: 
Individual taxpayers (T1) to make arrangements for the payment of outstanding balances of less than $100,000 in personal taxes; 
Businesses to make arrangements for the payment of outstanding corporate (T2) debt of less than $100,000 and GST/HST debt of less than $50,000; and
Businesses for the filing of Goods and Services Tax / Harmonized Sales Tax (GST/HST) returns with an estimated value of $20,000 or less.
 TSDMB's vision is that by increasing its focus on front-end operations, through the use of enhanced data and technology, and through leveraging capacity in the DMCC, the TSDMB will be able to resolve a greater number of these accounts earlier in the collections continuum, thereby reducing the number of accounts that require a more costly and time intensive series of actions. This approach will free-up collection officers in the other levels of the collections continuum to focus on more complex and high risk accounts that require more in-depth collections interventions. For the 2008-2009 fiscal year, the mandate and business objectives for the DMCC were outlined in a Protocol Agreement established between the DMCC, the Ontario Region, and the TSDMB. The Protocol Agreement for Fiscal Year 2008-2009 also clarified roles and responsibilities between the parties, and provided workload objectives for the call centre. Specific workload objectives for program deliverables are provided with an indication that the deliverables will be reviewed annually.


  Evaluation Methodology
For this evaluation study, we used the following methodologies: 
Examination of CRA policies, procedures and performance reports and plans as they pertain to TSDMB and the DMCC;
Analysis of accounts worked by the DMCC for fiscal year 2008-2009 to study the monthly trend of arrangements and volume activity as well as to determine random samples; 
Case review analysis of statistically valid samples of T1, T2 and GST/HST arrangements made by DMCC personnel; 
Case file review of DMCC taxpayer complaints filed;
Interviews with CRA managers in TSDMB and with managers and staff in the DMCC; and 
Review of related studies and literature from other jurisdictions.



 Limitations and Constraints 
REMITS is the current operating platform for the workload management of DMCC activities however it does not provide information to measure the outcome of DMCC arrangements. To determine what extent the DMCC has contributed to achieving compliance, we extracted a statistically valid sample[footnote2] of accounts from REMITS to draw samples[footnote3] of distinct accounts where arrangements were processed for the T1, T2 and GST/HST revenue lines for the months of April and July 2008. Both months were selected to ensure a typical representation of workload as well as to allow sufficient time for the resolution of accounts to occur based on DMCC arrangement parameters made by agents (maximum of 12 months according to DMCC procedures). We then initiated a case file review of the accounts using CRA administrative data from REMITS, Random Access Personal Information Database (RAPID), Standardized Accounting (SA) and GST/HST systems to measure the success of arrangements made and to ensure the integrity of our results.


 Findings from the Evaluation 


 2008-2009 Protocol agreement met 
The 2008-2009 Protocol Agreement forms the basis of measurement of the DMCC. The Protocol Agreement outlines the objectives, mandates, partners, roles and responsibilities, and indicates the measures that will be used to assess DMCC performance towards the goal of improving overall compliance and reducing the level of accounts receivable. This agreement is signed by the Director, Ottawa Technology Centre, Assistant Director, DMCC, Regional Director of Programs, Ontario Region and Director, Front-End Operations, Research and Analytics Division, TSDMB. An analysis of TSDMB performance reports reveals that the 2008-2009 Protocol Agreement has been met according to the agreed upon performance definitions. Results achieved are included in Table 1. Table 1 - Debt Management Call Centre Protocol Agreement 





Debt Management Call Centre Protocol Agreement [footnote4] 


2008-2009 Performance Against Targets


Breakdown
Actual Performance
Target
Variance


 Protocol Agreement 
 
 
 


Resolution rate (arranged vs. referred to TSO)
92.5%
75%
23.33%


Service Level (80/60) inbound calls
85.1%
80%
6.37%


Accessibility for inbound calls
96.9%
95%
2.04%


Direct / Indirect (outbound / inbound)
65 / 35
60 / 40
N/A


Direct / Indirect (collection letter workload)
65 / 35
68 / 32
N/A


Teletrace for T1, T2 & GST (accounts/hour)
8.9
6.0
48.33%


 Program Budget 
 
 
 


Program Allocation
$10,792,848
$10,651,000
1.33%


Program O&M
$442,818
$366,000
20.99%


Program Totals
$11,235,666
$11,017,000
1.98%


 Accounts Arranged 
 
 
 


T1 Collection
278,248
275,885
0.86%


T2 Collection
34,760
24,616
41.21%


T1 Installment
10,529
8,000
31.61%


GST Collection
51,837
30,583
69.50%


GST Compliance
217,603
170,356
27.73%


Totals
592,977
509,440
16.40%


 Dollars Arranged 
 
 
 


T1 Collection
$1,167,825,597
N/A
N/A


T2 Collection
$237,985,623
N/A
N/A


GST Collection
$119,326,057
N/A
N/A


Totals
$1,525,137,277
N/A
N/A





 DMCC activities extend beyond arrangements and referrals 
In the current DMCC program environment, the focus of performance measurement is directed towards those accounts that meet the status of arranged or referred but does not take into consideration total volume of all activities undertaken. As part of our evaluation we undertook a trend analysis of 2008-2009 program data which included all activities undertaken by DMCC agents by distinct account. A global analysis of the entire DMCC workload for 2008-2009 revealed that DMCC agents had worked 839,970 distinct accounts for the T1 revenue line and had an overall yearly average arrangement and referral rate of 31% and 4% respectively. For the T2 revenue line, the DMCC agents worked 66,992 distinct accounts and 513,651 distinct accounts for the GST/HST revenue lines with an overall yearly average arrangement rate of 47% and 48% with referral rates of 2% and 3% respectively. This explains why the DMCC rate of arrangements and referrals is lower than the calculation that is used within the 2008-2009 Protocol Agreement which is based on a ratio (75:25) of the number of arrangements to referrals made and does not include all accounts worked (Table 2[footnote5]). Table 2 – DMCC Arrangement Rate for Revenue Lines by All Accounts Worked at DMCC for Fiscal Year 2008-2009 (Distinct accounts)  This chart depicts the global analysis of the DMCC workload for 2008-2009. Preceding paragraph to the table explains the trend identified. Excerpt from the DMCC report:  A global analysis of the entire DMCC workload for 2008-2009 revealed that DMCC agents had worked 839,970 distinct accounts for the T1 revenue line and had an overall yearly average arrangement and referral rate of 31% and 4% respectively. For the T2 revenue line, the DMCC agents worked 66,992 distinct accounts and 513,651 distinct accounts for the GST/HST revenue lines with an overall yearly average arrangement rate of 47% and 48% with referral rates of 2% and 3% respectively. 







This analysis also revealed that DMCC does a considerable amount of work that may not be directly attributable to either an arrangement or referral. The work not related to arrangements and referrals is tracked to some degree as DMCC agents use various disposition codes when recording taxpayer contacts to indicate the nature of the particular contact event. When entered into REMITS these codes form part of the permanent taxpayer record. Currently there are 48 disposition codes of which 14 are related to arrangements and referrals. The other disposition codes track activities such as general enquiries related to issuance of remittance forms and change of account information. The systematic recording of these DMCC activities can provide a foundation or starting point from which to benchmark future DMCC activities for management decision-making. We recognize that these other DMCC actions do provide a benefit to the CRA as a whole in that they assist in resolving taxpayer enquiries at the earliest point of contact with the CRA. The unanswered question is whether these actions are within the responsibility of DMCC or whether they are better served through activities in other areas of the CRA such as general enquiries or business window. An ongoing process to monitor and analyze characteristics of the total portfolio of all disposition code activities used by DMCC will provide additional insight into direct vs. indirect collection activities and may provide benefit to the management of the collections workload.


 DMCC arrangements contribute to compliance 
A primary goal of collectors is to resolve the current non-compliance and to help the taxpayer remain current in the future. The CRA takes a “softer” approach when applying initial collection actions to first time non-compliers and may permit them additional time to resolve their delinquency prior to taking stronger collection actions. This is accomplished with a mutually agreed upon arrangement with the taxpayer. However, if the taxpayer fails to resolve the delinquency in the appropriate timeframe they are subject to the same collection actions as repeat or habitual non-compliers. Our literature research indicates that this approach is consistent with other Tax Agencies[footnote6]. To better understand the nature of arrangements made at the DMCC and to measure their success, we extracted a statistically valid sample[footnote7] of distinct accounts arranged for the months of April and July 2008. We then initiated a case file review of the accounts using REMITS, RAPID, SA and GST/HST systems to ensure the integrity of our results. Our definitions[footnote8] for the success, partial success and/or unsuccessful of an arrangement are as follows:  
  A successful arrangement by DMCC actions  is when a taxpayer enters into an arrangement with a DMCC agent to pay arrears or file an outstanding return(s), the arrangement is loaded into REMITS and the taxpayer pays all or substantially all of the arrears balance and/or files the return(s) as originally agreed within the specific timeframe authorized. 
  A successful arrangement by administrative actions  is when a transfer is made from an instalment credit to an arrears balance on the same account. 
  A successful arrangement by previous taxpayer actions (for GST returns)  is when the taxpayer returns were filed but not yet processed at the time of DMCC contact. 
  A partially successful arrangement  is when a taxpayer enters into an arrangement with a DMCC agent to pay arrears or file an outstanding return(s), the arrangement is loaded into REMITS and the taxpayer only pays a portion of the arrears amount or commences with the arrangement as originally agreed and ceases to fulfill the arrangement or only files some of the outstanding return(s). 
  An    unsuccessful arrangement  is when the taxpayer has not made any payments against the arrears balance or does not file the outstanding return(s) as agreed upon. 
 From this analysis we identified that DMCC arrangements contribute to compliance (Table 3). Our literature research of other jurisdictions revealed that no measurement or analysis of arrangement success rates, from a tax call centre environment, had been undertaken to allow for a comparison with other tax administrations. Table 3 – Overview of Percentage of Resolved Arrangements by Revenue Line 





Results of DMCC Arrangements
T1 (%)
GST/HST Collection (%)
GST/HST Return Compliance (%)
T2 (%)


April
July
April
July
April
July
April
July


Successful
65
64
60
60
92
85
80
84


Partially Successful
23
26
11
10
1
3
13
10


Unsuccessful
12
10
29
30
7
12
7
6





 Differences identified between personal income tax (T1) and business revenue lines (T2 and GST/HST) to resolve filing and/or remitting non-compliance 
To better understand what may be contributing to a successful arrangement, an analysis was undertaken of a statistically valid sample[footnote9] of T1, T2 and GST/HST accounts arranged by the DMCC in July 2008[footnote10]. Our analysis revealed that there are several different ways that an account can be successfully resolved. From a financial perspective, non-compliant accounts are resolved primarily by one of the following methods: 
A cash payment by the client including items such as bank remittances, post-dated cheques, pre-authorized payments, etc. 
Application of an available credit on the account to the arrears balance such as a credit assessment/reassessment, transfer of a misallocated payment to the arrears balance or transfer of some other type of credit to the arrears balance. Application of an available credit that requires an action to be completed by a DMCC agent is referred to as an administrative action. 
A combination of 1 and 2 above. 
 Our data analysis and case file review revealed that the three different revenues (T1, T2 and GST/HST) have distinguishable differences in the method used by taxpayers to resolve non-compliance. T1 taxpayer accounts are most often resolved as a result of payments made by the taxpayer rather than by transfers within the account. Taxpayers offering arrangements on T1 accounts are taking the payments from their ongoing financial resources. These payments were identified as the most common source of funds in 89% of the successfully arranged T1 accounts in the month of July 2008 (Table 4).  Table 4 – T1: July Collection Results 







Arrangements made on T2 and GST/HST accounts are often more complex in that there may be a combination of payments and transfers used to resolve the accounts (method 2 and 3). We identified that many of the accounts in these revenue lines had existing money available when contacted by a DMCC agent. The funds on these accounts were either in the form of previously paid installment payments[footnote11] or other pre-existing credits and were used to resolve arrears (Tables 5 and 6). Although this did successfully resolve the accounts for a period of time there is potential that the result is a temporary resolution and may not have a positive effect on overall long term compliance. Agents should make taxpayers aware of the potential implications in situations where installment payments are used to resolve non-compliance. The use of installment credits may create a deficiency with current installment obligations which could result in additional interest charges. This has the potential to prematurely return the account to DMCC or other levels of the collections continuum. Table 5 – T2: July Collection Results 







Table 6 – GST/HST: July Collection Results 







The DMCC is also responsible for compliance activities with respect to the filing of outstanding GST/HST returns. The timely addressing of non-filed tax returns ensures taxpayers are aware that the CRA is conscious of the non-filed situation and will take action if the taxpayer does not fulfil their tax obligation to file and remit a payment if due. It also provides the CRA with the opportunity to inform the taxpayer. This has a strong potential to reduce the possibility of a taxpayer being subject to additional collection measures or incurring any additional and potentially unnecessary interest and penalty charges for non-filed returns in the future. Our data analysis and case review revealed that DMCC agents are successfully resolving issues of overdue returns with taxpayers in 85% of the cases. Further analysis revealed that in 23% of these successful cases, DMCC agents had contacted compliant taxpayers for overdue returns when the returns had already been filed (Table 7). Additional analysis is required to determine if system logic or timeframe adjustments for the issuance of non-compliant notices is needed to reduce non-compliant notifications being generated to compliant taxpayers. During the course of the evaluation, documentation was provided by TSDMB to indicate that enhancements have been made to the Remits system which will reduce the potential for DMCC contact with taxpayers who have resolved non-compliance related to unfilled returns. Table 7 – GST/HST: July Return Compliance Results 







As noted in the Debt Management Call Centre Internal Audit Report, there is a need to strengthen performance measurement for the DMCC. All levels of the collections continuum contribute to compliance but we found that performance is measured differently within the DMCC compared to other levels of the collections continuum. DMCC performance indicators include the number of arrangements and referrals made which are considered “resolved” accounts. In contrast, performance indicators at the other levels define “resolved” as the number of accounts actually paid and the number of returns actually received. The remaining levels also keep track of total intake and work-in-progress. The difference in performance measurement among different levels of the collections continuum does not diminish the overall contribution or value of any level of the delivery model; however more could be done to measure the effectiveness of the DMCC. Recognizing that REMITS cannot provide information to measure the outcome of DMCC arrangements, one option for improving DMCC performance measurement would involve periodic measurement of the arranged accounts to determine the actual dollars collected and number of returns actually filed as a percentage of arrangements made. The measurement of dollars collected, number of accounts paid and returns filed provides for a more consistent and direct comparison to other levels of the collections continuum. In addition this exercise will provide DMCC with a benchmark estimate of amounts collected as a percentage of arrangements made. The comparison of results from similar performance measurement indicators at each level of the collections continuum could contribute to improved workload management and decision making.


 Opportunities exist for DMCC to enhance client awareness of their tax filing and remitting obligations. 
The knowledge required to collect returns and debts is considerable. Although the goal of the program is to resolve accounts through an arrangement with the taxpayer based on capacity to pay and within pre-established parameters, there is an inherent responsibility that DMCC agents be fair and transparent about collection procedures and activities in their dealings with taxpayer. Informing taxpayers of their responsibility to resolve their tax arrears or returns in conjunction with outlining the steps in the collections continuum gives the taxpayer the necessary information they require to make an informed decision for their particular circumstance, at that point in time. In situations when legal warning should be given it is critical that the phrasing reflect elements of the key message, with appropriate tone and that it be provided as an educational component of that particular contact with the taxpayer.  Interviews with DMCC team leaders revealed that agents may be hesitant to provide legal warnings on a consistent basis as they do not have a good understanding of the overall collection continuum and depending on the reaction of their contact with the taxpayer they may or may not provide a legal warning. While it may be challenging at times for an agent to convey the legal warning message, additional focus should be placed on this task complemented with appropriate training and ongoing support when a mutually agreed upon arrangement has been made between the taxpayer and the CRA. The process of informing the taxpayer on their tax responsibilities and CRA collections procedures combined with consistency in its delivery across all levels of the collections continuum may further strengthen the integrity of the CRA by treating people fairly and applying the law consistently. 


 Information on CRA collections continuum is not easily accessible 
There is a need to ensure that all activities within the collections continuum provide clear and consistent messages to taxpayers, particularly as they relate to any perceived or proposed legal actions. This understanding must also be consistent among agents and officers working at all tiers of the collections continuum. Information outlining the CRA's collection procedures is not easily available on the CRA website. While information circular 98-1R3 does provide a detailed description of Collections Policies its content may not be easily understood by taxpayers. A simplified document should be more easily accessible to taxpayers.  Research of other tax administrations[footnote12] revealed that clear and concise information related to debtor responsibilities and opportunities to arrange payment, along with additional measures that could be initiated to resolve unpaid accounts, is readily available and written in plain language with further instructions on how to obtain additional information if required. The provision of easily accessible information communicates transparency in the collections continuum process. Furthermore it enables newly informed taxpayers to make appropriate personal and business decisions to resolve their tax affairs in an effective and timely manner. More particularly, in those situations where taxpayers make a conscious decision to avoid payment of their debts, they are more likely to be aware of the financial and legal impact of making such a decision. A simplified, plain language document should be easily accessible to taxpayers. It would provide greater transparency in the collections process, illustrate the potential consequences of non-compliance and encourage contact. Any gains in this area could lead to increased voluntary compliance through a reduction in uninformed non-compliance activity.


 Analytics and research are being refined to better understand program performance for all levels of the collections continuum 
Work related to the collection of accounts is vast due to the complexity of the workload. Debtors have many characteristics beyond revenue type and business activity, from the small business owner to large corporations or senior citizens on fixed income and beyond. Differences between collection files are inherently difficult to profile based on availability of current internal information and performance management tools. They are further complicated by uncontrolled external factors such as the economic climate.  On April 1, 2008, TSDMB introduced a new organization structure which included the new Debt Management Research and Analytics Directorate (DMRAD) to pursue a more global analysis of Collections program data. This is intended to bring together analytics, research and the use of the IRC data environment to manage front-end activities. The objective was to develop and implement a risk-based debt management analysis system with the initial focus being on the front-end. DMRAD indicates that it will further develop the research and analytics environment by expanding capacity to conduct research and by acquiring and building business intelligence. To achieve this, a national program delivery model[footnote13] was developed which outlines the direction that will be taken. The current focus includes:  
Coordinating research and analysis of problem areas within Accounts Receivables or Non-Compliance front-end strategies;
Assisting in identifying and prioritizing potential improvements to collection and non-compliance strategies; and
Performing due diligence and risk assessment on the improved collection and non-compliance strategies before implementing them. 
 With respect to DMCC, DMRAD indicates that it plans to undertake additional studies, to assess initiatives related to ability to pay, broken arrangements, retention periods, minor balance thresholds and payment arrangement parameters.  We agree that these new analytics and research initiatives should provide valuable information to TSDMB to identify and adjust the program to improve DMCC performance. This evaluation, however, identified other opportunities to improve program effectiveness to achieve compliance and to change the behaviour of non-compliant taxpayers. 


 Recommendation: 
TSDMB, as part of their analytics and research plans, should explore:  
Analysing DMCC disposition codes to gain insight into direct vs. indirect collection activities to support workload management and decision making; 
Conducting a periodic review of the arranged accounts to determine their success; 
Enhanced training to DMCC agents to improve their understanding of their mandate relative to other levels of the collections continuum; 
Providing information to DMCC agents to assist them in informing taxpayers of their filing and remitting obligations; and
Enhancing accessibility to CRA collections procedures, in conjunction with outlining the steps in the collections continuum, to inform taxpayers of their legal obligations to file and remit on time. 



 Conclusion 
This evaluation concluded that the DMCC achieved its mandate with respect to the 2008-2009 Protocol Agreement and that the arrangements made by the DMCC have contributed to compliance. With respect to potential alternatives or modifications to program delivery, the evaluation made a number of recommendations to improve program effectiveness. The collections continuum is not just a TSDMB responsibility. TSDMB can achieve limited success on its own in dealing with the non-compliance challenge and will need the support of other branches to implement the recommendations in this report. This includes activities such as payment and return processing, communication and technology platforms. Some recommendations could be implemented now while others would need to be phased in over time. 


 Management Response 
The Corporate Audit and Evaluation Branch provided a report to the Front-End Operations Division (FEOD) containing a list of recommendations based on an evaluation of the Debt Management Call Centre (DMCC). As FEOD is responsible for providing operational support to the DMCC, on behalf of Front-end programs, it developed the following action plan which contains a suite of actions and strategies designed to address those recommendations. This plan also includes the opinions and views of the DMCC. With respect to issues outlined concerning quality assurance, an action plan has been developed to continuously assess and evaluate the DMCC's contribution into the debt management continuum and thereby ensure that the quality of work is maintained within this environment. Quality controls will provide opportunities to improve processes and avoid repeating errors. A periodic review of these quality assurance activities will help to ensure that measures taken are effective.





Recommendation #1
Action/Milestones/Timelines


Enhanced training to DMCC agents to improve their understanding of their mandate relative to other levels of the collections continuum
 Action: Update training package for agents to better reflect and promote awareness of how DMCC fits within Debt Management continuum. Milestones:

FY 2010-2011- Conduct review, update and deliver training package in conjunction with DMCC.
 


Recommendation #2
Action/Milestones/Timelines


Analyzing DMCC dispositions codes to gain insight into direct vs. indirect collection activities to support workload management and decision making
 Action: Integrated Voice Response (IVR) system implemented in April 2009 for inbound calls to address direct and indirect collection activities. Self serve options and non-collection calls were redirected through the IVR. Analyze DMCC dispositions codes to gain insight into the various collection activities. Milestone:

FY 2010-2011 - Review and determine the use of disposition codes around the workloads conducted by DMCC.
FY 2010-2011 –Align disposition codes with performance indicators to report on effectiveness and efficiency of activities carried out by DMCC.
FY 2010-2011 – Perform analysis of activities performed by the DMCC and develops recommendations on activities that are core to the DMCC and those that are not and develop an action plan to deal with recommendations.
FY 2011-2012 – Develop a procedure to track results attributable to DMCC actions.
 


Recommendation #3
Action/Milestones/Timelines


Enhancing accessibility to CRA Collections procedures, in conjunction with outlining the steps in the collections continuum, to inform taxpayers of their legal obligations to file and remit on time.
 Action: Collaborate with multiple partners to identify opportunities to enhance taxpayer communication regarding their legal obligation to file and remit and Agency collections policies. Milestone:

FY 2010-2011 - Identify opportunities to enhance communication as it relates to informing taxpayers of their filing and remitting obligations 
 For example: 

Review and provide feedback on key forms and publications as it relates to informing taxpayers of their filing and remitting obligations. 
Review results of Payment Usability Test conducted in March 2010 to determine opportunities for improvement to debt management related content on the Agency website. 
 


Recommendation #4
Action/Milestones/Timelines


Providing information to DMCC agents to assist them in informing taxpayers of their filing and remitting obligations
 Action: Update training package for agents to better reflect and promote awareness of how DMCC fits within Debt Management continuum and to assist the agents in informing taxpayers of their filing and remitting obligations. Milestone:

FY 2010-2011 – Conduct review, update, and deliver training package in conjunction with DMCC 
 


Recommendation #5
Action/Milestones/Timelines


Conducting a periodic review of the arranged accounts to determine their success.
 Action: Develop a monitoring strategy to evaluate the success of DMCC arrangements. Interim solutions:

FY 2010-2011 – Prepare an approach to manage and study arranged accounts (for all business lines) – similar to approach taken by CAEB. 
 Milestones:

FY 2010-2011 – Develop and prototype business intelligence based operational reporting system as a means to assess DMCC's contribution to the collections continuum.
The ability for the program to action this item is funding dependant.
 





Footnotes


[Footnote 1]


  Currently there are 48 disposition codes of which 14 are related to arrangements and referrals.
 



[Footnote 2]


  95% confidence level and 5% error rate
 



[Footnote 3]


  Sample size: T1 = 359, T2 = 331, GST/HST = 360
 



[Footnote 4]


  Protocol agreement performance report provided by TSDMB.
 



[Footnote 5]


  Referrals were not depicted in Table 2 as they are below 5% for all revenue lines
 



[Footnote 6]


  CGI report, Short Term/Tactical Best Practices around Tax Collection (May 2007)
 



[Footnote 7]


  95% confidence level and 5% error rate
 



[Footnote 8]


  Allowances have been made for small residual balances that reflect accumulated interest
 



[Footnote 9]


  95% confidence level and 5% error rate
 



[Footnote 10]


  Analysis was also undertaken for April 2008 with similar results having been achieved.
 



[Footnote 11]


  In situations where a business or individual client has been required to make instalment payments throughout the year, credits may be available within the account at the time of contact by a DMCC agent. In accordance with the CRA transfer policy, DMCC agents may transfers credits within the same corporation account or between related corporation accounts when circumstances meet established guidelines. Application of an available instalment credit that requires an action to be completed by a DMCC agent is referred to as an administrative action.
 



[Footnote 12]


  Internal Revenue Service of the United States of America and information from Canadian provincial government websites
 



[Footnote 13]


  Debt Management Program Delivery Model Action Plan, TSDMB, September 2008, page 8.
 






Report a problem or mistake on this page












Please select all that apply:

A link, button or video is not working



It has a spelling mistake



Information is missing



Information is outdated or wrong



Login error when trying to access an account




I can't find what I'm looking for



Other issue not in this list



Submit



Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries, contact us.










Date modified:
2010-11-01





Evaluation - CRA Information Resources for Small Business



On this page

Executive summary

1. Introduction

2. Background

3. Methodologies

4. Findings, recommendations, and management response

4.1. CRA information resources for small businesses are relevant for Canadians.

4.2. Users with different levels of tax literacy have different needs regarding information resources for small businesses

4.3. CRA information resources can be difficult to access regardless of the user’s level of tax literacy.

4.4. There is a relationship between information resources for small businesses and taxpayer’s ability to comply with their tax obligations.

4.5. Taxpayer’s reliance on information within CRA-certified software may be facilitating reporting errors.

4.6. The CRA’s governance structure that administers information resources for small businesses is decentralized and has unclear responsibilities.

4.7. Frontline staff have knowledge and experience which can drive improvements to information resources


5. Conclusion

6. Acknowledgements

7. Appendices

Appendix A: Evaluation issues, research questions and methodologies

Appendix B: Key stakeholders in the administration of CRA information resources for small businesses

Appendix C: Glossary






Executive summary
The purpose of this report is to provide Canadians, the Commissioner, Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) management, and the Board of Management with information on the relevance and effectiveness of the information resources that the CRA makes available for small businesses.
In carrying out its mandate, the CRA ensures that Canada’s voluntary self-assessment tax system is sustained by providing taxpayers with the support and information resources they need to understand and fulfill their tax obligations.Footnote 1  Building on the 2016 Serving You Better consultations with small and medium businesses, in 2019, the CRA held public consultations that gave people across the country the opportunity to talk about their experience when interacting with the CRA.Footnote 2  Canadians have stated that they would like the CRA to provide more personal and tailored services, make taxes easier to understand, provide accurate information consistently, make services accessible and modernize programs and services.
While information resources for small businesses fulfill a need for Canadians, the evaluation identified challenges for taxpayers in finding and understanding information resources, particularly for taxpayers with low to moderate levels of tax literacy. The CRA has developed persona that represent prototypical characteristics of distinct groups of taxpayers and the evaluation provides further support for many attributes of these segments. The CRA provides extensive information but this is not necessarily what the low literacy small business taxpayer segment needs. Meanwhile, tax preparers with a higher tax literacy and more complex tax issues tend to rely on CRA information resources as one source amongst many and prefer to use private sector materials when available.
Difficulty finding and understanding information resources is shown to have a relationship with small business taxpayers’ ability to comply with their tax obligations and to impact workloads for call centres, office and small business auditors and appeals officers. Small business taxpayers and tax preparers find CRA information resources challenging which appears to increase their reliance on tax software. A limited examination of taxpayers using CRA-certified software showed that inaccurate information may be used in determining eligible expenses which could lead to reporting errors in some instances. Reviewing the information contained in CRA-certified tax software will help identify and quantify its potential impact on taxpayers and relationship to reporting errors.
While there is no formal strategy in place specific to information resources for small businesses, various branches have independently undertaken initiatives which can be considered key elements of a comprehensive strategy. Efforts have already been made with respect to environmental scanning and monitoring, employing user testing and feedback during product development, and delivering segmented client-centric products.
Designing a horizontal strategy with clear responsibilities to support the administration of information resources for small businesses will help the CRA to consistently deliver resources, materials and services to Canadians.
Summary of recommendations
In order to meet Canadians’ expectations, the CRA should develop and implement a coordinated strategy and action plan to manage information resources for small businesses. The strategy should include the development of information resources that are tailored to taxpayer segments with different levels of tax literacy and incorporate feedback from CRA employees who interact with small business taxpayers and tax preparers. Finally, the CRA should review and assess the extent to which information in CRA-certified software impacts reporting errors.
Management response
The Public Affairs Branch, the Service, Innovation and Integration Branch, the Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch, the Compliance Programs Branch, the Collections and Verification Branch, agree with the recommendations in this report and have developed related action plans. The Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch has determined that they appear reasonable to address the recommendations.
1. Introduction
The evaluation of the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) information resources for small businesses was listed in the Risk–Based Audit and Evaluation Plan 2017-2020, which was approved by the Board of Management in June 2017. The evaluation framework was approved by the Management Audit and Evaluation Committee in May 2018.
This report outlines the main findings related to the evaluation issues and research questions identified in the evaluation framework. For the purposes of this evaluation, the term “small business” refers to both T1 self-employed filers i.e. individuals and T2 businesses. Please see Appendix A for a full description of the evaluation issues, research questions and methodologies.
The purpose of this report is to provide Canadians, the Commissioner, CRA management, and the Board of Management with an independent assessment of the relevance and effectiveness of the information resources that the CRA makes available for small businesses.
2. Background
The CRA ensures that Canada’s voluntary self-assessment tax system is sustained by providing taxpayers with the support and information resources that they need to understand and fulfill their tax obligations.Footnote 3
Small business taxpayers are currently estimated to represent 20% of the Canadian workforce and are projected to grow to 35% by 2025 in part due to the rise of the non-traditional workforce.Footnote 4  A 2004 study conducted by Statistics Canada found that full and accurate reporting for small businesses requires a greater level of tax knowledge than what is necessary for salaried employees.Footnote 5  Yet, a 2017 study that examined tax literacy among small business owners found that, despite having more complex needs, small business owners’ knowledge about taxes is as poor as that of other taxpayer groups.Footnote 6
This growing segment of the population has more complex information resource needs which they are required to understand in order to comply with their tax obligations. Additionally, small business taxpayers have varying degrees of tax literacy and those with low tax literacy find it more challenging to find and understand CRA information resources. Many small business taxpayers use tax preparers (74%) or tax software (22%) to file and report their taxes each year.Footnote 7  It is important to note that small business taxpayers remain responsible for the accuracy of their returns when using tax preparers or tax software.    
This need for accessible information resources that are easy to find and understand is reinforced by recent results of CRA consultations showing Canadian’s preferences. In 2019, the CRA held public consultations with an aim to identify ways that the CRA can ‘Serve Canadians Better’. The consultations gave people across the country the opportunity to talk about their experience when interacting with the CRA.Footnote 8 Canadians responded that they would like the CRA to provide personal and tailored services, make taxes easier to understand, provide accurate information consistently, make services accessible and modernize programs and services.
To better reflect the needs of taxpayers, the CRA created personas to be realistic representations of identified taxpayer segments. Personas are used as a reference to help the CRA understand how a user will interact with a CRA product, task, service, or application. Of the 5 CRA personas, 3 can be applied in the small business context: Nate, Beatrice and Wayne. In this context, Nate and Beatrice represent small business taxpayers, 26% of whom file their own tax returns and 74% of whom hire a tax preparer to file on their behalf (Wayne).Footnote 9 These 3 personas will be used throughout the report to position findings in relation to the segments, which have different needs and levels of tax literacy. See Figure 1 for a detailed description of each persona.
Figure 1: CRA Personas applicable to the small business context








Image description

Figure 1 is a graphic that describes the three personas described above. The left columns describes Nate. He is self-employed. He likely has overdue tax returns. Because he is so overwhelmed with his tax obligations he does not know what information to even look for. He wants simple and easy to understand information. The middle column describes Beatrice. She is also a business owner. Unlike Nate, she knows what information she needs. The right column describes Wayne – who is a tax preparer. He is well acquainted with the tax filing process and wants more complex and detailed information. 




3. Methodologies
For the purpose of this evaluation, CRA information resources are defined as all tax-related information products that are made available to taxpayers to facilitate their understanding of how to comply with their tax obligations. Using this definition, the evaluation team examined the information resources listed in Figure 2.



Figure 2: Information resources examined


CRA resource
Delivery format - Online
Delivery format - Paper
Delivery format - Telephone
Delivery format - In-person or seminar




Tax guides
yes
yes
no
no


Tax folios
yes
no
no
no


E-services: My    Business Account and Represent a Client 
yes
no
no
no


Web pages on    various tax topics
yes
no
no
no


Phone inquiries    through CRA call centres 
no
no
yes
 


Liaison Officer    Service
no
no
no
yes





To assess the effectiveness and administration of these information resources, the evaluation team used the following methodologies:

data analysis
document reviews
internal interviews and focus groups with CRA employees
external interviews and focus groups with small business taxpayers and tax preparers
survey of tax preparers

Please see Appendix A for more details on the evaluation issues and methodologies. Appendix B provides a description of relevant Branches’ mandates and their responsibilities related to information resources for small businesses, and Appendix C provides a glossary of terms used in this report.
4. Findings, recommendations, and management response
The recommendations presented in this report address issues of high significance or mandatory requirements.
CRA management agree with the recommendations in this report and have developed related action plans. The Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch has determined that they appear reasonable to address the recommendations.
4.1. CRA information resources for small businesses are relevant for Canadians.
Relevance refers to the extent to which an entity (program, service, activity) continues to be relevant to government priorities and be responsive to a demonstrable need.Footnote 10
Continued need expressed by Canadians
A number of organizations provide tax information intended for small businesses in Canada. Comparing the number of unique visits during two randomly selected 3-month periods revealed that the CRA is the dominant information resource amongst the free unpaid web resources available, ranging between 74% to 83% of the traffic.
Survey results showed that Chartered Professional Accountants prefer to use private sector text, webinar and video information resources for their information needs.Footnote 11  Many survey respondents still use CRA information resources as one source amongst many available to them and there is certain information that only the CRA can provide. These CRA niches can be classified into two categories:
Account-specific information: When asked to rank their most used CRA products, 70% of survey respondents chose CRA E-Services as their most frequently-used CRA product. Due to the confidential nature of taxpayer information, the private sector currently cannot provide account-specific information to taxpayers.
Publishing the CRA’s position on specific issues: Both small business taxpayers and tax preparers need to know the CRA’s position through the publication of CRA information resources in order to be compliant. Small business taxpayers are accountable for the accuracy of their tax return regardless of their reliance on private sector resources including software and tax preparers.Footnote 12
Government of Canada priority
Providing information resources for small businesses continues to be relevant to the priorities of the Government of Canada. The December 2019 mandate letter for the Minister of National Revenue clearly states the following Government of Canada priority: “Ensure correspondence and other communications are straightforward and easy to read.” This priority is also reflected in a CRA news release which states that “The CRA is committed to improving services for small businesses and ensuring all Canadians can get the information they need about taxes and benefits easily and quickly.”
The mandate letter and public statement are complemented by the 2007 Taxpayer Bill of Rights, which states that all taxpayers have the right to “complete, accurate, clear, and timely information.” Additionally, it states that “the CRA is committed to providing service offerings that meet the needs of small businesses.”
4.2. Users with different levels of tax literacy have different needs regarding information resources for small businesses

















Small business taxpayers who have low to moderate tax literacy tend to find tax basics challenging. In focus groups, Business Enquiries Call Centre agents indicated that small business taxpayers typically fall into 2 groups based on their reason for calling. The first group includes taxpayers who call seeking re-assurance regarding their understanding of their tax obligations or the actions they have taken (Beatrice). The second group includes taxpayers who appear to be overwhelmed by their tax obligations (Nate) and ask agents to assist them in completing their tax returns. While there is no data available to quantify the size of each group, call centre agents estimate the second group is much larger.





The CRA provides extensive information but this is not necessarily what taxpayers with low to moderate levels of tax literacy require to build a sufficient level of tax literacy such that they understand their tax obligations.Footnote 13  Interviews with CRA employees repeatedly emphasized the need for taxpayers to develop sufficient tax literacy to allow them to keep accurate books and records. If no books and records are kept, or if they are not properly kept, there is a potential for expenses to be miscategorised by the tax preparer. This demonstrates the need for all small business taxpayers (regardless of whether they use a tax preparer) to acquire a basic level of tax knowledge that will allow them to review their returns and to keep accurate books and records.












In contrast, users with high tax literacy, such as tax preparers, require in-depth information to address complex tax questions on behalf of their clients. 43% of survey respondents reported that they either ‘often’ or ‘always’ prepare a return that has at least one complex element that requires them to seek additional information to complete their client’s tax returns. When these situations arise, tax preparers tend to use CRA information on a specific legislative interpretation issue to gain insight into the CRA’s position but also consult a variety of private sources. Owing to their higher level of tax literacy, tax preparers are able to compare and contrast information from different sources and view the CRA policy as an opinion – albeit an important one. Figure 3 shows that when survey respondents were asked to identify which information resources they relied on, they clearly chose the private sector information resources in 6 of the 8 situations presented.





Figure 3: Tax preparer preferences - CRA compared with non-CRA information resources.
 Tax preparers were asked “which resource would you say…”








Image description

Figure 3 summarizes the responses of CPA tax preparers when they were asked “which resources would you say….” Response choices were CRA, non-CRA, or same. When asked which resource allows for easier access to what I need, 24% responded CRA, 48 responded non-CRA, and 28% responded same. When asked which resource provides timely, up-to-date information, 38% responded CRA, 37% responded non-CRA, and 25% responded same. When asked which resource was easier to understand, 17% responded CRA, 60% responded non-CRA, and 22% responded same. When asked which resources provides more nuanced, complex information, 6% responded CRA, 79% responded non-CRA, and 15% responded same. When asked which resources provides information from different sources, 11% responded CRA, 74% responded non-CRA, and 15% responded same. When asked which resource is more applicable to specific situations 18% responded CRA, 57% responded non-CRA, and 25% responded same. When asked which resources advises on what is best for their client, 17% responded CRA, 61% responded non-CRA, and 22% responded same. Lastly, when asked which resource is more authoritative, 36% responded CRA, 37% responded non-CRA, and 27% responded same.




Despite a clear preference for non-CRA information resources, the CRA’s position is often referred to by tax preparers. Focus group participants noted that CRA Folios are one of their most used products, specifically because they need to understand the CRA’s position. This was also evident in the survey where respondents noted Folios are their most relied upon CRA resource after E-Services which, as discussed earlier in the report, does not have a private sector alternative. Moreover, while tax preparers are more likely to use and value private sector information resources when they exist, some private sector information resources cost money to use. Paying to access private sector resources may not be feasible for small business taxpayers.
4.3. CRA information resources can be difficult to access regardless of the user’s level of tax literacy.
An information resource is considered to be accessible when it contains information which is easily found and understood. Overall, the evaluation found that information resources are difficult for taxpayers and tax preparers to find online using the CRA search function and use technical language which is challenging to understand for those with low and moderate tax literacy. Also, while information resources are available, services that enhance taxpayers and tax preparers’ ability to apply these information resources are not well known or used. 
Finding information resources:

















CRA guides and web content are currently structured by tax topic or CRA business line. While this structure supports those who know what they are looking for (Beatrice and Wayne), it does not serve those who are so overwhelmed that they do not know where to start (Nate). This underservicing of the low and moderate tax literacy segment is compounded by the Canada.gc.ca search engine which requires that the user know precisely what to look for to be effective. This creates a significant barrier for low tax literacy taxpayers who are not familiar with precise tax terminology. When compared internationally, certain other Federal Tax Administrations organize their information differently than the CRA but there is no evidence that indicates that their approach results in better outcomes for the small business taxpayer than CRA’s current configuration.





Difficulty in accessing CRA information resources available on the website leads to calls to the Business Enquiries Call Centre. Analysis of the reasons taxpayers called the CRA found that main reasons for calls were:

32% did not find the information,
14% did not understand the information, and
11% wanted to confirm understanding of the information

Further analysis of the Business Enquiries Call Centre call traffic showed that almost one third of calls could have been resolved by using online portals such as My Account, My Business Account, and Represent a Client. The Chartered Professional Accountant (CPA) survey findings are consistent with this finding. CPAs reported that trouble accessing E-Services and requiring account specific information accounted for 47% of calls. 
Another notable way the CRA offers information resources to small businesses taxpayers is through a free Liaison Officer service. Taxpayers can register for this service (either in-person one-on-one visits or group seminars) aimed to help small business taxpayers understand their tax obligations. For example, Liaison Officers direct small business taxpayers towards a targeted set of information resources in contrast to the broad information resources available for small businesses. While most of the information provided by Liaison Officers is available on the CRA website, it is not organized in the same centralized, accessible manner. Liaison Officers also provide a list of common errors made by small businesses.Footnote 14 This list is currently only accessible via private webpages such as this one.
Surveys conducted by the CRA showed that after consultations with Liaison Officers 97% of taxpayers felt that the tools and information provided would help them better manage their tax affairs in the future.












While tax preparers often know what they are looking for and are more familiar with technical language, they also noted having difficulty accessing CRA information resources. In focus groups, they noted that when using popular private sector search engines they could generally find the information they are looking for on CRA websites. However, when tasked with finding specific information using the search engine on Canada’s GC.ca website, the majority were unsuccessful. Focus group participants agreed that to find information using the government’s search engine, it is important to use precise and correct wording.





When they have questions, tax preparers have access to the Dedicated Telephone Service which is open to small and medium income tax preparers who have registered for this service. The Dedicated Telephone Service connects tax preparers with experienced CRA officers who are trained to answer complex questions about the Income Tax Act. Data from the tax preparer focus group showed that only a few tax preparers used the Dedicated Telephone Service often, while 33% of survey respondents said they either had never used the service or were unaware of it. This is in contrast with the general Business Enquiries Call Centre, which 39% of tax preparers reported using often.
Understanding information:

















CRA employees interviewed, all stressed the importance of providing condensed or prioritized information relevant to small businesses. Currently, the closest equivalent is a list of links available on the Checklist for new small businesses webpage. It contains information on the taxpayers’ fiscal obligations and planned touchpoints with the CRA. In focus groups, users both internal and external to the CRA noted the following issues with this list:

It is found by searching the keywords ‘Checklist for small business’ which assumes that the user is aware that this resource exists.
The materials are not organized with the user in mind and do not identify when the information would be relevant to the user. This is especially relevant for information on topics such as record keeping instructions which are much easier to implement in the beginning of the year when the user is setting up their file structure.
The materials included in the list are dense and difficult to navigate.






Another observation is that technical language is used throughout CRA materials which can add to small business taxpayer’s confusion. While small business taxpayers have a clear preference for plain language, the CRA tends to favour more technical language which subject matter experts feel more accurately reflects the tax act. When asked in interviews, CRA employees report that their primary reason provided for favouring technical language is that the CRA cannot compromise on its obligation to provide accurate and technically correct information. However, Treasury Board Secretariat notes that the use of plain language is a requirement of the Directive on the Management of Communications. The Canada.ca Content Style Guide specifies that published content should use “the clearest, most popular term for your audience.”   












Generally speaking, tax preparers do not encounter problems understanding CRA information resources. However, when tax preparers want to understand aspects of the Income Tax Act, they prefer using private sector resources. During focus groups, participants were asked to compare a CRA Folio with a private sector equivalent. When asked which publication provided a better understanding of the topic, most preferred the private sector publication, stating that it provided a more detailed explanation of the principle and how it was applied through a court decision.





4.4. There is a relationship between information resources for small businesses and taxpayer’s ability to comply with their tax obligations.
The premise of CRA information resources is that there is a positive relationship between information and compliance.Footnote 15  The more useful the information that can be shared with a taxpayer, the more probable the taxpayer is to report compliantly. While the evaluation was not able to demonstrate a causal link between the quality of information resources provided to small businesses and subsequent reporting compliance, several methods were used to test whether there is an indirect relationship. The evidence showed how a poor understanding of materials could impact reporting compliance.
CPA survey respondents were asked to consider a list of 11 factors that could impact their ability to report accurately. Four of the factors related to CRA supports and materials (e.g. ambiguity in CRA information resources) and seven were factors that they could face in their larger operating environment (e.g. information from their client company was not made available to them). Of the 11 factors, the top three responses that impact compliance are related to CRA supports and materials: 

The general nature of or lack of information on highly complex tax issues: 33%
Tax preparers’ clients poor understanding of their compliance requirements: 30%
Timeliness of the CRA publishing information resources following a legislative or regulatory change: 24%

Because tax preparers file based on the information provided by their clients, the impact of their clients’ poor understanding of the compliance requirements can be demonstrated through objections related to record keeping issues. Filing an objection is a formal process that taxpayers can use to request the CRA to review an assessment where the taxpayer thinks the CRA misinterpreted the facts or applied the law incorrectly. The evaluation team reviewed more than 250 objection files randomly selected from 700 business objections related files from the 2015-2017 tax years. The goal was to identify cases where taxpayers objected because of the poor quality or their misunderstanding of information resources provided by the CRA. This review revealed that almost 50% of the objections filed by businesses or on behalf of businesses are directly related to record keeping issues.
Assuming that small business taxpayers are aiming to report accurately, this indicates that they are struggling to keep organized records that enable compliance with tax obligations. A review of information resources available to small business taxpayers on the CRA website showed that information resources on the subject of record keeping is scattered. For example, the obligation that the taxpayer must keep receipts is mentioned under the expense records sub-topic of the Checklist for new small businesses. However, separate components of record keeping related obligations such as keeping motor vehicle records and personal versus business expenses are presented under different sections of the web site. As a result, it is challenging for taxpayers to easily access a full picture of their obligations related to record keeping.
4.5. Taxpayer’s reliance on information within CRA-certified software may be facilitating reporting errors.
CRA-certified software enables Canadians to prepare and file their taxes and have their claims processed efficiently by the CRA. In 2018, 76% of small business taxpayers who filed their own taxes and 98% of tax preparers surveyed used tax software.Footnote 16  The CRA developed a certification process to work with industry to ensure that private sector software are compatible with the CRA’s systems.Footnote 17  The CPA survey shows that respondents have a high level of confidence in the accuracy of the software:
Figure 4: CPA survey perceptions of tax software








Image description

Figure 4 outlines survey responses from CPA tax preparers concerning tax filing software. 93% of respondents believed that as a result of software, they are less likely to make calculation errors. 71% believed they are less likely to make eligibility errors. 49% believe that using software has reduced their reliance on CRA information.




As stated on the CRA website, the current certification process which includes a disclaimerFootnote 18 , evaluates the compatibility of the software, namely whether entries in the software match with the corresponding lines of the applicable tax forms. The CRA provides supporting materials to software developers, including software certification guides for both EFILE and NETFILE that outline the testing of tax calculations, system output, web service response messaging, and functionality of additional filing services such as Auto-fill my Return, ReFILE and Express Notice of Assessment. The software developer goes through a rigorous process with the CRA to establish that the particular package is compatible with the CRA systems and meets certain standards resulting in certification. However, the CRA does not certify or review the technical accuracy of information, language or guidance provided in the software.
During the focus group, small business taxpayers were provided a scenario to complete. They were provided a set of facts and asked to respond using a CRA-certified software that small businesses used to file their own taxes for tax year 2017. Participants were provided, and encouraged to use, CRA information resources to help complete the scenario. When completing the task, participants chose to rely on information found in the software and did not refer to the CRA materials that had been provided. When asked why they chose to use software exclusively, participants noted that they found the CRA information resources overwhelming. For these taxpayers, using CRA materials to find information was “like finding a needle in a haystack,” whereas software easily provided relevant information when they needed it and was presented in small manageable portions.
Despite the fact that the CRA has a certification process for software, the taxpayer bears ultimate responsibility for the accuracy of their tax return. Through the scenario, the focus group participants followed the sequencing of steps outlined in the software. Taxpayers relied on the information within the software and claimed certain expenses twice or calculated incorrect amounts for expenses.
Sequencing: The scenario required participants to allocate the appropriate proportion of expenses as business-use-of-home expenses. The sequencing in the software prompted users to claim a number of expenses before claiming the business-use-of-home expense. The majority of participants claimed at least one expense in its entirety, before again claiming a proportion of the same expense as business use-of-home-expense.
Inaccurate information: The scenario in the focus group also asked participants to claim the correct amount of advertising expense. No participant responded to the scenario correctly.
These observations prompted the evaluation team to conduct a further review, comparing information regarding specific expenses against the corresponding legislation and jurisprudence. Using data from the Small Medium Enterprise Research Audit project, the team reviewed five expenses identified as having the highest reassessment rates.





The information available in the software was inconsistent with the Income Tax Act for four of the five expenses reviewed. The errors committed by taxpayers were then presented to auditors in subsequent internal focus groups, where it was confirmed that auditors often come across these precise reporting errors.












For example, the information that taxpayers relied on stated that taxpayers are eligible for business-use-of-home expense as long as they have a home office. However, expenses related to the business use of a work space in your home are only eligible if one of the following conditions are met: 1) it is the principal place of business 2) the taxpayer uses the space only to earn their business income, and uses it on a regular and ongoing basis to meet their clients, customers, or patients. Auditors reported that they saw taxpayers claim the expense on the sole basis they have a home office over 80% of the time.
The following must be emphasized about this analysis. First, the evaluation did not conduct a comprehensive study of softwares to identify all possible instances of inaccurate information or double dipping of expenses. Second, the evaluation did not test the taxpayer’s knowledge or understanding of the information.
4.6. The CRA’s governance structure that administers information resources for small businesses is decentralized and has unclear responsibilities.
The evaluation also looked at CRA’s administration of information resources for small businesses to identify what might be causing or contributing to experiences and outcomes described in Section 4.1 of the report. The following CRA branches publish content related to small businesses:

Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch;
Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs Branch; and
Compliance Programs Branch.

Currently, each branch is responsible for developing and maintaining its own published content. Public Affairs Branch is responsible for providing advisors who ensure that CRA published materials are formatted to meet CRA and Treasury Board Secretariat standards. This has resulted in a fragmented approach in the delivery of information resources for small businesses. For example, there are 34 separate webpages (authored by different programs) which describe updates for the tax filing season.





There are 22 executive positions that relate directly to information resources for small businesses. The evaluation found that the performance agreements for these executives include conflicting performance objectives. Some include the expectation for executives to understand and address taxpayer needs, while others expect products and services that facilitate compliance. When executives were asked what evidence is used to measure the successful achievement of these objectives, output-based performance measures such as web pages visits were mentioned. This example does not indicate the outcome of the interaction with CRA i.e. whether the user found the information they were looking for and if they were able to action it appropriately. There was no evidence that user experience testing results were being used as feedback on performance or to drive changes to content. 












Existing performance indicators do not measure the effectiveness of CRA information resources. While there are executives who are responsible for outcomes related to the effectiveness of information resources for small businesses, there is little evidence that relevant CRA research is linked to achieving or monitoring progress on these objectives.
The CRA’s current governance structure does not have a central entity responsible and accountable for the following key functions related to the administration of information resources for small businesses:

Organizing online content so that it is easily found via search, condensed and presented in order of priority based on user needs
Ongoing maintenance of links and webpage navigation
Coordinating the development of content across branches
Ensuring that content is written in plain language
Monitoring whether the content is meeting the needs of relevant taxpayer segments
Using outcome-based performance measurement data to drive future updates to content

Not all government departments have a model where subject matter experts are principally responsible for published content. Immigration, Refugee and Citizenship Canada has adopted a model where its Public Affairs Branch is fully accountable for all external facing communications products and services. Subject matter experts provide input into what is published and ensure technical accuracy, but their communications function has final say on how it is communicated.
The decentralized nature of CRA information resources available for small businesses indicates there is a need for a comprehensive strategy to manage such information. In interviews with senior management, no interviewee could identify a formal document which articulates a CRA-wide strategy for the development, drafting, publication and maintenance of information resources.
Despite this, branches have independently undertaken initiatives which provide key elements of a comprehensive strategy. Efforts have already been made with respect to:
Environmental scanning and monitoring: The CRA regularly scans the environment to identify taxpayer needs and perceptions of service quality. However, there is no evidence of follow up studies that assess whether the interventions implemented were effective, used, or meet a genuine need.
Delivering segmented client-centric products: The personas developed by the Public Affairs Branch are a foundational activity for designing and developing client-centric products. However, there is limited evidence that content authors are using the personas in the content development process. CRA information resources are better aligned to serve the needs of the Wayne and Beatrice personae than the Nate persona.
Incorporating user testing and feedback into ongoing product development: In collaboration with Treasury Board Secretariat, Public Affairs Branch is increasingly conducting research focused on user experiences in completing tax and benefits-related tasks. However, not all branches have the capacity or expertise to conduct user-experience testing which may explain why it has yet to be integrated into the CRA’s performance measurements for information resources for small businesses.
4.7. Frontline staff have knowledge and experience which can drive improvements to information resources
There are numerous groups of frontline staff across the CRA that interact directly with small business taxpayers including but not limited to:

Business Enquiries Call Centre agents field telephone calls from small business operators and their representatives;
Office Audit and Small Business Auditors review the reporting accuracy of small businesses;
Appeals officers review taxpayer objections and appeals; and
Liaison Officers provide seminars and information to help small businesses in their reporting compliance. 

Given their frequent interactions with taxpayers, frontline staff have a wealth of information about the types of mistakes taxpayers are making and can provide valuable insight into the experiences of taxpayers. Frontline staff are often not consulted as a part of the process of developing information resources. In interviews, frontline staff repeatedly noted that most taxpayers with low tax literacy routinely make the same basic mistakes which include:

Claiming one’s own lunches or groceries as a meal and entertainment expense;
Claiming one’s commute from their home to place of business as a motor vehicle expense; and
Claiming interest from one’s personal credit card.

From the perspective of frontline staff, there are many different ways taxpayers can meet their obligations but there are a few known, common ways small business taxpayers make mistakes. During the consultations, frontline staff offered suggestions to help small business taxpayers avoid known pitfalls and meet their obligations. For example, a list of do’s and don’ts dedicated to people starting a business and focused on ‘what not to do’ rather than on ‘what to do’.
Figure 5: Possible stakeholders of a CRA-wide strategy to administer information resources for small businesses








Image description

Figure 5 is a graphic that lists possible CRA stakeholders who can be consulted when drafting information resources. They are categorized into frontline staff and technical experts. Stakeholders from frontline staff include call centre agents, auditors, liaison officers, and appeals officers. Technical experts include public affairs branch staff (who specialize in plain language writing and web analytics), user experience specialists, the Strategy, Innovation, and Integration Branch, and other subject matter experts across the CRA.




Recommendation 1
The Public Affairs Branch in collaboration with the Service, Innovation and Integration Branch with program branches should formalize a coordinated strategy and action plan across Branches with responsibility for information resources for small businesses based on expertise in:

User experience and priorities;
Plain language writing;
Outcome-based performance measures;
Knowledge of taxpayers’ understanding and experiences; and,
Subject matter.

The implementation of this strategy should ensure the development and publication of information resources that:

Are tailored to different levels of tax literacy (i.e., personae); and
Effectively incorporates feedback received directly from small business taxpayers and tax preparers and from CRA employees who interact with small business taxpayers and tax preparers.

Management response
The Public Affairs Branch and the Service, Innovation and Integration Branch agree with this recommendation. In particular, we see the Web Optimization Strategy and the People First philosophy as key components of this action plan. Both the Web Optimization Strategy and the Agency’s People First transformation agenda seek to address many of the same problems outlined in this report, as their main objectives are to improve the quality of our client service, including online information services for Canadians. These initiatives provide a framework within which specific actions to improve information resources for small businesses will occur.
The Public Affairs Branch will work with the Service, Innovation and Integration Branch and other implicated branches to formalize a coordinated strategy and action plan to make it easier for small business owners to find and understand answers to questions related to taxes and benefits. The strategy will be completed by Q1 of 2021-22.
As an outcome of the strategy, the Public Affairs Branch will deliver a small business content optimization project by June 30, 2021. This includes the development and implementation of:

A review of how clients perform while visiting CRA’s web presence on Canada.ca when accessing information services related to high-demand questions.
Improved content, navigation, and search to make it easier for businesses to find the right information quickly based on research findings.
Omni-channel improvements to small business information to call centres, written communication products and chat channels.
A communications strategy focused on the varied information needs specific to small and medium sized businesses.

When developing new information products, the Service, Innovation and Integration Branch will work with the Public Affairs Branch and program branches to ensure client and employee feedback, including the Serving You Better consultations, are leveraged, ensuring the improvements are directly linked to what the CRA has heard and follow the principles of CX outlined in the CRA’s Service Policy Framework.
To achieve a seamless and effective experience across channels, the Digital Design and Production Directorate within the Public Affairs Branch, in collaboration with the Digital Services Directorate within the Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch, will leverage a new governance to provide horizontal oversight and management of CRA’s information resources for small businesses.
These actions will be delivered with the support of:

Individual Returns Directorate - Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch
Call Centre Services Directorate – Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch
Business Returns Directorate – Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch
Digital Services Directorate – Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch
Business Compliance Directorate - Collections and Verification Branch

Recommendation 2
The Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch, with the Compliance Programs Branch and Collections and Verification Branch, should review and assess the extent that information in CRA-certified software impacts reporting errors and provide a report based on their analysis. The Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs Branch should support the analysis by providing legislative interpretation.
Management response
The Compliance Programs Branch and Collections and Verification Branch will identify common errors or trends that impact compliance for small businesses and provide this information to the Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch by the end of September 2020. The Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch will facilitate information sessions with software developers to discuss these errors and trends with a goal of enhancing the information provided in the software products, where feasible. This will be an annual ongoing process with the first round completed by March 31, 2021.
5. Conclusion
The CRA continues to strive to provide better service to Canadians. Providing information resources for small businesses is one way that the CRA provides information and support to Canadians to support tax compliance. The findings presented in this report show that while the CRA information resources for small businesses are relevant to Canadians, different small business taxpayer segments have different information needs.
The CRA has developed persona that represent prototypical characteristics of distinct groups of taxpayers and the evaluation provides further support for many attributes of these segments. The CRA provides extensive information but this is not necessarily what the low literacy small business taxpayer segment needs. Meanwhile, tax preparers with a higher tax literacy and more complex tax issues tend to rely on CRA information resources as one source amongst many and prefer to use private sector materials when available.
There are opportunities for the CRA to improve Canadians’ ability to find and understand the information it provides as well as the type of information made available. Difficulty accessing information resources may impact small business taxpayers’ ability to comply with their tax obligations and can impact workloads for call centres, office and small business auditors, and appeals officers. Because of its wide reach, improvements to information provided in CRA-certified software could reduce unintentional reporting errors.
The evaluation findings show that information resources for small businesses should be:

designed and delivered with various end-users in mind
tailored to meet the needs of users who have different levels of tax literacy
leverage existing expertise of CRA employees who interact with small business taxpayers and tax preparers to enable continuous improvement

Designing a horizontal strategy with clear responsibilities and central oversight to support the consistent administration of information resources for small businesses will help the CRA to deliver resources, materials and services that respond to the needs of Canadians.
6. Acknowledgements
In closing, we would like to acknowledge, recognize, and thank the Assessment, Benefit, and Service, Compliance Programs, Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs, Service, Innovation, and Integration, Collections and Verification, and Appeals, and Legal Services for the time dedicated and the information provided during the course of this engagement. Finally, we would also like to thank the representatives of the Chartered Professional Accountants (CPA) for their insights as well as their members who took the time to thoughtfully complete our survey.
7. Appendices
Appendix A: Evaluation issues, research questions and methodologies



Evaluation issues, research  questions and methodologies


Issue
Research questions




How    effective are the CRA’s information resources for small businesses?
Are    CRA’s information resources for small businesses relevant to taxpayers? 


How    effective are the CRA’s information resources for small businesses?
To what extent can taxpayers, tax professionals, and tax preparers access CRA’s information? 


How    effective are the CRA’s information resources for small businesses?
Is there a relationship between information resources for small businesses and tax compliance?


How effectively does the CRA manage its information resources for small businesses?
Is the related governance appropriate? 


How effectively does the CRA manage its information resources for small businesses?
Are the monitoring and reporting effective?


How effectively does the CRA manage its information resources for small businesses?
What factors impact these activities and whether there are any downstream impacts of these efforts?





The following research methodologies were employed to answer the research questions identified in the table above:
Document review and data analysis:
Documents reviewed included tax guides, CRA web pages, jurisprudence, applicable legislation, corporate data and reports. In addition, the team reviewed 265 objections filed by businesses or on behalf of businesses.
Internal interviews and focus groups:
Interviews were conducted with CRA employees, managers and executives across Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch, Compliance Programs Branch, Compliance and Verification Branch, Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs Branch and Public Affairs Branch. The team also facilitated 10 focus group sessions in regional tax services offices. Participants in interviews and focus groups included representatives from: 

Small and Medium Enterprises Directorate who are responsible for supporting the Liaison Officer and Office Auditor programs. Liaison Officers service is offered to owners of small businesses taxpayers to help them understand their tax obligations. Office auditors are responsible for ensuring that small-sized businesses comply with the tax laws administered by the CRA.
Objections Program Division who are responsible for resolving disputes between taxpayers and the CRA;
Payroll Auditors who examine businesses’ books and records to make sure they support the amounts filed in tax returns; and
Business Enquiries Call Center who respond to taxpayer enquiries related to businesses.

External focus groups:
Two in-person focus groups were conducted by an independent third-party. One group gathered the perspective of taxpayers who prepared their own taxes and the other of tax preparers whose clients are small businesses. The focus groups were asked to answer scenario-based problems and were facilitated to highlight:

User preferences;
Perception of CRA products and services;
Challenging topics;
Use of CRA information resources in light of the participants’ reliance on tax software.

The findings were used to develop survey questions which sought to validate and quantify the results from the focus group.
External survey:
The Program Evaluation team partnered with the Chartered Professional Accountant (CPA) Canada to administer an online survey. 291 CPA members completed the survey in April 2019.
External interviews:
Other government departments were also interviewed, including:

Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada – whose Public Affairs branch operates under a centralized governance structure; 
The Treasury Board Secretariat’s Digital Transformation Office – TBS is responsible for overseeing the Government of Canada’s web presence on Canada.ca. Given this context, the team sought to identify any constraints in proposing modifications to the CRA’s website; and
The Taxpayer’s Ombudsman Office – to gather data on any complaints that they may have received regarding CRA information resources.

Limitations:
The Survey population was originally intended to include both tax preparers and T1 self-employed individuals who prepared their own taxes. However, based on the findings from the focus groups, the T1 self-employed individuals who prepared their own taxes did not have sufficient tax literacy to provide informed survey responses. Therefore, the survey was re-scoped to include only tax preparers.  
Appendix B: Key stakeholders in the administration of CRA information resources for small businesses



Key stakeholders in the  administration of CRA information resources for small businesses


Stakeholder - Branch
Stakeholder - Division
Responsibility




Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch
The Information Programs Division
Authors and develops most of the CRA’s text resources. This division    is responsible for approximately 5,500 web pages and 1,700 paper products. Their    objective is to provide Canadians with tax information that they need to meet    their tax obligations and access their benefit and credit entitlements. 


Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch
Call Centre Services Directorate
Develops, maintains, and improves national information services and    products that assist individuals and businesses in voluntarily complying with    federal, provincial, and territorial tax legislation, and in receiving    legislated credit and benefit entitlements. This directorate is responsible    for administering the Business Enquires Call Centre.  


Compliance Programs Branch
Small Medium Enterprises Directorate
Supports the Small and Medium Enterprises Directorate (SMED) programs    by updating and maintaining external web pages and helping identify external    communication opportunities through discussions with the Public Affairs Branch.    SMED also provides direction, analysis, policy analysis and support to the    Liaison Officer, Small Business Audit and Office Audit programs.


Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs Branch
Income Tax Rulings Directorate
Authors the CRA’s folios and publishes technical interpretations of    the Income Tax Act. The folios are primarily intended for tax preparers. The Income Tax Rulings Directorate will draft changes to the folios, whenever there is a legislative    change or a change in position as a result of a court decision or a ruling,    and follows this by a review from key internal program areas at the CRA and a    public comment period. This directorate also oversees the Dedicated Telephone    Service which provides support to small businesses through tax preparers. 


Public Affairs Branch
The Terminology working group
Supports CRA employees in written communications by setting the    standard terminology and writing style; the working group consists of    representatives from every CRA Branch and Region to discuss language-related    issues that affect the CRA.


Public Affairs Branch
The Executive Correspondence and Language Services Division
Owners of Plain language at the CRA and the Writer’s Toolbox, who are    responsible for making sure that CRA products are clear and relevant.


Public Affairs Branch
The Public Opinion Research and Environmental Analysis Division
Conducts external research for the CRA and is responsible for helping    the CRA understand its audiences, their needs, what influences them and the    implications on the CRA by conducting research presented in the Annual    Corporate Research and user experience reports.


Public Affairs Branch
The Web Publishing Division
Responsible for the delivery of CRA’s products and services on the    Internet.


Service, Innovation and Integration Branch 
Chief Service Officer Secretariat 
Guides the development and transformation of CRA programs and    services to improve the service experience of Canadians both from a    functional and emotional perspective. Designs CRA programs and services from the    perspectives of Canadians and their potential interactions with CRA programs    and services. And, creates service outcomes that uphold – and go beyond –    what is outlined in the Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights and pro-actively leverage    the feedback the CRA gets from Canadians in program and service design and    delivery.


External stakeholders 
Provincial governments, tax firms and associations
Provide, validate, and sign-off on information and products with the CRA.





Appendix C: Glossary



Glossary


Term
Definition




Business    use-of-home-expense 
Expenses related to running a    business out of your home. Business-use-of-home-expenses are eligible as long    as you meet one of the following conditions: 
			
the    location is your principal place of business or 
you use    the space only to earn your business income, and 
you use it on a regular and ongoing basis to meet    your clients, customers, or patients.



Client-centric approach 
Approach to doing business that focuses on    creating a positive experience for the client by understand people's needs    and expectations, which will produce better programs and services. 


CRA corporate business    plan 
Provides an overview of the CRA's objectives, strategies, performance    expectations and financial projections.


Dedicated telephone service 
Service that offers free technical help for small and medium income    tax preparers. Experienced CRA officers are available by telephone to help    tax preparers find answers to complex questions about the Income Tax Act.


Income tax folio (Folios) 
Series of technical publications that reflect the Canada Revenue    Agency's interpretation of federal income tax provisions as they relate to    various topics. 


Information resources 
Tax related information products that are made available to taxpayers    to facilitate their understanding on how to comply with their tax    obligations. 


Liaison officer service 
Service offered to owners    of small businesses taxpayers to help them understand their tax    obligations through in-person visits or group seminars. 


My Business Account 
Secure    and convenient online application available for businesses and organizations    to access their Canada Revenue Agency account information. 


Persona concept 
Fictional    character designed to be representative of specific segments of a population.    At the CRA this principle has been used to develop five personas that are    designed to be representative of Canadian taxpayers. 


Represent a Client 
Service    that provides tax preparers and representatives with secure and controlled    online access to tax information on behalf of individuals and businesses. 


Service Management Strategy 
The CRA’s Service Management    Strategy (SMS) came into effect in 2015 and is a requirement of The TBS    Policy on Service. The policy requires every federal department and agency to    have a formal, multi-year SMS which is to be reviewed and updated annually.


Small business
Unless otherwise indicated, the    term “small business” refers to both T1 self-employed filers and T2    businesses.


Usability testing 
Technique used in user-centered    interactive design to evaluate a product by testing it with users.







Footnote 1

CRA Departmental Plan 2019-2020 
					

Return to footnote1 Referrer


Footnote 2

Serving Canadians Better Report 2019 
					

Return to footnote2 Referrer


Footnote 3

CRA Departmental Plan 2019-2020 
					

Return to footnote3 Referrer


Footnote 4


					   Randstad (2016), “Workforce 2025: the future of the world of work” 
					

Return to footnote4 Referrer


Footnote 5


					   Statistics Canada (2004), “Canadian Individual Taxpayers: a Changing Proﬁle” 
					

Return to footnote5 Referrer


Footnote 6


					   CD Howe (2017) “The Knowledge Deficit about Taxes: Who it affects and what to do about it” 
					

Return to footnote6 Referrer


Footnote 7


					   The remaining 4% of small business taxpayers file by paper. 
					

Return to footnote7 Referrer


Footnote 8

Serving Canadians Better Report 2019 
					

Return to footnote8 Referrer


Footnote 9


					   Canada Revenue Agency, Agency Data Warehouse, T1 General Data 
					

Return to footnote9 Referrer


Footnote 10


					   Treasury Board Secretariat “Policy on Results”  
					

Return to footnote10 Referrer


Footnote 11

Survey results showed that tax preparers had the following preferences regarding information resources:
Text resources-CRA: 46%, Private sector: 54%, Webinars-CRA: 5%, Private sector: 95%, Video-CRA: 8%, Private sector: 92% 
					

Return to footnote11 Referrer


Footnote 12


					   Each taxpayer must take reasonable steps to ensure that their return is true, correct, and complete. Nesbitt v R 105 FTR 233, 96 DTC 6045.  
					

Return to footnote12 Referrer


Footnote 13


					   Corroborated by Consumer Experience research conducted by Forrester in 2019.  
					

Return to footnote13 Referrer


Footnote 14


					   The errors listed were corroborated by both audit re-assessments and auditor interviews as the most common. 
					

Return to footnote14 Referrer


Footnote 15


					   Corroborated by Consumer Experience research conducted by Forrester in 2019. 
					

Return to footnote15 Referrer


Footnote 16


					   Mandatory electronic filing legislation introduced in 2012 {see ITA S.150.1(1)} requires all tax preparers who prepare more than 10 tax returns for profit to electronically file. 
					

Return to footnote16 Referrer


Footnote 17

Software Certification Process, EFILE, NETFILE 
					

Return to footnote17 Referrer


Footnote 18

CRA disclaimer related to the use of software “Your responsibilities using a certified software product” 
					

Return to footnote18 Referrer









Report a problem or mistake on this page












Please select all that apply:

A link, button or video is not working



It has a spelling mistake



Information is missing



Information is outdated or wrong



Login error when trying to access an account




I can't find what I'm looking for



Other issue not in this list



Submit



Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries, contact us.










Date modified:
2020-10-16





Evaluation of CRA's Administration of the Softwood Lumber Products Export Charge Act, 2006


Final Report
Corporate Audit and Evaluation Branch January 2011 




Table of Contents

 Executive Summary 
 1. Purpose 
 2. Background 
 3. Evaluation Issues 
 4. Methodologies 
 5. Evaluation Findings and Recommendations 
 6. Conclusions 
 Appendix A 



 Executive Summary 
Introduction  The Treasury Board Submission for the Softwood Lumber Products Export Charge Act, 2006 (SLPECA, or the Act) committed the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) to undertake a formative evaluation within the first three years of the initiative. The submission indicated that the evaluation would "highlight the level of success of implementation and provide action plans for the shortcomings or gaps determined in the administration of the Softwood Lumber Products Export Charge Act, 2006." This evaluation pursued three issues: 
Is the CRA effectively administering its portion of the SLPECA?
Have the CRA and its delivery partners worked in a collaborative and coordinated manner?
Are there indications that the intended outcomes related to CRA's administration of the SLPECA are being achieved?
 Background  Since the expiry of the 1996 Canada-United States Softwood Lumber Agreement on March 31, 2001, the Government of Canada sought a durable resolution to the softwood lumber dispute that would provide predictable and stable access to the United States market for Canadian softwood lumber producers. On April 27, 2006, the Prime Minister announced that Canada and the United States had reached a framework agreement that would provide the basis for resolving the softwood lumber dispute, and the Softwood Lumber Agreement, 2006 (Agreement) was signed by the Minister of International Trade and the United States Trade Representative on September 12, 2006. Canada and the United States implemented the Agreement on October 12, 2006. A major component of the Agreement is the imposition of export measures, including an export charge, to be levied by Canada. The SLPECA is the implementing legislation for the charge. CRA's administration of the SLPECA includes the processing of monthly returns and payments within Assessment and Benefits Services Branch (ABSB) and a requirement for development and implementation of an effective compliance and verification program within Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs Branch (LPRAB). Evaluation Methodology  The methodologies used in conducting the evaluation study included document and file review, examination of data from the Rulings and Interpretations Tracking System (RITS), interviews with CRA managers and staff involved in administering the SLPECA, provincial representatives and representatives of the Foreign Affairs and International Trade Canada (FAITC). The evaluation also included an online survey of lumber company representatives. Findings and Recommendations  Without the benefit of a comparison program or a long program history, it appears that the CRA's administration of the SLPECA has been effective, particularly in light of the modest turnaround time between the signing of the Agreement and its proclamation into law. On the questions of continuously striving for greater efficiency, horizontal management and the monitoring of performance, only minor changes have been suggested. The working relationship with FAITC, the main delivery partner, has matured and works well. An on-line survey of registrants, a review of available program (compliance) data, and the perspective of provincial clients also suggest that, with the exception of some minor concerns, CRA is effectively administering the SLPECA.  The evaluation makes three recommendations to strengthen CRA's administration of the SLPECA. LPRAB should:  
Develop a national quality assurance program to ensure consistency and accuracy of audits; 
Consult with duty officers with the intent of developing system change proposals for consideration by ABSB to improve the Other Levies Assessing System (OL) and, to a lesser extent, the Rulings and Interpretations Tracking System (RITS); and,
Examine ways to better educate registrants so that the frequency of common, less technical errors is reduced, and that voluntary compliance is enhanced. 



 1. Purpose 
The Treasury Board Submission for the Softwood Lumber Products Export Charge Act, 2006 (SLPECA, or the Act) committed the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) to undertake a formative evaluation within the first three years of the initiative. The submission indicated that the evaluation would "highlight the level of success of implementation and provide action plans for the shortcomings or gaps determined in the administration of the Softwood Lumber Products Export Charge Act, 2006."


 2. Background 
2.1 An overview of the SLPECA   Since the expiry of the 1996 Canada-United States Softwood Lumber Agreement on March 31, 2001, exports of softwood lumber to United States from the Canadian forest products industry had been subject to punitive trade actions by the United States Department of Commerce. These actions resulted in the May 2002 imposition of United States anti-dumping and countervailing duties on most softwood lumber exports to the United States. Canada challenged the United States trade actions under the North American Free Trade Agreement, and before the World Trade Organization and the United States Court of International Trade. The Government of Canada sought a durable resolution to the softwood lumber dispute that would provide predictable and stable access to the United States market for Canadian softwood lumber producers and end the cycle of litigation that had plagued the industry for over two decades. On April 27, 2006, the Prime Minister announced that Canada and the United States had reached a framework agreement that would provide the basis for resolving the softwood lumber dispute, and the Softwood Lumber Agreement, 2006 (Agreement) was signed by the Minister of International Trade and the United States Trade Representative on September 12, 2006. Canada and the United States implemented the Agreement on October 12, 2006, leaving only a few weeks for the CRA to develop the initial infrastructure to administer the Act.  Under the Agreement, the United States countervailing and antidumping duty orders on Canadian lumber have been fully revoked and almost US$4.535 billion has been returned to Canadian exporters. A major component of the Agreement is the imposition of export measures, including an export charge, to be levied by Canada, which in turn is returned to the provinces net of expenses. The SLPECA is the implementing legislation for the charge.  The Agreement excludes from the export measures softwood lumber products first produced in the Atlantic Provinces from logs originating in the Atlantic Provinces or Maine, those produced in the Territories, as well as those produced by 32 specific companies in Quebec and Ontario. The SLPECA provides exemptions from the export charge to the products excluded under the Agreement.  Under the Agreement, the regions affected choose between an export charge ("Option A") or a lower export charge rate plus a volume restraint ("Option B"). Each region has two opportunities throughout the term of the Agreement to change the Option it has selected: January 1, 2010 and January 1, 2013. The export charge rate is determined monthly, based on the most recent four week average of the weekly framing lumber composite prices.  Figure 1 provides a summary of the options chosen by Canadian provinces/regions: Figure 1: Export Options 





Export Option
Region


"A" Export Charge only
British Columbia Coast, British Columbia Interior, Alberta


"B" Export charge plus volume restraint
Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec


Excluded
Atlantic Provinces, Territories





Regarding Option A, the SLPECA contains a surge mechanism whereby if the volume of exports from a region operating under Option A exceeds its "trigger volume"[Footnote 1] by more than 1% in a month, Canada shall apply, retroactively to all exports to the United States from that region during that month, an additional export charge equal to 50% of the applicable export charge for that month. With respect to Option B and the additional consideration of "volume restraint", each region receives a volume of export quota based on a regional share fixed in the Agreement, the price of lumber and the volume of United States lumber consumption. Regional quota allocations are distributed to exporters on a monthly basis, meaning that Foreign Affairs and International Trade Canada (or FAITC) sets the quotas and manages 108 quota periods over nine years. Quota allocation is based on methodologies that are determined in consultation with the provinces and that could be region-specific.  2.2 CRA's administration of the SLPECA   Softwood Lumber is relatively new to the CRA. The CRA did not have an existing program structure administering softwood lumber as it was not impacted by the 1996 Softwood Lumber Agreement between Canada and the United States. As a result, SLPECA introduced a requirement to provide new services to approximately 1500 exporters. From a resourcing perspective, this meant that the Agency required funds to develop new activities (first time start up) and to modify numerous functions and systems already existing to accommodate the implementation and maintenance of the softwood lumber program.  The implementation of the SLPECA involves four of CRA's Tax Services program activities. These services include the processing of monthly returns and payments, and a requirement for development and implementation of an effective compliance and verification program to meet the goals and objectives agreed to by Canada under the Agreement. Responsibilities of each of the pertinent areas include the following: 
Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs Branch (LPRAB) is the Office of Primary Interest and the main contact with other federal stakeholders under the SLPECA. LPRAB is responsible for preparing rulings and interpretations, developing/implementing policies, developing regulations, preparing remission orders, negotiating Memoranda of Understanding, participating on SLA committees, supporting litigation/defence, and recommending legislative changes. As well, LPRAB is in charge of verification activities (by conducting export permit data matching and risk assessments, as well as by selecting audits and compliance reviews). 
Assessment and Benefit Services (ABSB) is in charge of developing forms and the website, preparing materials and services for registrants' assistance, posting information for registrants and responding to registrants' enquiries. As well, ABSB is responsible for processing registration forms, issuing account numbers, sharing registration information with FAITC, annual recertification of independent re-manufacturers, and reviewing security for non-residents. In addition, the branch is responsible for processing returns on a monthly basis, processing returns for charge on duty deposits, issuing notices of assessment and reassessment, and processing refund applications. ABSB is responsible for processing remission orders and for administering late payment interest and monetary penalties.
Appeals Branch resolves disputes with registrants and conducts reviews of CRA decisions, as well as assists the Department of Justice during litigation.
Tax Services and Debt Management Branch (TSDMB) is responsible for the collection of assessed charges and outstanding returns.
 To maintain fair access to the United States softwood lumber market it was anticipated that the CRA would expend approximately $11.7 million on an annual basis, starting in 2006-2007 and continuing over the seven years of the Act, to administer its portion of the SLPECA.  2.3 Softwood lumber partners and responsibilities  The complexity of the legislation requires that the administration of the export charge be supported by a robust and flexible regime. The export charge itself is unlike other taxes and charges being administered by the CRA. It requires highly flexible administrative processes and systems to allow for the application, removal or variance of the export charge on an ongoing basis throughout the fiscal year. This unique and changing environment adds significant complexity to the application of the export measure. Adding to this complexity, from the CRA's perspective, is that FAITC and Justice Canada are important partners in administering the SLPECA. Specifically:  
The aforementioned export charge, to be levied by Canada on exports of softwood lumber products to the United States, is collected and administered by the CRA with support from FAITC. 
FAITC's Export and Import Control is responsible for synthesizing, tracking and conveying the data necessary to be able to accurately set monthly regional access volumes and enabling the CRA to establish an accurate export charge. 
The Processing Unit at the Surrey Tax Centre (STC) in British Columbia maintains a verification process pertaining to data (approximately 500,000 export permits annually) received from FAITC and assists them with the reconciliation process. In support of these linkages, an existing data link for CRA to communicate with FAITC has been replicated and adjusted. 
 2.4 Cost recovery and transfers to provinces  It was estimated that revenue from permit fees would be $3 million in the first year of the Agreement, growing to approximately $4.5 million for each remaining year. These funds go to the Consolidated Revenue Fund (CRF), and in conjunction with revenue from the export charge, serve to offset implementation and administration costs. The Government distributes to the provinces the export charge, net of the cost to the CRF for implementation, administration, and costs associated with defending Canada's interests in legal challenges to the Agreement. Funds distributed to the provinces do not affect equalization payments.


 3. Evaluation Issues 
Based on consultations and research conducted in preparation of the Softwood Lumber Results Based Management and Accountability Framework, the Program Evaluation Division identified three evaluation issues. These issues and the associated research questions pursued during this study were as follows:  Issue 1: Is the CRA effectively administering its portion of the SLPECA?  
1.1 Has the program been developed and administered in a cost-efficient manner?
1.2 Has the CRA effectively coordinated its efforts among all the branches involved?
1.3 Have managers appropriately monitored the delivery of the SLPECA?
 Issue 2: Have the Canada Revenue Agency and its delivery partners worked in a collaborative and coordinated manner?  
2.1 Have the external partners provided each other with the support and materials they require to carry out their roles and responsibilities in a timely manner?
2.2 Are the governance structures in place appropriate for facilitating collaboration and coordination amongst the external partners?
 Issue 3: Are there indications that the intended outcomes related to CRA's administration of the SLPECA are being achieved?  
3.1 Is CRA fostering trust with registrants and clients through its management of the SLPECA?
3.2 Are affected lumber companies complying with their obligations under the SLPECA?
3.3 What other challenges, if any, have hindered compliance or made it more challenging to comply with the Softwood Lumber Agreement?



 4. Methodologies 
The following methodologies were employed during the conduct of the evaluation study: 
 Document and file review: Legislation, documents, processes, policies, files and procedures were reviewed as they pertain to the SLPECA to assess workload, outputs, achievement of expected results, impacts, relationships and linkages. 
 Data analysis: Data from the Rulings and Interpretations Tracking System (RITS) and the verification unit were examined to report on compliance rates amongst registrants. 
 Interviews (internal): Interviews were conducted with 48 CRA managers and staff involved in administering the SLPECA. A total of 16 interviews were conducted with HQ representatives from LPRAB, ABSB, ITB, and Finance and Administration Branch (F&A). A visit to the Processing Unit at STC permitted an on-site review and the completion of 10 in-person interviews with members of that team. In LPRAB, telephone interviews were conducted with eight current/former Technical Advisors and 14 LPRAB duty officers. 
 Interviews (external): Five provincial representatives were interviewed by telephone regarding their perceptions of CRA's administration of the SLPECA. Six representatives from FAITC were also interviewed. 
 Survey: An on-line survey was conducted with lumber company representatives (n=46).



 5. Evaluation Findings and Recommendations 
5.1 Is the CRA effectively administering its portion of the SLPECA?  Four aspects of administration were reviewed: budget management, information technology (IT) upgrades, coordination and monitoring. No substantive concerns were found in any of these four areas. Our assessment of "budget management" is based on a review of the disbursement of allocated funds. The funds available to administer the Act have been adequate, as no branch has gone over-budget based on its original allocations.  A review of the breadth, frequency and impact of IT upgrades revealed that since administration of the Act began, the Processing Unit in STC has undergone a complete software overhaul with the transition from MS Access to Other Levies System (OLAS). These changes have largely occurred semi-annually, and they bundle numerous enhancements together. Although it was not possible to cost out previous and subsequent efficiency gains, all STC Processing Unit staff were able to point to numerous changes that have occurred that have made their jobs easier for them.  Compared to STC Processing Unit staff, LPRAB's duty officers have experienced one-tenth of the total OLAS enhancements that have been implemented during administration of the Act, and according to these users, those who could recall one of these changes felt that it had no meaningful impact on their productivity. However, when probed whether there were changes that possibly could enhance their productivity, the vast majority had at least one idea for OLAS. While LPRAB duty officers had numerous ideas about changes to the IT systems that could result in increased productivity, it is unclear whether these ideas reflect a lack of familiarity with the systems or not. As well, it was found that while members of the STC Processing Unit are consulted semi-annually by the Excise and Other Levies Section (located in HQ) on their desired OLAS changes, duty officers have not been given the same opportunity by LPRAB. We assessed coordination by examining training and support, governance and horizontality, and data sharing systems within the Agency. For the most part, the Agency has effectively coordinated its efforts among the branches and regions involved: 
Extensive training, nearly all of which originated in Headquarters, has been provided since the outset of the Act, and this continues in ABSB and LPRAB today. Those who participated in the training generally made positive assessments of it, based on its timing and the value-added it provided them in helping do their jobs. The one area where there may be an additional opportunity is in LPRAB providing its duty officers with systems training.
On the question of governance, both ABSB and LPRAB have developed formal governance structures to facilitate communications within their respective Branches. Due to the fact that LPRAB duty officers are located in 11 Tax Services Offices (TSOs) (representing all regions) across the country, a governance structure called the Technical Advisor Conference Call (TACC) has been developed to facilitate communication between HQ and the duty officers. Each region has a designated Technical Advisor, who amongst other tasks, liaises between LPRAB HQ and their region's duty officers. Overall, LPRAB Technical Advisors' appraisals of TACC are generally very positive. The main concern raised by duty officers was that information was shared by their Technical Advisors on a "need-to-know" basis rather than to the group. In spite of this impression, duty officers are generally confident that their work is accurate. Meanwhile, the Processing Unit located in the STC reported regular, effective contact with HQ. A formal governance structure has also emerged here, with rotating chair, minutes and regularly scheduled meetings. It has leveraged its small size and centralized workforce by inviting all staff to regular video conferences and other meetings.
There was no evidence of formal governance structures in place to facilitate communication across branches, but this seems to have had no impact on coordination of effort within the Agency. Coordinating reporting, which involves collaboration between F&A, LPRAB and FAITC, has worked well, as has communication between ABSB and LPRAB. There is regular contact between the parties driven by need and none of the individuals interviewed saw a need to implement a formal structure at this time.
For all the data that are shared between ABSB and LPRAB, only a few areas of concern were identified during our interviews, suggesting that, for the most part, data sharing systems are working effectively. 
 Monitoring of accuracy and consistency are critical. We found evidence that the monitoring of records processing and the quality of audits is taking place: 
Since the outset of the Act, the STC Processing Unit has monitored to ensure accurate record processing. Meanwhile ABSB undertook a review of Surrey's processes, with the aim to improve efficiency and consistency of processing where possible.
LPRAB has developed and distributed templates to facilitate a consistent audit approach, and completed audits are monitored for quality in TSOs. However, it is not known whether those who review completed audits do so in a way that is consistent with their colleagues in other offices. It should also be noted that the results of monitoring are not communicated back to HQ for it to validate whether a consistent approach is being applied by all duty officers in every office. This feedback takes on added significance, however, as with the high annual verification coverage rates required by the Act, duty officers are now carrying out follow-up visits on registrants.
 Recommendations  LPRAB should consult with duty officers with the intent of developing system change proposals for consideration by ABSB to improve OL and, to a lesser extent, RITS. Management Response:  Agreed. The Excise Duties and Taxes Division and the GST/HST Rulings Directorate in LPRAB will continue to increase the systems functional capacity of regional Softwood officers in order to ensure that they are fully aware of all aspects of the OL and RITS systems. As system expertise increases (early 2011), regional softwood officers, team leaders, technical experts and managers as well as HQ experts will be engaged in consultations in an effort to identify potential improvements to both the OL and RITS systems. Potential Other Levies systems enhancements will be referred to representatives of the Assessment and Benefit Services Branch, who are responsible for reviewing such amendments and submitting them to the Information Technology Branch, as timing opportunities and when resource allotments are available. Changes to the RITS system will also be considered and examined. Given that the systems responsibility for RITS resides within the GST/HST Rulings Directorate, changes to this system can be made in a timely manner (i.e., within a week or two after changes are requested). LPRAB should develop a national quality assurance program to ensure consistency and accuracy of audits.  Management Response:  Agreed. The Excise Duties and Taxes Division will complete its ongoing program review exercise of all regional offices by the summer or fall of 2011. Information gathered during our regional review visits will be used to establish the national Softwood program and file standards. The Division will use these national standards as the first step in setting up a quality assurance program to ensure the consistency and accuracy of audits. 5.2 Have the Agency and its delivery partners worked in a collaborative and coordinated manner?  Unlike some other Federal jointly managed programs, there is no formal governance structure in place to facilitate collaboration and coordination between FAITC and CRA. In spite of this, the working relationship between the two parties appears to have matured considerably over the past three plus years. The major factors driving this maturation process have been: 
A series of successfully implemented IT upgrades which have facilitated data sharing: Specifically, management of the export permit process has improved considerably. In the three full years where data exist, the number of invalid Business Numbers has dropped significantly (64%) as has the number of inappropriately issued permits (84%) by FAITC. As well, there was no evidence of any problem associated with the exchange of costing information. 
An "educating" period where both parties learned how the other worked. FAITC officials were positive in describing their working relations with their CRA counterparts: When comparing their experiences with CRA to other inter-departmental programs that they have dealt with, FAITC representatives indicated two main points in their appraisals: there have been no "turf wars" with CRA, and CRA officials have consistently been flexible and responsive to their requests. Meanwhile, there was a general sense amongst CRA representatives that, in the past, FAITC had not always been consistent in its communications efforts and, certainly in the early days of the partnership, needed to better understand how the CRA works. Further, CRA representatives felt that information exchanges such as setting up meetings, responses to emails and phone calls, were a priority when initiated by FAITC, but were less so when originating from members of the CRA. 
The relatively small number of people involved in administration on both sides, which has allowed individuals to get to know one another and leverage their small numbers through direct contact: The network of informal communications established has been leveraged to manage unanticipated challenges, such as the Third Country Adjustment Refund[Footnote 2], as they have arisen.
 5.3 Are there indications that the intended outcomes of the SLPECA are being achieved?   Although a review of outcome data is not typical of a formative evaluation, we chose to review the early results achieved in order to provide further insight into CRA's administration of the Act.  The relationship between the CRA's major activities and outputs, through to its various intended outcomes, is delineated in the Softwood Lumber Program Logic Model (Figure 2). CRA's intended SLPECA outcomes can be divided into various immediate, intermediate, end and strategic outcomes between its two clients, the softwood lumber companies (registrants) and their respective provincial governments. The shaded boxes in the logic model (Figure 2) delineate the outputs and outcomes for which data were collected (Appendix A provides the rationale for the outputs and outcomes selected for review). The proceeding discussion on these outputs and outcomes is organized into three sections, as outlined below.  Section 5.3.1 focuses on lumber company perceptions of the outputs (read left to right in the logic model) delivered by the CRA. These include: 
Responses to registrant inquiries;
Registrants issued account numbers;
Registrants sent monthly statements and notices of assessment;
Charges assessed;
Refunds issued; and
Audits and reviews conducted.
 Section 5.3.2 provides available data related to the following immediate and intermediate outcomes (read from top to bottom):  
Registrants understand their obligations under the SLPECA; 
Registrant registers or deregisters appropriately;
Registrant completes returns and remits fees;
Registrant is informed of the new charge assessment (if any); and
Registrant remits outstanding fees or is compliant.
 Section 5.3.3 provides the perspectives on provincial representatives on the two outputs (furthest right in the model): 
Revenue reports for provinces; and
Net charge distributed quarterly to the provinces.
 In addition this section summarizes provincial views on the strategic outcome of "fostering trust".   5.3.1 Registrants' assessments of CRA outputs (products and services) are generally positive  In order to gauge the extent to which the CRA is seen to be supporting its Softwood Lumber client base, registrant satisfaction levels in four specific service areas ─ how enquiries have been handled, the registration process, the processing of returns/account maintenance and the performance of auditors ─ were sought.[Footnote 3]  Responses to registrant enquiries: Among those with experience making enquiries to the CRA, just over four-fifths of survey respondents said they had been provided clear information in a timely manner. Overall, when asked whether they had made any enquiries about the SLPECA to the Agency, nearly six in 10 (59%) indicated that they had done so. Of these representatives, 93% agree that the CRA had treated them respectfully and 82% agree that the CRA both responded to their inquiries in a timely fashion and had provided them with clear information. Registrants issued account numbers: The registration process is widely viewed as easy. Nearly three-quarters (72%) of those completing the survey said that they were personally involved in the registration process for their company, and of this group, 85% described the process of registering for a business/account number for the Softwood Lumber program as either "very" or "somewhat" easy. Figure 2: Logic Model (Outputs and Outcomes)  [View image of Logic Model (Outputs and Outcomes)] [View text version of Logic Model (Outputs and Outcomes) image] Registrants sent monthly statements and notices of assessment: Although reported discrepancies with account statements are not frequent, satisfaction with how these are dealt with is comparatively lower. While less than one in five (17% ) of those completing the survey said they had a discrepancy in their account statements from the CRA, 38% of those from this group (n=3) said they were satisfied with the level of service to address this situation. Only 4% (n=2) of the companies say that they sought a review of a CRA decision on a charge, and one of these two companies felt satisfied with the process and its results. Of all the open-ended questions inviting participants to elaborate on their experiences, the one covering account statements generated the most feedback. One participant said that the Notices of Assessment statements are not informative, asking if the "Total Amounts" line refers to the total amount due, total amount paid, or total amount submitted on the export charge return. Another commented that it was difficult to talk to a CRA representative at the Surrey Office over discrepancies. Some participants provided suggestions for improving the processing of forms. One representative, who reported faxing 50 pages per month to the CRA, suggested it would be much easier if his company could send their detailed remittance information electronically or through email. Another respondent felt that there was confusion on the issue of declared value versus the $500 cap. And another suggested that software should bring up the applicable exchange rate automatically. It was also noted that the objection to relatively minor issues should not require going through a formal Notice of Objection procedure, but this person did not specify what they had in mind with respect to "minor issues". Refunds issued: According to results from the on-line survey with companies, nearly 40% (n=18) indicate that their company had been eligible for a refund at some point over the past 3 years. Respondents were asked about their level of satisfaction with the refund process both during and prior to 2009, and there was no change in their collective satisfaction level. Both prior to and post January 1 2009, 39% responded that they were "satisfied" with the refund process; none stated that they were "very satisfied", but equally noteworthy, none stated that they were "very dissatisfied" either. Two participants requested telephone interviews to supplement their responses to the online survey, and both raised concerns about the timeliness of their refunds. Broadly speaking, there are two conditions within SLPECA where companies could be eligible for refunds: through the third country adjustment, or through regular account adjustments and/or an audit. The third country adjustment is more complex administratively, less frequently occurring (its conditions have been met just once), but it is also the refund that is more likely to have impacted more participating companies.[Footnote 4] Approximately 70% of companies that had a charge assessed for the periods covered by the third country adjustment actually claimed their refunds (there were 423 exporters during this period and 295 entitled companies sought refunds).[Footnote 5]  Those who did claim their refunds had to go through a specific process in order for their claims to be accepted. Although the Third Country Adjustment refund must cover six "periods" (i.e. period = month) for each of the two consecutive quarters when the unique market conditions were met, exporters were asked to file only one refund application along with a supplement (Form 278-1) to provide details for each period. In spite of this effort to simplify the process for the client, the Processing Unit still needed to process each period, or month, separately. This is why, as is presented in Figure 3 below, the number of periods is approximately six times the number of applications less periods where there was no charge (no exports by exporter). Figure 3: Number and Percentage of Periods Processed Within Various Timeframes (in days) 





Number ofdays
TotalsProcessed


 
 Periods[Footnote 6]  
 Percentage 


 Less than 30 days 
1059
73%


 30-45 
199
14%


 46-60 
46
3%


 61-90 
66
4%


 Over 90 
77
5%


   
1447
100%





As the results shown in Figure 3 suggest, the vast majority of refunds (about 95%) were processed within 90 days, and more precisely, nearly three-quarters (73%) were processed in less than 30. Besides the third party adjustment, corrections due to miscalculations or overpayment of fees are more routine sources of refunds to exporters. Of the approximately 450 accounts that reported an export charge during the most recent two fiscal years, the number of refund claimants for 2008-2009 was 98 (about 22% of accounts) and for 2009-2010 it had declined to 67 (or about 15% of accounts). Given the total numbers of refunds delivered for each of these two years, claimants typically received about 5.7 refunds in 2008/2009 (567 total refunds/98 claimants) and seven in 2009-2010 (472 refunds/67 claimants). Figure 4 summarizes the length of time (in days) between the received date and assessed date (date a company was credited) for refunds.  Figure 4: Refund Processing Times (in days) over 2008-2009 and 2009-2010 





 Number of Days 
 Fiscal Year 08/09 (n=98) 
 Fiscal year 09/10 (n=67) 
 Year over Year % Differences 


 Refunds 
 Percentage 
 Refunds 
 Percentage 


Less than 30
105
19%
61
13%
-6%


30-45
88
15%
40
9%
-6%


46-60
49
9%
56
12%
+3%


61-90
89
16%
181
38%
+22%


90 +
236
41%
134
28%
-13%


 TOTALS 
 567 
 100% 
 472 
 100% 
 





The refund processing results are somewhat mixed. On the one hand, the proportion of companies having to wait over 90 days for a refund declined year over year by 13%. In 2008-2009 just over four in 10 companies (41%) waited over 90 days, but this dropped to just over one quarter (28%) in the subsequent year. On the other hand, the percentage of companies waiting shorter periods of time for a refund also dropped. The proportions receiving their refunds in both the less than 30 days group (-6%) and the 30-45 days group (-6%) had declined year-over-year. The timeframe experiencing the greatest growth has been the 61-90 day period (+22%); in the 2009-2010 fiscal year, nearly four in 10 (38%) received their refund in this timeframe. Further information from ABSB revealed that just over half (95 of the 181, or 52%) of refund claims were filed by one client (BN9), which is also one of the larger exporters. As well, in 2009-2010, several refund claims were received from this exporter for the same periods (two or three per period). These claims require more review due to the number of transactions for each period.  Audits and reviews conducted: Half of the sample (50% or n=23) had been audited at some point since the SLPECA has come into effect and a large majority praised the performance of the auditors during the audit process. Nearly nine in 10 (87%, or n=20) indicated that they were either "very satisfied" or "satisfied" with the professionalism, integrity and respect demonstrated by their auditor during the process. Nearly eight in 10 (78%, or n=18) were satisfied with their level of competence. Duty officers, for their part, emphasized that their approach was one of helping clients comply, and in many instances this meant educating clients, which seemed appreciated, especially when they found errors in the registrants' favour. But most duty officers noted that they had had a couple of clients who simply blamed them for the existence of the SLPECA. Overall: When asked about their overall satisfaction, a comfortable majority were satisfied with the Agency's administration of the Act while a small minority was not. Approximately three-fifths (61%) said they were either "very satisfied" or "satisfied" with CRA's administration of SLPECA, while just over one in 10 (13%) said they were either "dissatisfied" or "very dissatisfied". Approximately another one-fifth (22%) were "neutral". 5.3.2 Immediate and intermediate outcomes  This section reviews the immediate and intermediate outcome boxes identified as in-scope in the logic model. The available program data suggest that registrants are complying with their obligations under the Act, but some key data are not available.   Registrants understand their obligations under the SLPECA: Rather than asking registrants to self-assess their knowledge of the Act, we obtained program data in order to provide an overview of their filing, remitting and reporting accuracy. Compliance rates can be interpreted as a broad indication of registrants' understanding of their obligations.[Footnote 7]  Registrant registers or deregisters appropriately: This outcome was addressed in section 5.2 of this report, which examined CRA's relationship with FAITC. We found that the management of the export permit process has improved considerably in terms of the prevalence of invalid business numbers. Registrant completes return and remits fees: Figure 5 presents statistics on the level of filing compliance. Figure 5: Registrant Filing Compliance 





Factor
Fiscal Year
% Change


 2008-2009 
 2009-2010 


 Registrant Population 
931
909
-2.4%


% that filed
98.8%
96.8%
-2.0%


% that filed with greater than $0.00 due 
45.4%
39.9%
-5.5%


% that filed a refund
8.6%
5.6%
-3.0%


 Returns 
 
 
 


Average $ value assessed per return with amount due
$23,884.79
$20,487.12
-14.2%


Total % Returns Filed that were Nil[Footnote 8] 
71.9%
72.6%
+0.7%





Large majorities of registrants (98.8%, 96.8%) filed returns for the two fiscal years studied, and there was a small decline in the percentage who filed (2%) year over year. Almost half of registrants filed at least one return with a balance owing, but the year over year data point to a decline from 45% in 2008-2009 to 40% in 2009-2010. Less than one in 10 per year filed a refund in either year (8.6% in 2008-2009, 5.6% in 2009-2010), with the percentage dropping. Just over seven in 10 (71.9% and then 72.6%) of the total number of returns filed were nil returns, but it is not known how many registrants filed only nil returns for each of the entire fiscal years. Reporting compliance is the next intended outcome, and the available registrant reporting compliance data are summarized in Figure 6 below. Figure 6: Registrant Reporting Compliance 





 
Fiscal Year
% change


 2008-2009 
 2009-2010 


 Registrant Population 
931
909
-2.4%


% of Registrants Audited* 
30.9%
24.3%
-6.6%


% of Periods (Months) with no change
82.2%
86.3%
+4.1%


# of Periods (Months) with change
795
622
-21.8%


% debit change
56.7%
74.3%
+17.7%


% credit change
43.3%
25.7%
-17.7%





* CRA is expected to audit at least 25% of registrants annually. The 24.3% completed during 2009/2010 represents a work-in-progress and is not the final percentage of completed audits for that fiscal year. With large samples (30.9% in 2008-2009 and 24.3% in 2009-2010) of the registrant population being audited annually, the 4.1% increase in the no-change rate is a positive sign that an increasing number of registrants understand their obligations under the SLPECA. Given the year-over-year decline in the registrant population, the relative proportions of months where a change was detected dropped by over one in five (21.8%). In this timeframe the number of debit changes increased by 17.7%. Based on duty officer perceptions, the most common reporting errors made by registrants appear to be on using the appropriate currency conversions or United States exchange rates, informing FAITC or CRA regarding missing or cancelled permit information and improper deduction of the yield loss (even though this was dealt with by moving its reporting position on the form, deducting it continues to be a commonly cited error). Registrants remit outstanding fees or are compliant: TSDMB provided a summary of the current inventory and the amount collected during each fiscal year. The past make-up of the inventory was not available.  In order to assess the post-audit intermediate outcome "registrant remits outstanding fees or is compliant", TSDMB was asked for data on the proportion of registrants that were referred to collections, how many have paid, what the dollar value was and how long they took to pay, all for fiscal year 2006-2007, 2007-2008, and 2008-2009. The only historical data available were the dollars collected in each of the three first fiscal years of the Act. These are shown in Figure 7: Figure 7: Collection of Outstanding Amounts Owed by Registrants  





Amount collected ($)
Year


 2007 
 2008 
 2009 


 6,091, 380 
 3,833, 714 
 4,032,329 





While the other historical data were not available, TSDMB was able to provide a snapshot of the composition of the current inventory. As of September 2010 there were 78 accounts with a total value of $5,460,899. Of these, 23 (or 30% of) accounts amounting to $2,289,211 (or 42% of the total) are non-resident companies based in the United States where the SLPECA is unenforceable. The average age of the remaining 55 accounts is 404 days, but seven of these registrants have made an assignment into bankruptcy. As a result, the value of the inventory as of September 2010 was $1,590,778. Recommendation  LPRAB should examine ways to better educate registrants so that the frequency of common, less technical errors is reduced, and that voluntary compliance is enhanced.  Management Response:  Agreed. LPRAB will communicate on a regular basis with officers of the Assessment and Benefit Services Branch to assist in identifying the source, extent or frequency of common, less technical errors. These efforts will assist ABSB with the objective of educating registrants in avoiding or reducing future errors. Directorate officials could explore with ABSB the use of various communications vehicles which would best suit the nature of the information identified and the client base that it is intended to reach. 5.3.3 Provincial perspectives  Because the Act is administered on a cost-recovery basis (funds received are net of the administration and legal costs required), it is essential that provincial representatives trust the CRA to provide them with their share (or credit their outstanding balances) in an accurate and timely manner. Most provincial representatives trust the CRA to calculate the appropriate payments, and this belief has been corroborated by an independent review. Corporate Audit and Evaluation Branch examined whether the information and the processes used in calculating and remitting distributions to the provinces were appropriate in terms of their accuracy and completeness. The scope of the review was limited to the SLPECA distributions made to the provinces in March, June, and September 2009, and it was found that the administrative and legal charges were allocated correctly to each eligible province. (Softwood Lumber Advisory Engagement, 2010) Concerns were raised about timeliness. Two of the provincial representatives indicated that adjustments to payments received came sufficiently late that the provincial representative was unable to update the figures in time for submission to their respective Auditors General. It was unclear if they understood the reasons for these time lags. In spite of generally being satisfied in their dealings with Agency officials, there is an appetite for more information than that which is currently provided. It was suggested that more information than just the balance owed/paid by the province to the CRA (as a result of the third party adjustment) should be included. Representatives also noted that it would be helpful if more detailed information on how the federal government spends its funds in administering the Act be included. When it came to expressing their questions and concerns, however, all indicated that they were able to easily locate the appropriate person(s) to make their inquiry(ies) to and were treated professionally and respectfully. As well, results were generally positive when probed about whether they received a satisfactory response to their particular inquiries.


 6. Conclusions 
Without the benefit of a comparison program or a long program history, it appears that CRA's administration of the SLPECA has been effective, particularly in light of the modest turnaround time between the signing of the Agreement and its proclamation into law. On the questions of continuously striving for greater efficiency, horizontal management and the monitoring of performance, only minor changes have been suggested. The working relationship with FAITC, the main delivery partner, has matured and works well. An online survey of registrants, a review of available program (compliance) data, and the perspective of provincial clients also suggest that, with the exception of some minor concerns, CRA is effectively administering the SLPECA.


 Appendix A 
Methodology Note: Rationale for the Selection of Outputs and Outcomes Included within the Scope of the Evaluation  Not all outputs and outcomes were included in the scope of the evaluation.  The logic model contained in this report (Figure 2) depicts the outputs and outcomes related to the CRA's administration of the SLPECA. However, not all of the outcomes and outputs were reviewed during the evaluation. This appendix explains the rationale for the evaluation's scope. One pattern that emerges from the logic model is that, of the two clients, the large majority of outputs and subsequent outcomes are intended for softwood lumber companies. Working from left to right in the model, seven of the eight major activities across the top row, ranging from taxpayer assistance through to legislative matters, are all intended for the industry, leaving only "Payments/Reports to the Provinces" for the provincial governments. For softwood lumber companies, an in-depth review of all the possible outputs and outcomes delivered to them would be comparable to undertaking a small-scale review of the entire Agency. Steps were taken to reduce the response burden on softwood lumber companies  Rather than conduct such a comprehensive review, an industry survey was developed and administered with an eye to minimizing the time requirements placed on its representatives. The outputs intended for softwood lumber companies were prioritized so that some would be included in the survey while others would be scoped out.[Footnote 9] Criteria were established to facilitate and justify these choices. For example, the breadth or frequency of industry exposure to each CRA output was deemed one relevant consideration. Were there any outputs that had significantly less up-take than the others? It turns out that the products and services provided by both Enforcement and Appeals could be scoped out because of the limited experience most companies had had with these services.[Footnote 10] At the time of writing, there were a total of 25 appeals and no enforcement actions since the outset of CRA's administration of the Act.  As well, there are several outputs related to the "Taxpayer Assistance" and "Legislative Matters" activities that are intended to facilitate the industry's understanding of its obligations under the Act, in fact too many to examine in a systematic fashion. We did not ask specifically about various CRA outreach efforts, specific web content, or the results of rulings and interpretations, policy papers, notices or changes to the legislation.[Footnote 11] However, program data suggested that most eligible companies had contacted the CRA with at least one inquiry, so it was possible to ask them about that experience as a proxy measure for their views on feeling supported by the CRA to comply with the Act.[Footnote 12]  The result of this prioritization exercise is visually depicted in the logic model. Not only are the contents in the gray shaded boxes included in the study's scope while those in white boxes are not, but to further highlight this distinction, the SLPECA outputs are divided into two rows in a similar in-scope and out of scope fashion. Working from left to right, the softwood lumber company outputs that are in-scope are: responses to registrant inquiries, issuing of account numbers, monthly statements, Notices of Assessment, charges assessed, refunds issued, audits and reviews conducted. But it is through all of these outputs ─ those listed here as well as those "not part of the analysis" ─ that the Agency expects to achieve its immediate, intermediate, end and strategic outcomes for which it is accountable. Besides reducing the eligible content, further efforts were made to minimize the burden placed on participating softwood lumber companies by streamlining the survey's format and administration to the greatest extent possible. First, the survey was delivered electronically rather than by telephone, mail or in-person interview. As well, the vast majority of questions posed were closed-ended, thereby further facilitating the ease of completion. Moreover, survey items focused on industry satisfaction with CRA's outputs. Why measure satisfaction?  Canadian softwood lumber companies, operating within a heavily regulated marketplace with substantial economic interests at stake, have regularly been registering, reporting, filing and remitting to the CRA, the primary service provider on all these matters since late 2006. Given all of these factors, if there was widespread satisfaction or dissatisfaction with a particular product or service, participating companies should be in position to articulate these views by now. 




Footnotes



Footnotes

Footnote _ftn1


					   Each province is allocated a share of exports based on its historic share of the United States market, which is called the trigger volume. A surge occurs in a month when the volume of softwood lumber products exported from an Option A region exceeds the region's trigger volume by more than 1%.
					

Return to footnote_ftn1 Referrer


Footnote _ftn2


					   See footnote 4 for details.
					

Return to footnote_ftn2 Referrer


Footnote _ftn3


					   The electronic survey was distributed to a non-random sample of 495 participating softwood lumber companies during April 2010, obtaining a standard 10% response rate for such methods, or 46 company respondents. As a result, although survey results are presented as percentages, these results should be interpreted with caution, as they cannot be extrapolated with confidence to the larger population.
					

Return to footnote_ftn3 Referrer


Footnote _ftn4


					   According to the 
Act, the "third country adjustment" would occur when the following conditions were met: 
 United States consumption of non-Canadian exported softwood lumber is 20% greater than its consumption of Canadian softwood products, the Canadian market share of U.S. consumption of Canadian softwood has decreased and, America's market share of its consumption of its own lumber products has increased.
 If these three conditions are met in two consecutive calendar quarters when compared to the data of the previous two same quarters, then companies that had paid the tax charge would be eligible to receive a refund. As it happens, these conditions were met during the last quarter of fiscal year 2007-2008, but were not discovered until late in the first quarter of 2008-2009 as such analysis invariably relies on the availability of past data. In the interim, not only had the appropriate fees been collected from the companies, but the CRA had already completed its calculations and transferred the funds to the provinces for their respective shares. Uncovering that the conditions were met for the third country adjustment meant that both Option "A" and "B" provinces should not have been transferred those funds and companies in those provinces were eligible for a refund.
 While the books are now balanced with Export Option "A" provinces, at the time of writing Export Option "B" provinces continue to be in a debit position with the CRA. That is, eligible funds that would under "normal" circumstances be transferred to the four provinces in question are now retained by CRA until those funds distributed prior to invoking the third country adjustment are recouped. Given the way events have unfolded, how the CRA was perceived by provincial representatives was of specific interest.
					

Return to footnote_ftn4 Referrer


Footnote _ftn5


					   With the third country adjustment refund, it is the responsibility of the exporter to apply and file the necessary applications within two years of the day the exporter paid the export charge.
					

Return to footnote_ftn5 Referrer


Footnote _ftn6


					   Refers to the number of refunds
					

Return to footnote_ftn6 Referrer


Footnote _ftn7


					   Note that registration compliance is dealt with in the DFAIT section because that process is administered jointly between the partners.
					

Return to footnote_ftn7 Referrer


Footnote _ftn8


					   Includes B275 returns, amended B275 returns and B279 surge returns. Every person who is either registered or required to be registered to export softwood lumber products to the United States is required to file a monthly B275 Charge Return. When a surge is declared during a particular month, exporters who have shipped products from a region of origin in surge will be required to complete and file form B279
					

Return to footnote_ftn8 Referrer


Footnote _ftn9


					   Overall, the results of this prioritization can be seen throughout the logic model. Logic model contents in gray-shaded boxes are part of the study, those in white are not.
					

Return to footnote_ftn9 Referrer


Footnote _ftn10


					   In fact there was a survey item that asked about experience with the appeals process, but only two companies responded affirmatively to this.
					

Return to footnote_ftn10 Referrer


Footnote _ftn11


					   These were not included in the survey for several reasons: first, companies have already been operating at a level that implies this knowledge since late 2006. Plus, there would be no need to rely on company self-reported appraisals regarding such knowledge of the Act because Program data on intermediate outcomes (behavioural) would more than suffice. Moreover, there is reason to believe that probing on the companies' proactive seeking of information would be more memorable for them (reference).
					

Return to footnote_ftn11 Referrer


Footnote _ftn12


					   When clarification is sought, the information provided needs to be timely and accurate for the source to maintain legitimacy and trust.
					

Return to footnote_ftn12 Referrer









Report a problem or mistake on this page












Please select all that apply:

A link, button or video is not working



It has a spelling mistake



Information is missing



Information is outdated or wrong



Login error when trying to access an account




I can't find what I'm looking for



Other issue not in this list



Submit



Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries, contact us.










Date modified:
2011-05-06





External Administrative Correspondence (EAC) Evaluation


Final report
To print a copy of this report, use the printable version (PDF, 3587 KB).
Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch
September 2014
Table of Contents

Executive Summary
1. Purpose
2. Background
3. Evaluation scope and methodology

3.1 Scope
3.2 Methodologies
3.3 Limitations and clarifications


4. Findings

4.1 Is the EAC sent to Canadians by the CRA understandable?
4.2 How well is the CRA administering EAC?


5. Conclusion
6. Recommendations
7. Management response
8. Acknowledgements

Appendix A: EAC Reviewed by Siegelvision and TNS
Appendix B: Larger Versions of Figure 1
Appendix C: Larger Versions of EAC Found at Figure 2
Appendix D: Larger Versions of IRS EAC Found at Figure 3



Executive Summary
Purpose
The evaluation of external administrative correspondence (EAC) was approved by the Management Audit and Evaluation Committee in October 2012 to explore the following two issues:

Is the EAC sent to Canadians by the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) understandable?
How well is the CRA administering EAC?

The Program Evaluation Division of the Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch used a series of methodologies to answer these issues including interviews with staff, subject matter experts, and stakeholder groups; surveys; data analysis; literature and document reviews; consulting foreign and domestic tax administrations; and engaging third party research contractors.
Background
EAC can be described as personalized correspondence that is intended for a specific recipient or their authorized representative. The CRA sends out approximately 129 million pieces of EAC each year.
Public Affairs Branch (PAB) is responsible for developing and implementing CRA policies, guidelines, standards, training, and tools related to communications.
Findings
Messaging, structure, tone, and branding of EAC could be improved.
Other tax administrations have recently made significant changes to the way they administer EAC.
PAB has made efforts to improve the administration of EAC, however, internal processes and systems create challenges to the effective administration of EAC.
Recommendations
We recommend that CRA senior management:

Consider enterprise-wide options in moving forward to address the shortcomings of EAC.
Consider including EAC in the CRA Corporate Business Plan and Service Strategy.
Seek opportunities to position EAC to take advantage of technology (electronic forms of communication) and emerging strategies e.g. behavioural economics.

Management Response
A plan is being developed to address the issues raised in the evaluation report.
The plan includes the following:

The CRA will seek the views of businesses, tax intermediaries, and their associations on how the Agency can improve its notices and letters, through its Red Tape Reduction consultations scheduled for the fall.
A further engagement opportunity will be launched in the new year to seek the views of additional stakeholders, including charities and benefit recipients.
A summary of the results of these consultations will be made public in 2015, and will form the basis of an action plan, with a particular focus on delivering more correspondence online and in a manner that is clear and can be tailored so that the information needs of recipients, whether simple or more complex, are met.
The CRA anticipates that, beginning in February, 2015 and continuing through to early 2016, its top volume letters and notices will be available online to Canadians in simplified, easier-to-understand formats.
The CRA will also review the best practices of other tax administrations, and engage a third party consultant to provide expert advice on how to simplify language on complex or technical topics, visually present information in a way that encourages understanding and action where required, and use emerging technologies effectively.

1. Purpose
The External Administrative Correspondence (EAC) Steering Committee, chaired by the Public Affairs Branch (PAB) from 2007-2012, requested an evaluation of the personalized correspondence sent by the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) to external recipients. The Management Audit and Evaluation Committee (MAEC) approved the EAC evaluation framework in October 2012.
The purpose of the evaluation was to examine two issues:

Is the EAC sent to Canadians by the CRA understandable?
How well is the CRA administering EAC?

This document provides the findings and recommendations for this evaluation.
2. Background
2.1 What is EAC?
EAC is defined as personalized correspondence generated by the CRA that is intended for a specific recipient or their authorized representative. It can be classified as either a notice or a letter but does not include returns or forms. Footnote 1
EAC produced by the CRA varies considerably in terms of content, complexity, and the quantity generated. In 2011-2012, the CRA sent out just under 129 million pieces of EAC, comprised of approximately 430 specific letter or notice types (for example, individual income tax notice of assessment, Canada child tax benefit notice of redetermination, etc.). Roughly 8% (n=35) of the different types of EAC is responsible for 90% of the total volume. The Assessment and Benefit Services Branch is responsible for generating approximately 331 (77%) of these different types of EAC. Table 1 provides a volume breakdown of the types and amount of EAC generated by branch.

Table 1: Types and Volume of EAC by Branch 2011-2012


Branch
Different Types of EAC
Volume of EAC
% of Total Volume




Assessment and Benefit Services (ABSB)
331
118,344,621
91.93%


Taxpayer Services and Debt Management (TSDMB)
23
9,072,819
7.05%


Compliance Programs (CPB)
35
693,037
0.54%


Appeals (AB)
4
313,709
0.24%


Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs (LPRAB)
39
310,927
0.24%


Total
432
128,735,113
100.00%



Source: CRA program branches
2.2 Why is EAC important?
The CRA Taxpayer Bill of Rights states that "all Canadians have the right to complete, accurate, clear, and timely information". The Bill of Rights also commits the CRA to minimizing the costs of compliance for small businesses. This includes minimizing the time, effort, and costs that small businesses incur by making interactions with the CRA as straightforward and convenient as possible.
The CRA Public Affairs and Communications Policy requires that communications, including EAC, be effective, well-coordinated, and responsive to the needs of the public. It also requires that information provided to the public must be in plain language (more specifically, information must be clear, well-organized, and easy to understand and use).
EAC is one of the ways the CRA ensures that taxpayers Footnote 2 have the information they need to comply with Canada's tax laws and access the benefits available to them. EAC is sent predominantly for one of two purposes:

to elicit action (file, pay, register, provide missing information, etc.); or
to provide the recipient with information (acknowledgement of receipt, confirmation of information, etc.).

Table 2 provides a breakdown of EAC by purpose (action and information) both at the Agency and branch level. Note that overall approximately 36% of EAC required action on the part of the recipient and 64% provided information.

Table 2: 2011-2012 Action and Information Correspondence 


 
ABSB
TSDMB
CPB
AB
LPRAB
Agency




Action
37,621,577
7,542,276
412,806
108,006
86,951
45,771,616


Information
80,723,044
1,530,543
280,231
205,703
223,976
82,963,497



Source: CRA program branches
2.3 Who is responsible for EAC?
There is no one area within the CRA that has exclusive accountability or responsibility for EAC.
Branches and regions, as subject matter experts in administering and delivering CRA programs, are responsible for the content of and day to day activities related to generating EAC. Employees are responsible for ensuring that the EAC they generate is in plain language or, more specifically, clear, well-organized, easy to understand, and easy to use. Footnote 3
Most operational programs generate EAC. Some program activities, such as the processing of returns, may result in only one piece of EAC a year (for example, an individual income tax notice of assessment). Other program activities, such as conducting reviews, audits and examinations, require more interaction and may result in multiple pieces of EAC.
PAB is responsible for developing and implementing CRA policies, guidelines, standards, training, and tools related to communications. Footnote 4
PAB is also responsible for assisting program areas to ensure CRA communications products are of the highest quality; and supporting employees with tools and resources to enhance their writing. PAB chaired the EAC Steering Committee until it was dissolved in April 2012. It has since been replaced by the Plain Language Implementation Committee.
2.4 How is EAC generated and sent to recipients?
EAC is generated in three different ways:

Automated EAC is created, based on system algorithms, by CRA information technology systems that are used to register businesses, assess or process returns, or perform accounting, collections, and other compliance functions.
Employee-customized EAC is predominantly created by selecting standardized verses or templates from system applications, such as the Electronic Letter Creation System, that can be manually modified by employees.
Employee-authored EAC is typically free-form letters created using word processing software without the aid of templates or standardized verses.

The vast majority of EAC generated by the CRA is automated (96% or 123.5 million), followed by just over 5 million (almost 4%) that is employee-customized and just over 0.1% that is employee-authored (177,313). Table 3 provides a breakdown of action and information EAC by how it is generated.

Table 3: Action and Information EAC by Generation Method (2011-2012)


 
Action Volume
Action %
Information Volume
Information %
Total Volume
Total %




Automated
41,847,570
91.43%
81,606,220
98.36%
123,453,790
95.90%


Employee-customized
3,790,071
8.28%
1,313,939
1.58%
5,104,010
3.96%


Employee-authored
133,975
0.29%
43,338
0.05%
177,313
0.14%


Total
45,771,616
35.55%
82,963,497
64.45%
128,735,113
100.00%



Source: CRA program branches
Most EAC is sent to external recipients through regular mail. A very small volume is sent by registered mail or electronically. About 1% of the volume generated by ABSB is in electronic form (mainly pdf) available to subscribers of My Account and My Business Account.Footnote 5
3. Evaluation scope and methodology
3.1 Scope
The two issues the evaluation focused on were:
1. Is the EAC sent to Canadians by the CRA understandable?
The elements involved in determining understandability can be difficult to isolate and in fact may include elements that on their own may not be synonymous with understanding but assist in optimizing understanding. Examples include: use of white space, organization of thoughts, use of headings, bold text, italics, etc.
Plain language, clarity, readability, and understandability as it pertains to written correspondence are dependent on the following basic input elements Footnote 6:

Content: the selection of information to be communicated
Structure: how the information is organised, sequenced and linked
Language: how the information is expressed in words including tone
Design: the typography, layout and graphic design of the document

Readability must also consider the reader's response to the document:

Their attitude and emotional response
What they know from reading it
What they are able to do as a result

All the above stated elements have gone into our assessment of understandability of EAC.
2. How well is the CRA administering EAC?
The focus was on activities related to administering EAC in the CRA (e.g., governance and accountability provisions, roles and responsibilities, policies, procedures, processes). This included an examination of the work completed by the EAC Steering Committee and Plain Language Implementation Committee and how the CRA is organized to deliver EAC.
3.2 Methodologies
The following methodologies were used to examine the evaluation issues:

Volumetric data from all program areas responsible for EAC was requested, collected, and analyzed.
A review of files and documentation associated with the management and administration of EAC in the CRA was conducted.
A total of 67 interviews (many of which were group interviews) with approximately 400 interviewees representing headquarters and the regions were conducted.
A review of literature related to literacy and financial literacy, plain language and written communications was conducted.
A total of 10 interviews were held with stakeholder groups and subject matter experts in literacy and plain language.
We attended two conferences, one on plain language and the other on literacy, and had the opportunity to speak to and learn from subject matter experts.
We contracted with a third party to independently assess the clarity Footnote 7 of 23 unique pieces of EAC (representing 42% of EAC volumes).
We contracted with a third party to conduct an online survey of 4 different target populations: individuals, businesses, benefit recipients, and charities to assess the clarity, comprehension, and ease of understanding of 13 pieces of EAC.
An online survey was sent to 15,586 employees responsible for generating EAC in headquarters and the regions (6,274 respondents).
An online survey was distributed to all CRA telephone call centre agents across the country (327 respondents).
We met with representatives of the Office of Taxpayer Correspondence, United States Internal Revenue Service (IRS), and conducted teleconferences with representatives of the Australia Tax Office (ATO), United Kingdom Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs (HMRC), and New Zealand Inland Revenue Department (IRD).
Information was exchanged with Revenu Québec.

3.3 Limitations and clarifications
The following limitations and clarifications should be considered when reviewing this report:

An external survey using online panelsFootnote 8 was carried out by TNS Canada for this evaluation. Although online panels are the preferred method of the Government of Canada to survey Canadians endorsed by Public Works and Government Services Canada, they are not ideal for all circumstances. Research suggests that they cannot be construed as representative and they are known to be less accurate than probability samples using random digital dialing telephone surveys.Footnote 9
As indicated in the evaluation framework, the sheer volume and various types of EAC generated by the CRA prevented an in-depth examination of some aspects of EAC (for example, quality review and assurance processes).
The evaluation team was dependent on many different program areas to provide volumetric data on the EAC they generate. This proved to be a difficult exercise and it was not possible to test the reliability or integrity of the data. However, the total volume of EAC provided by the branches was assessed against the total volumes identified from online sources with a variance of just over 0.2%. We acknowledge the intrusive nature of our requests and the efforts of the implicated branches to obtain this data, in particular, the Assessment and Benefit Services Branch.
Accuracy and timeliness of EAC were not included in the scope of the evaluation.
Lastly, no single source of data is sufficient to support conclusions or findings unless the data is quantitative and proven irrefutable. All findings and conclusions in this report are supported by multiple sources of data.

4. Findings
4.1 Is the EAC sent to Canadians by the CRA understandable?
As indicated earlier, understandability of EAC must factor in a number of elements – those that are within and outside the CRA's control.
4.1.1 There are external factors that impact understanding
Regardless of age, education, or cultural background, everyone needs information from the CRA that they can read and clearly understand. For EAC to be effective it must be easily understood so that the reader can, if necessary, take the appropriate action. Ideally, it should not place an unnecessary burden on the reader or the author. Research and subject matter experts in plain language and literacy interviewed for this evaluation emphasized that for EAC to be most effective, it first has to meet the needs of the reader (as opposed to the author).
ResearchFootnote 10 has shown that people:

Read with different degrees of literacy.
Read in a hurry or without full attention.
Read in poor reading conditions.
May not know (or read) the language well.
May have a cognitive or learning disability.
May have a visual disability that can affect reading.
May have a physical disability that affects interaction.

Research also suggests that reading ability is flexible. It shifts depending on task, context, and motivation.Footnote 11 The CRA relies on Canadians voluntarily participating in the tax and benefit system for it to be successful. The time and effort required to comply with tax obligations and apply and continue to receive benefits is often viewed as an inconvenience (if not a burden). In 2011, the Red Tape Reduction Commission (RTRC) identified over 1,100 irritants directed at the CRAFootnote 12 many of which were related to access to readily available and clear information.
Aside from time and effort, the results of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development adult skills surveyFootnote 13 found that many Canadians are not performing well in literacy and numeracy - skills necessary to read and understand EAC.
This survey found that almost one out of every two Canadians (49%) between 16 and 65 have literacy rates below the minimum level necessary to function well in society. These Canadians would find it challenging to understand the content of a newspaper article or the essence of this paragraph. Similarly, 55% of Canadians have levels of numeracy proficiency below a level that allows them to function well in Canadian society. Understanding EAC with more than one mathematical computation would cause confusion for these individuals.
Immigrants make up almost 21% of the total Canadian population and the majority (almost 73%) do not have English or French as their mother tongue, and 6.5% speak neither English nor French.Footnote 14 An estimated 65% of Canada's immigrant population has low literacy skills in English or French. More generally, 60% of recent and established immigrants, compared to 37% of the Canadian-born population, were below the average in prose literacy.Footnote 15
Conclusion:
To meet the needs of all Canadians and specifically the large population of Canadians with literacy challenges it is incumbent on the CRA to ensure its correspondence is clear and understandable.
4.1.2 The results of third party assessments of the understandability of EAC were mixed but clearly indicate that improvements can be made
We contracted two third parties to independently assess whether the EAC sent to Canadians is understandable. Siegelvision, a company that specializes in the clarity of communications, was hired to undertake an assessment of 23 distinct English and corresponding French letters selected from a variety of program areas within the CRA. Siegelvision was uniquely qualified to conduct this assessment based on their internationally renowned expertise in the field of clear communications. Siegelvision's team worked with the United States IRS within the last 5 years and did work for Revenu Quebec in the 1980's to assist them in improving their EAC.
The EAC reviewed by Siegelvision ranged from 1 to 14 pages in length and represented a cross-section of the correspondence the CRA sends to businesses, individuals, benefit recipients, and charities every year. Most were selected based on their high volumes whereas others were selected because they were considered complex or represented a distinct workload. The 23 types of correspondence represented 42% of the overall volume of EAC sent in 2011-2012.
Siegelvision assessed each piece of EAC and rated it against 11 different criteria. These criteria are widely recognized as the industry standards by subject matter experts in a variety of fields related to communicationsFootnote 16, including those in the CRA.
Additionally, 7 pieces of EAC (6 English and 1 French) were subject to a detailed critique in which Siegelvision highlighted specific issues that they believed contributed to confusion and undermined readability and effectiveness. These pieces made up 31% of the volume of EAC and contain issues common to all 23 letter types tested.
Overall, Siegelvision concluded that while the EAC had certain strengths such as being relatively short in length, using limited legal disclosures and fine print, and often using personal pronouns, their main criticisms were that the:

information was not well organized;
presentation of information did not inspire confidence; and
tone used lacked empathy.

Through a contract with TNS Canada Ltd., 13 of the 23 pieces of EACFootnote 17 reviewed by Siegelvision were also reviewed by 4 target populations - individuals, businesses, benefits recipients, and charities through the use of online panels.
TNS is an international marketing and social research company that specializes in the use of HighlighterFootnote 18 technology. Using Highlighter and a series of closed-ended questions, participants assessed the clarity, comprehension, and ease of understanding of CRA EAC. Refer to Appendix A for a list of the EAC reviewed by Siegelvision and TNS.
Results of the TNS Canada survey are more difficult to interpret as they are not generalizable to the Canadian population as a whole and exclude Canadians having low computer proficiency and/or literacy rates. Therefore, while respondent results may appear more favourable in terms of understandability and other measures, we caution that these results represent very optimal circumstances.
We have used the results from Siegelvision and TNS as well as other available research to explore the results in further detail.
Information could be better organized to optimize understanding
Siegelvision found that the majority of the EAC examined was not organized in a way that allowed the reader to quickly and easily identify its main purpose or important pieces of information such as dates, amounts, phone numbers, next steps, etc. Often the main purpose of the documents was not readily apparent and other important information was scattered throughout the document or embedded in dense paragraphs. When looking at the EAC as a whole, Siegelvision found that there was no underlying grid to ensure that EAC is written and designed in a consistent manner and common elements are reused.
To illustrate these points see Figure 1, the Canada child tax benefit (CCTB) notice of redetermination (larger versions can be found in Appendix B). Note that all of the first page and most of the second is devoted to the calculations the CRA uses to arrive at an amount owing. The reader must work their way through this data, which the CRA uses to validate its request, until the bottom of the second page where the request for payment is made.
Figure 1: Canada Child Tax Benefit Notice of Redetermination

Source: Assessment of external correspondence for the Canada Revenue Agency (Siegelvision)
Explanation of points

Top-most message is "keep for your records", but urgent issues are relegated to bottom page 2 (you owe money; CCTB entitlement will be reduced by 50%).
Four calculations across two pages (vertical/horizontal/indented) make it difficult to trace relationship of original benefit, subsequent credits, payments, and current amount owed.
Reference "Information used to calculate" is disconnected from resulting "entitlement" amount shown and the relationship to CCTB entitlement is unstated.
Same amount ($186.74) described two ways: "Amount direct deposited" (page 1) and "payment issued" (page 2).
Tone is authoritarian and overly formal (we will reduce … until the amount owing is paid in full).

TNS surveyed an online panel of benefits recipientsFootnote 19(n=225 English and n=115 French) about the CCTB notice of redetermination and findings similar to those identified by Siegelvision emerged. When asked specifically what the EAC requires them to do, 53% of English respondents and 48% of French respondents answered correctly "to make a payment". The remaining English and French respondents answered incorrectly or did not know.
When asked the extent to which they agreed with a list of statements about the CCTB notice, survey participants responded as shown in Table 4. Interestingly, respondents gave themselves greater credit for being able to determine the main message (58% English and 55% French) than they were actually able to do (see above paragraph).

Table 4: Evaluation of the CCTB redetermination notice in English and French


 
The document is confusing
Organized correspondence
Able to immediately determine main purpose
Appropriate amount of information
Clear words, terms & language




English version (n= 225)
27%
57%
58%
65%
65%


French version (n= 115)
31%
50%
55%
62%
50%



Source: CRA Taxpayer Communications Clarity Testing (TNS)
Table 5 shows that of the 13 English pieces of EAC reviewed by TNS panels, 6 (46%) had self-assessed ratings of being able to immediately determine the main message ranging from 80% to 91% and confusion rates from 8% to 18%.

Table 5: Evaluation of notices and letters


 
I was able to immediately determine the main purpose of the document.
The correspondence was organized or laid out in a way that helped me understand why I needed to take action.
I found the document confusing.




Individual-Soft collection letter
91%
85%
9%


Reminder to charities to file a return (TX11D)
88%
82%
10%


Notice of intention to revoke a charity's registration
87%
81%
18%


Individual - Request to file a return
86%
82%
9%


Benefit recipients - Missing information
85%
81%
11%


Benefit recipients - GSTC marital status validation
80%
83%
8%



Source: CRA Taxpayer Communications Clarity Testing (TNS)
The remaining 7 pieces of EAC (54%) had higher scores on confusion (13% to 37%) and generally lower self-assessed ratings of being able to immediately determine the main message (56% to 77%). These 7 pieces of correspondence represent 39% of all action oriented EAC (see Table 6).

Table 6: Evaluation of notices and letters with lower understandability results


 
I was able to immediately determine the main purpose of the document
The correspondence was organized or laid out in a way that helped me understand why I needed to take action.
I found the document confusing




Businesses - Request to file a return
77%
66%
21%


Businesses - CPP/ROE
73%
68%
13%


Businesses - Corporation NOA
73%
63%
22%


Individuals - Validation Letter
70%
66%
37%


Individuals - Income tax and Benefit NOA
68%
58%
31%


Benefit recipients - CCTB redetermination notice
58%
57%
27%


Businesses - SOA for current source deductions
56%
56%
25%



Source: CRA Taxpayer Communications Clarity Testing (TNS)
When asked to recall whether they found EAC they received from the CRA easy to understand 68% French and 75% English Charity representatives responded affirmatively whereas approximately 57% of business representatives agreed. See Table 7 for more details.

Table 7: Percentage of respondents within recipient groups that found CRA correspondence easy to understand


 
Charities
Benefit Recipients
Individuals
Businesses




English
75%
67%
61%
58%


French
68%
71%
64%
56%



Source: CRA Taxpayer Communications Clarity Testing - TNS survey results
Research conducted for the CRAFootnote 20 by the Walker Consulting Group also identified issues with EAC:
"Prevailing sentiment about this channel of communication (written communication) tended to be more negative than positive:

Participants indicated that they often do not understand much of the information expressed in the letters they receive. Many indicated a degree of frustration about not understanding various pieces of information contained in letters from the CRA.
Many felt that letters from the CRA often do not fully explain the reasons why the CRA had come to certain conclusions impacting their taxes payable and/or tax credits."

Presentation of information may not inspire confidence 
As previously noted, within the CRA, communications is a shared responsibility. This includes ensuring high quality EAC that will not only communicate information, but will help to reinforce the CRA's brand, and build and maintain public trust and confidence in the CRA's integrity, impartiality, and commitment to service.Footnote 21
One of Siegelvision's main findings of the EAC they reviewed was that its presentation did not inspire confidence. More specifically, they felt the EAC did not meet best practices in today's marketplace utilized by organizations in other industries serving the same recipients (banking, insurance, cable, utilities). The EAC didn't use standard formatting conventions to organize and highlight important information. For example, the EAC did not make use of different font sizes, bold, headings, subheadings, column titles, or colour to allow the reader to quickly and easily find or navigate through the document.
Siegelvision also noted inconsistencies across notices and different formats within notices that suggest impersonal, antiquated output processes. They indicated that the EAC uses an outdated practice where the first page contains information specific to the purpose of the EAC yet the back of the same page contains information of a general nature (how to contact the CRA, how to make a payment, etc.) then on the third page, marked as page 2 of 2, the remainder of the message is continued. Without following the best practice of true duplex printing, the reader must skip over boilerplate content to finish reading important information about their situation.
Siegelvision also expressed concern that the lack of unifying CRA brand elements may suggest that the EAC, which may request payment or confidential information, are fraudulent and could impede action being taken on the part of the recipient.
Even the majority of employees interviewed agreed that the EAC generated by the CRA, especially when compared with EAC produced by the private sector, does not look professional. They commented that many of the information technology systems used by the CRA are legacy systems and that this is reflected in the EAC they generate.
The examples of EAC in Figure 2 show a range of formats, style and branding elements (larger versions can be found at Appendix C). They make up 26% of the total volume of EAC sent by the CRA in 2011-2012.
Figure 2: Examples of the different EAC generated by the CRA

Source: CRA program branches
The tone of EAC could be more aligned to the circumstances
In their report Siegelvision felt that the tone of the EAC was bureaucratic and one-sided and has a punitive, demanding nature to it. They felt that the language used does not convey a partnership between the CRA and the recipient.
Corroboration of Siegelvision's comments on tone can be found in other research conducted for the CRAFootnote 22:
"There was a broadly held belief that the tone of the language in letters from the CRA is often unduly severe, even when the information does not relate to an audit or like issue. In a few groups, participants juxtaposed the friendly, helpful nature of the telephone service to the less friendly and less helpful tone of the CRA EAC, suggesting a notable and puzzling difference in tone and approach."
"As was found in the general public groups, SME focus group participants found that they often felt uncertain about the language and tone of elements of paper EAC they received from the CRA."
Interviews with CRA staff also suggest that tone of EAC may be too severe especially with first contact correspondence. Telephone enquiries staff commented that many calls originate from distressed taxpayers calling after receiving CRA EAC because they are fearful of the repercussions of not doing things right.
TNS respondents were less harsh with respect to the tone of EAC. When asked to what extent you agree that the tone of the EAC is respectful, responses ranged from 57% to 85% for the different types of EAC.


Examples of tone from first contact EAC reviewed by Siegelvision and TNS respondents
GSTC Marital Status Validation"If you do not reply or provide the requested information within 30 days, we will stop or revise your payments. You may also be required to repay amounts already received."
Random Review of Benefits Letter"If you do not reply or do not provide the requested information and documentation within 30 days, we will adjust your account based on the information we have for the period under review. This may result in your payments being stopped or revised. You may also have to repay amounts you have already received."
Request for supporting evidence for claims on T1 Return"If we do not receive a reply, we will disallow the amounts under review, which may mean that you will have a balance owing."
Validation of unclaimed income T1 Return"If we do not receive a reply, we will reassess your return based on the information we have."
Missing Information Letter"If we do not receive a reply within 30 days, we will assume that you do not consider yourself eligible for the CCTB and for the child component of the GST/HST credit and we will not process your application and child registration form."


Conclusion:
A professional look, hierarchical structure, clear messaging and engaging tone are essential elements that significantly contribute to understandability especially considering that Canadians read at differing levels of literacy proficiency. These are elements that could contribute to reinforcing the CRA's brand, and building and maintaining public trust and confidence in the CRA's integrity, impartiality, and commitment to service.
4.1.3 Most recipients will contact the CRA by telephone if they do not understand the EAC they receive
An unintended impact of not writing clear EAC is a higher rate of telephone or written enquiries. TNS survey respondents indicated that their first choice would be to telephone the CRA if they could not understand EAC they received from the CRA (see Table 8).

Table 8: Percentage of respondents within recipient groups who said they would contact CRA by telephone when correspondence is not understood


 
Charities
Benefit Recipients
Individuals
Businesses




English
52%
59%
52%
51%


French
66%
66%
62%
44%



Source: CRA Taxpayer Communications Clarity Testing (TNS)
In 2011-2012, the CRA telephone enquiries services answered over 22 million taxpayer calls.Footnote 23 While enquiries staff acknowledged that their main call drivers were not EAC specific, they did indicate that the number of EAC related calls were still substantial. When asked to what extent their workload consisted of answering questions related to CRA EAC, a majority of enquiries telephone staff surveyed said 25% or more of their calls related to EAC. See Table 9 for more details.

Table 9: CRA Enquiries Agents Survey Responses
	Of the calls answered over the last 12 months, approximately what percentage related to letters or notices sent by the CRA?


 
Less than 25%
25% - 50%
51% - 75%
More than 75%




Individual Income tax enquiries (N=229)
16%
48%
28%
8%


Benefit recipients enquiries (N=229)
7%
31%
42%
20%


Business enquiries (N=98)
10%
37%
30%
23%



Source: PED survey of Agency Staff
Of the calls relating to EAC, a majority of enquiries staff estimated that 25% or more were about not understanding the correspondence. See Table 10 for more details.

Table 10: CRA Enquiries Agents Survey Responses
	Over the last 12 months, approximately what percentage of enquiries calls relating to correspondence were a result of the recipients not understanding the content of the letters/notices?


 
Less than 25%
25% - 50%
51% - 75%
More than 75%




Individual Income tax enquiries (N=229)
21%
41%
26%
12%


Benefit recipients enquiries (N=229)
10%
27%
29%
34%


Business enquiries (N=98)
18%
33%
32%
17%



Source: PED survey of Agency Staff
Unintended Impacts
Other implications, although not measured as a part of this evaluation, relate to compliance and hardship. Benefits recipients who expect to receive and are dependent on a monthly benefit may be negatively impacted by the cessation of receiving that benefit as a result of failing to comprehend and respond to the EAC. Similarly, the CRA will need to pursue other means to secure compliance (another letter, a telephone call, an in person arrangement) should the recipient not respond to a demand or request as a result of not understanding the EAC.
4.1.4 Benchmarking of other tax administrations reveal that they have recently enacted changes to improve the understandability of their EAC
United States
In July 2008, the IRS embarked on a major initiative to improve the clarity, accuracy, and effectiveness of its EAC. The IRS recognized its EAC appeared dated (see Figure 3 for examplesFootnote 24) and wanted to, in part, simplify and clarify the language used in its EAC. The objectives were to improve taxpayer understanding and reduce some of the burden placed on taxpayers by EAC.
The IRS, with the aid of the staff at Siegel+Gale (now with Siegelvision), conducted a review of its EAC. Similar to the findings in this evaluation they found that the differences among many letters reflected internal IRS structure, as opposed to taxpayer needs. Yet, despite the systems-driven structure, letter production did not take advantage of existing technological capabilities. And from a communications perspective, many letters lacked a logical framework and a consistent voice.Footnote 25
Figure 3: Examples of IRS EAC prior to the initiative to change its EAC

Source: Making a Noticeable Difference (IRS presentation)
In response, the IRS developed a framework based on best practices and the input of both employees and stakeholders. The new design framework addressed consistency across different notices, a logical flow of information, a layout and design that aids readability and comprehension, and a tone that aligns to the circumstances. Each notice clearly explains: why it was sent, how the recipient should respond, what the consequences would be should the recipient not respond, and where the recipient could find additional resources, publications, and services. Refer to Figure 4 for an example of an IRS notice designed using the framework.
Figure 4: Overview of the IRS Design Framework for EAC (first page)

Source: Making a Noticeable Difference (IRS presentation)
As a point of comparison, Figure 5 shows a CRA notice of taxpayer requested reassessment and the above notice.
Figure 5: CRA and IRS comparison – Notice of Reassessment

Source: Making a Noticeable Difference (IRS presentation)
United Kingdom (UK)
An objective of the UK Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs (HMRC) is to ensure that correspondence is read, understood, and acted upon. Approximately 10 correspondence types make up 59% of the HMRC's EAC. The HMRC has undertaken extensive testing on these 10 pieces of correspondence over time. Testing involves focus groups, individual interviews, and discussions with stakeholders which allows them to ask questions about understanding, layout, user-friendliness, and whether they perceive their letters as a call to action (to file, pay, provide information, etc.).
The HMRC also collects quantitative data using online testing panels and a communications lab (COMLAB) developed specifically for HMRC. This allows them to use "hot spot" technology (similar to highlighter) to identify key areas where people have difficulty understanding the EAC.
The HMRC is able to store the results of the data from its testing and compile a history of what does and what does not work. The results from COMLAB can be used when considering any future modifications to correspondence.
Some of the lessons learned by the United Kingdom are consistent with what plain language experts recommend to improve understandability (for example, make it easy, highlight key messages, and use personal language). They found that there is a minute window of opportunity to get a reader's attention, the average reader has an attention span of 2 minutes, and readers generally focus on headings, boxes, and images.Footnote 26
Australia
The Australia Tax Office (ATO) redesigned some of their EAC based on UK research emphasising fairness, reciprocity, and social norms. Figure 6 shows a before and after version of their overdue payment reminder notice.Footnote 27
Figure 6: Changes made to Overdue Payment Reminder by the Australian Tax Office

Source: ATO
To assess the impact of the changes on taxpayer behaviour, the ATO set up a randomized experimental design involving the revised and original overdue payment reminder. They sent different versions to 100 random debt cases. The cases were tracked for 2 months after the reminder was sent. The responses to the "after" version was compared with responses to the "before" version. The results showed a positive effect on compliance amongst recipients of the "after" version (see Table 11).Footnote 28 Basically, it resulted in more arrangements, increase in payments, fewer unpaid accounts, and a lessening of overall debt.

Table 11: Results of the ATO's Overdue Payment Reminder Pilot


 
% change




Enter Arrangement
4.3%


Paid in part or in full
6.8%


Unpaid
-2.6%


Increased Debt
-4.2%



Source: Applying behavioural insights to reduce fraud, error and debt, Cabinet Office Behavioural Insights Team (February 2012).
The ATO also emphasizes the importance of using the correct tone in its EAC. They group their EAC into four categories depending on the stage of contact. First contact, they adopt a tone that portrays the professional advisor and educator. As things escalate (i.e. they do not obtain the required response) their tone changes from fair advisor to trusted authority and finally to firm and forceful administrator.
4.2 How well is the CRA administering EAC?
The focus of this section will be on internal processes, structure, governance, accountability, training, systems, tools, support, etc. This includes an examination of how the CRA is organized to deliver EAC. Best practices of other tax administrations are also presented.
4.2.1 The CRA, led by PAB, has made a concerted effort to improve EAC over the past 9 years
Since 2005, PAB has worked in conjunction with the branches and regions to improve the quality of EAC. In 2007, PAB implemented an EAC framework to:

formalize the structure and encourage consistency in EAC activities;
define roles and responsibilities;
assist the CRA in moving towards greater consistency in messaging; and
develop common tools and guidelines.

PAB established a working group and then a steering committee that focused specifically on EAC. All program branchesFootnote 29, as members of the steering committee, were asked to conduct a review of their EAC and EAC-related activities. As a result, all program branches developed and implemented action plans to improve the quality of their EAC. Although there were concerns expressed over the subjective nature of some aspects of quality, the reviews identified errors and inconsistencies in EAC.
Branches continue to work on improving the quality of their EAC. For example, the Assessment and Benefit Services Branch and Information Technology Branch launched Enterprise Correspondence (EC) to address the format and archival limitations of existing system applications. The Taxpayer Services and Debt Management Branch implemented an ongoing review of its accounts receivable EAC to ensure that it is clear, concise, and accurate. The Compliance Programs Branch has implemented a new audit quality review program and online learning product to address the most common written communication issues in auditor EAC. In 2012, PAB replaced the EAC Steering Committee with the Plain Language Implementation Committee.
Since 2009, PAB has devoted time and effort to promoting the use of plain language. In 2009, PAB developed and implemented a 2 day course on plain language. As of November 2013, 6,225 employees in headquarters and the regions attended the course and 150 plain language instructors had been trained to deliver the course. Approximately 59% (n = 3,694) of participants submitted feedback after completing the course and 83% rated it as relevant to their job and 87% rated it as useful. PAB is currently working on developing an online plain language course.
PAB also developed and maintains a Writer's Toolbox which is available to all employees on the InfoZone. The Writer's Toolbox was created to collect, in one location, the tools, resources, and information employees need when preparing written communications, including EAC. The different elements of the toolbox are intended to guide employees in using standard terminology, writing more clearly and simply, and applying a consistent style. The toolbox has had over 400,000 visits in the last two years.
No one area within the CRA is ultimately accountable for the administration of EAC
PAB is responsible for the communications policy but ultimately it is Agency management that must support and enforce its adoption. In 2007, an Agency wide steering committee, led by PAB, implemented a framework with the objective of formalizing the structure of and encouraging consistency in EAC activities.
The CRA does not identify EAC as a service delivery channel despite the almost 129 million pieces that are sent out every year
The corporate business plan clearly identifies service as one of the three pillars of an effective tax administration.Footnote 30 The plan recognizes that the information needs of Canadians vary widely and, as a result, the CRA will provide current information and respond to enquiries through several service channels. The plan makes multiple references to different channels such as the website, enquiries services, and outreach, throughout the document. Although EAC is one of the primary ways in which the CRA provides Canadians with information, the plan does not make reference to EAC as a service channel.
4.2.2 Despite the CRA's efforts to improve its EAC there are major obstacles in place that limit what can actually be achieved
As indicated earlier, the CRA has invested a significant amount of time and effort to improve its EAC over the past 9 years. Considerable efforts have been made on the part of PAB, the program areas responsible for administering EAC, and the regions. However, our research has indicated that the strategic direction and strategic initiatives do not always align with what the program areas and regions can, in reality, implement given their other priorities and the resources available to them.
Barriers to Implementation
The evaluation found that, when viewed as a whole, the CRA's ability to successfully administer EAC was impeded by:

complex tax and benefit laws that mandated what information needs to be included in EAC (or the sending of EAC);
fragmented business processes both within and across many branches;
approximately 15 letter creation systems and over 40 input systems;
high volumes of EAC and high volumes of verses that are used to generate EAC (some of which may be obsolete or unnecessary);
variability in content, style, format, and writing style; and
non-existent, incomplete, or inconsistent measures of effectiveness.

The information technology systems and infrastructure currently in place make it challenging to administer EAC
The CRA relies heavily on its information technology systems and infrastructure to conduct EAC-related activities. We estimate that about a third of CRA employees are involved in automated, employee-customized, or employee-authored EAC.
Automated EAC is typically in response to information provided or not provided by Canadians. Many of the systems used to automatically generate EAC are legacy systems. The age and limited functionality of these legacy systems do not allow for much flexibility in making changes to the content, format, or design of the EAC they generate. Many of the flaws identified by Siegelvision can be traced back to the limited functionality of these systems. In the area of effective design and inviting graphics, where Siegelvision scored all 23 pieces of EAC as poor, the feasibility of making these changes with existing functionality may be limited.
The Business Client Communications System (BCCS), for example, may pull information from several systems to create a single piece of EAC. BCCS uses 112 templates and 10,177 verses to create communication items. The selection of verses from these systems to compose a letter may directly contribute to some of the understandability issues identified in this study.
Most customized correspondence is also generated using legacy systems such as the Electronic Letter Creation System (ELCS). These systems were designed to automate the creation, review, printing, and storage of letters. The objectives of these systems were to improve efficiency, ensure quality and address consistency of EAC through the use of pre-approved templates and verses (ELCS has 1 template and 5,503 verses).
ELCS was the system most commonly used by the employees we interviewed and surveyed (47% of respondents) to generate customized EAC. While there are benefits associated with ELCS, many employees expressed frustration working with ELCS and the quality of the EAC it generated. One quarter of those surveyed who use ELCS (26%) rated it as "hard" or "extremely hard" to use when looking for verses.
The CRA has recognized the shortcomings of the systems it uses to generate EAC. As mentioned earlier, the Assessment and Benefit Services Branch, in partnership with the Information Technology Branch launched Enterprise Correspondence (EC). It is being offered to branches as an option to address the format and archival limitations of existing systems. However, while many program areas have migrated (or plan to migrate) to EC, its use is not mandatory. We did not have the opportunity to interview many employees in the regions that used EC. The few employees that we did speak to who used EC were very positive.
4.2.3 The CRA could learn from what other tax administrations have done to improve the administration of their EAC
United States 
Much of what we found as part of this evaluation was similar to what the IRS found when they embarked on a major initiative to improve the clarity, accuracy and effectiveness of their EAC. To achieve their objectives the IRS implemented a centralized approach. In July 2008, the IRS created the Taxpayer Communications Taskgroup (TACT), which examined, not only how EAC was written and designed, but:

how EAC was governed;
how EAC was integrated into the IRS service delivery strategy;
how management and business processes could be streamlined;
how EAC was measured in terms of is impact; and
how enabling technology and tools could be improved.

In January 2010, the IRS replaced TACT with the permanent Office of Taxpayer Correspondence (OTC). It serves as an enterprise-wide focal point for EAC from design and development to effectiveness and downstream impact. Its responsibilities include:

creating and revising EAC;
forecasting and measuring the downstream impact of new and changes to existing EAC;
collecting data on EAC;
evaluating the effectiveness of EAC;
implementing standards, procedures, and policies for EAC; and
being the point-of-contact to report the risk of, or actual issuance of, erroneous taxpayer EAC.

Program areas in the IRS are still recognized as the subject matter experts; however, the OTC is ultimately responsible for IRS EAC.
Australia
The ATO also takes a more centralized approach to EAC. While business areas are responsible for managing their own EAC, the ATO has established a corporate gatekeeper for all outbound EAC (paper or electronic).
The gatekeeper role is to undertake the end-to-end development and maintenance of all ATO outbound communications in consultation with the requesting business area. They champion and promote the move from traditional to electronic channels and offer solutions to assist in the management of inbound responses to outbound messages. Each business area has an EAC coordinator who meets weekly with the gatekeeper. The ATO established a corporate senior executive steering committee for EAC. They also established an enterprise EAC forum that is responsible for undertaking the practical tasks related to decisions made by the steering committee such as prioritising of EAC into the information technology systems.
Revenu Quebec
In the early 1990's, an increasing volume of communications led the organization to design and implement a standardized correspondence creation system. They launched the Generalized System of Standardized Communications (GSSC) as part of an overhaul of all its administrative systems. The integration of all administrative communications systems was completed in the fall of 2005. Since communications were standardized and integrated into an overall management communications system (both paper and electronic versions), Revenu Quebec has greatly enhanced its services to produce personalized communications while ensuring a better quality control of its correspondence items.
5. Conclusion
Overall, the understandability of Agency EAC and its administration could be improved. Improvements to design and administration would likely result in greater efficiencies and, potentially, better outcomes achievement (i.e. improved service, reduction of red tape, improved compliance).
6. Recommendations
The CRA has an opportunity to benefit from the considerable research and findings of this evaluation to move forward to address its shortcomings in EAC. It is noteworthy that the IRS has recently undergone the modernization of its correspondence and has established a model from which the CRA could learn. We recommend that CRA senior management:

Consider enterprise-wide options in moving forward to address the shortcomings of EAC.
Consider including EAC in the CRA Corporate Business Plan and Service Strategy.
Seek opportunities to position EAC to take advantage of technology (electronic forms of communication) and emerging strategies e.g. behavioural economics.

7. Management response
The EAC evaluation was undertaken as part of the CRA's continuing efforts to enhance its service to Canadians. The CRA welcomes the findings of the evaluation, which reinforce the need for a continued and concerted effort to improve CRA correspondence, and agrees with its recommendations.
The CRA has a strong track record of continuous improvement to its communications with Canadians. This includes improved plain language in its tax forms and guides, internal training and tools for employees on the use of plain language, and more recently, its focus on providing simple-to-use online services, including online mail.
The CRA is committed to improving its correspondence as a critical part of its efforts to reduce red tape and to support taxpayers in complying with their tax obligations and accessing the benefits to which they may be entitled.
A plan is being developed to address the issues raised in the evaluation report. In recognition that Canadians increasingly want to receive their correspondence electronically, and that the cost of changing paper-based mailing systems are costly and time consuming, a central focus of CRA's activities under the plan will be on electronic correspondence.
The plan includes the following:

The CRA will seek the views of businesses, tax intermediaries, and their associations on how the Agency can improve its notices and letters, through its Red Tape Reduction consultations scheduled for the fall.
A further engagement opportunity will be launched in the new year to seek the views of additional stakeholders, including charities and benefit recipients.
A summary of the results of these consultations will be made public in 2015, and will form the basis of an action plan, with a particular focus on delivering more correspondence online and in a manner that is clear and can be tailored so that the information needs of recipients, whether simple or more complex, are met.
The CRA anticipates that, beginning in February, 2015 and continuing through to early 2016, its top volume letters and notices will be available online to Canadians in simplified, easier-to-understand formats.
The CRA will also review the best practices of other tax administrations, and engage a third party consultant to provide expert advice on how to simplify language on complex or technical topics, visually present information in a way that encourages understanding and action where required, and use emerging technologies effectively.

8. Acknowledgements
Program Evaluation Division wishes to acknowledge the assistance provided by management and staff of all implicated branches of the CRA, especially those who took time out of their busy schedules to complete our surveys, meet with us and/or provide us with information. We also extend a special thanks to:

representatives from the United States IRS, the ATO, the New Zealand Inland Revenue Department, the United Kingdom HMRC, and Revenu Quebec for providing us with insightful and thought provoking information on their tax administrations;
representatives from the British Columbia Securities Commission, Canadian Payroll Association, Chartered Professional Accountants Canada, ABC Life Literacy Canada, Decoda Literacy Solutions, Literacy Partners of Manitoba, and Employment and Social Development Canada; and
Cheryl Stephens (plainlanguage.com) and Brigid Hayes (Brigid Hayes Consulting). Both are renowned experts in their fields (plain language and literacy respectively) who gave freely of their advice, experience and knowledge.

Appendix A: EAC Reviewed by Siegelvision and TNS
 



No.
Type of EAC
Reviewed by Siegelvision
Reviewed by TNS




1
CCTB and GST/HST Credit Missing information letter
√
 


2
CCTB Missing Information notice
√
√


3
CCTB Notice of redetermination
√ Detailed
√


4
GST/HST Credit Validation and control - marital status - initial contact letter
√
√


5
CCTB Validation and control - overlimit - initial contact letter
√
 


6
Corporate Income Tax Notice of assessment
√
√


7
Corporate Income Tax Notice of reassessment
√
 


8
Payroll Source deductions - statement of account
√ Detailed
√


9
GST/HST Pending cancellation notice
√
 


10
Individual Income Tax Processing review - additional information validation letter
√ Detailed
√


11
Individual Income Tax Processing - matching - additional information letter
√
 


12
Individual Income Tax Notice of assessment
√ Detailed
√


13
Individual Income Tax Notice of reassessment
√
 


14
Canada Pension Plan Record of earnings - discrepancy letter
√ Detailed
√


15
Information Returns Notice of assessment
√
 


16
GST/HST Notional assessment
√
 


17
Payroll Request to file letter
√
 


18
Individual Income Tax Request to file T1 return letter
√
√


19
Corporate Income Tax Request to file T2 return letter
√
√


20
Individual Income Tax Soft collection letter
√
√


21
GST/HST Minor balance letter
√
 


22
Charities Notice of intention to revoke
√ Detailed
√


23
Charities Reminder to file return
√
√



 
 
Appendix B: Larger Versions of Figure 1

 

 

Top-most message is "keep for your records", but urgent issues are relegated to bottom page 2 (you owe money; CCTB entitlement will be reduced by 50%).
Four calculations across two pages (vertical/horizontal/indented) make it difficult to trace relationship of original benefit, subsequent credits, payments, and current amount owed. Difficult to follow, especially for vulnerable CCTB audience.
Reference "Information used to calculate" is disconnected from resulting "entitlement" amount shown; relationship of income entitlement is unstated).
Same amount ($186.74) described three ways: "Amount direct deposited" (page 1) and "credits applied to the amount owing" and "credits applied" (page 2).
Tone is authoritarian and overly formal (We will).

 
Appendix C: Larger Versions of EAC Found at Figure 2
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
Appendix D: Larger Versions of IRS EAC Found at Figure 3

 

 
 

 

Footnotes
Footnotes

Footnote 1

Given that it is a specialized workload, executive EAC (responses from the Minister, Commissioner, and Assistant Commissioners) was not included in the scope of this evaluation.
Return to footnote 1 referrer 

Footnote 2

Taxpayers include all persons having reason to interact with or be engaged by the CRA.
Return to footnote 2 referrer 

Footnote 3

CRA Public Affairs and Communications Policy (July 2012)
Return to footnote 3 referrer 

Footnote 4

CRA EAC Framework, Public Affairs Branch (January 2007)
Return to footnote 4 referrer 

Footnote 5

Subscribers to these electronic accounts may opt to receive correspondence such as the Notice of Assessment within their accounts and be notified by way of e-mail.
Return to footnote 5 referrer 

Footnote 6

University of Reading, Simplification Centre, Criteria for clear documents: a survey, April 2011
Return to footnote 6 referrer 

Footnote 7

All elements used to assess understandability
Return to footnote 7 referrer 

Footnote 8

Panels are the single largest sampling source for online studies in market research. An online panel is a pre-recruited group of individuals or households who have agreed to take part in online market research surveys. People with lower incomes, with less education, having lower literacy levels, living in rural areas or age 65 and older are typically underrepresented on online panels.
Return to footnote 8 referrer 

Footnote 9

American Association of Public Opinion Research Report on On-line Panels, March 2010
Return to footnote 9 referrer 

Footnote 10

Content for Everyone (making information accessible), Whitney Quesenbery, Center for Civic Design (May 2013)
Return to footnote 10 referrer 

Footnote 11

Plain by design: evidence-based plain language, Karen Schriver, KSA Communication Design and Research, PLAIN 2013 (October 2013)
Return to footnote 11 referrer 

Footnote 12

Leaders in red tape reduction, questions and answers, CRA Website (January 2012)
Return to footnote 12 referrer 

Footnote 13

Survey of Adult Skills or Programme for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (October 2013).
Return to footnote 13 referrer 

Footnote 14

Statistics Canada - Immigration and Ethnocultural Diversity in Canada, National Household Survey, 2011
Return to footnote 14 referrer 

Footnote 15

Literacy and Immigration – Saskatchewan Literacy Network
Return to footnote 15 referrer 

Footnote 16

Fields such as reading, visual design, information design, typographic design, literacy, cognitive psychology, educational psychology, technical communications, impact of technology, etc.
Return to footnote 16 referrer 

Footnote 17

Resource limitations did not provide us with the opportunity to have TNS survey all of the EAC reviewed by Siegelvision.
Return to footnote 17 referrer 

Footnote 18

The highlighter tool allowed survey participants to access a sample of the EAC online and click on text and images in the document that they did not understand or found confusing.
 
Return to footnote 18 referrer 

Footnote 19

These responses cannot be generalized across the Canadian population.
Return to footnote 19 referrer 

Footnote 20

CRA Corporate Research – Walker Consulting Group, March 2012 and May 2013
Return to footnote 20 referrer 

Footnote 21

CRA External Administrative Correspondence Framework, Public Affairs Branch (January 2007)
Return to footnote 21 referrer 

Footnote 22

CRA Corporate Research - March 2012 and May 2014
Return to footnote 22 referrer 

Footnote 23

Commissioner's Annual Reports to the Governments of the Provinces and Territories, 2011-2012
Return to footnote 23 referrer 

Footnote 24

Larger versions are available at Appendix D
Return to footnote 24 referrer 

Footnote 25

Case study | Internal Revenue Service, CarryOn, Siegel+Gale
Return to footnote 25 referrer 

Footnote 26

Behavioural Economics in the ATO, International Debt Management Committee, Australian Tax Office (July 2013)
Return to footnote 26 referrer 

Footnote 27

Applying behavioural insights to reduce fraud, error and debt, Cabinet Office Behavioural Insights Team (February 2012).
Return to footnote 27 referrer 

Footnote 28

Applying behavioural insights to reduce fraud, error and debt, Cabinet Office Behavioural Insights Team (February 2012), ATO.
Return to footnote 28 referrer 

Footnote 29

Program branches include the Appeals, Assessment and Benefit Services, Compliance Programs, Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs, and Taxpayer Services and Debt Management Branches.
Return to footnote 29 referrer 

Footnote 30

Summary of the Corporate Business Plan 2014-2015 to 2016-2017
Return to footnote 30 referrer 








Report a problem or mistake on this page












Please select all that apply:

A link, button or video is not working



It has a spelling mistake



Information is missing



Information is outdated or wrong



Login error when trying to access an account




I can't find what I'm looking for



Other issue not in this list



Submit



Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries, contact us.










Date modified:
2015-11-16





Evaluation – Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) Management of Small Business Nudge


Final Report
Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch
June 2022


On this page

Executive summary
1. Introduction
2. Background
3. Evaluation methodologies
4. Findings, recommendations, and management response
4.1 There is no standard definition of “small business” at the CRA, and none that takes a taxpayer-centric view. The evaluation team has developed the concept of a “closely-held” business to address this gap.
4.2 A taxpayer-centric segmentation approach could enhance CRA nudge impacts on small businesses.
4.3 Many of the concerns regarding CRA nudge experimentations can be traced to a culture and practice of vertical rather than horizontal integration.


5. Conclusion
6. Acknowledgement
7. Appendices
Appendix A: Evaluation issues and methodology
Appendix B: List of reports for the thematic evaluation
Appendix C: Glossary





Executive summary
This evaluation is the second in a series of evaluations on small business administration at the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA).
The purpose of this engagement was to provide the Commissioner, CRA management, and the Board of Management with an assessment of the CRA’s nudgeFootnote 1 efforts as it is appliedFootnote 2 to encouraging tax compliance among the small business population.
This report also examines the CRA’s multiple definitions of “small business” and the CRA’s own data user experiences in terms of using CRA data to conduct nudge activities.
Nudge experimentation relies on understanding the small business taxpayer’s behaviours, attitudes, and operating context. As a result, nudge success depends on horizontal and governance related factors in the areas of research and data.
When properly targeted and designed, a nudge intervention can be an innovative and cost-effective way to facilitate voluntary compliance with a desired outcomeFootnote 3. Nudges, such as letter and telephone reminders, are intended to encourage desired behaviours, such as helping taxpayers to comply with their tax obligations, while minimizing the burden on them. Traditional compliance strategies, such as audits, are labour-intensive and have limited reach, while nudges tend to be more cost-effective with their wider reach.
According to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’s Forum on Tax Administration (2021), a data-driven understanding of human behaviour can improve taxpayer and customer services and optimize enforcement strategies, including nudges. In the context of nudges, there could be circumstances where segmenting large, diverse populations is worthwhile. The process of segmenting identifies distinctive sub-groups who tend to share certain demographics, behaviours, social values, and other attributes within a populationFootnote 4.
Findings
The evaluation found that:

there is no standard definition of “small business” at the CRA, and none that takes a taxpayer-centric view; the evaluation team developed the concept of a “closely-held” business to address this gap
a taxpayer-centric segmentation approach (for example, using a blend of behavioural, attitudinal, and context data to reach a more meaningful understanding of a taxpayer group) can enhance the CRA nudge impacts for small businesses
many of the concerns regarding CRA small business nudge research can be traced to a culture and practice of vertical rather than horizontal integration

Summary of recommendations

The Service, Innovation and Integration Branch should develop Behavioral Economics research standards for the Agency outlining the required steps in establishing rigorous behaviour-centric segmentation, specific to the appropriate target groups (treatment groups) and desired outcomes.
The Service, Innovation and Integration Branch, with the support of the program branches, should improve collaboration and sharing of small business nudge related research and projects across the Agency.
The Service, Innovation and Integration Branch, with the support of the program branches, should improve small business nudge monitoring and reporting.

Management response
The Service, Innovation and Integration Branch (SIIB) agrees with the three recommendations in this report and has developed related action plans. The Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch (AERB) has determined that they appear reasonable to address the recommendations. After allowing adequate time for key action plan items to be completed, AERB will conduct a follow-up assurance engagement to determine whether any gaps continue to exist and what opportunities should be further explored.
Regarding the first recommendation, SIIB recognizes that Behavioural Economics (BE) has increasingly been used to develop nudge techniques in an effort to increase voluntary compliance, service provision and internal operations. In order to design effective nudge interventions, the most suitable nudge intervention for a given project will capitalize on both the cause of the behavioural issue and specific characteristics of the target population. Both rest on the availability of data and its reliability.
SIIB, in consultation with CRA stakeholders will:

Establish a “BE Research Standard” that codifies the controls required in the course of BE research (Q4 2022-2023).
Assess the viability of applying third party attitudinal survey data to CRA micro data (Q3 2022-2023).
Establish and maintain a list of experts that can be consulted for BE Research (Q2 2022-2023).

As for the second recommendation, SIIB recognizes the need for further collaboration and sharing of nudge research across the Agency. SIIB houses the Centre for Excellence in Behavioural Economics Research (CEBER), which promotes methodological rigour in Agency nudge activities.

SIIB will improve functionality of the Agency Research Inventory that facilitates sharing and identification of BE research (Q4 2022-2023).
SIIB, through the planned relaunch of the Research Network, will act as a hub for analysts across the Agency to share their work (Q3 2022-2023).

Finally, in response to the third recommendation, it should be noted that behavioural economics research in the CRA is distributed across different program areas. To provide an enterprise-level view of nudge projects.

SIIB will establish guidelines for data analysis of nudge and behavioural economics activities, including a “BE Research Standard” that codifies the controls required in the course of BE research (Q2 2023-2024).
Develop a mechanism of annual reporting on nudges, including small businesses (Q4 2023-2024).



1. Introduction
A thematic evaluation of “small business administration” was first included in the Board of Management approved Risk-Based Audit and Evaluation Plan 2018 to 2021 and an overarching evaluation framework was approved by the Management Audit and Evaluation Committee on May 30, 2019.
This thematic evaluation is divided into a series of reports. The first report, “Audit Yield,” was presented to the Management Audit and Evaluation Committee in November 2019.
This report is the second in this series. This evaluation started by exploring the following areas:

definitions of “small business” at the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA)
T1 and T2 population compliance trends
any data-related experiences that were encountered

One of the commitments of the thematic evaluation approach is to provide the Management Audit and Evaluation Committee and the Audit Committee of the Board of Management (Board) with periodic progress reports. The interim report was presented to the Management Audit and Evaluation Committee in March 2021 and the Audit Committee of the Board in April 2021, respectively. During these meetings, the original wave two commitment evolved in terms of refining the examination of T1 and T2 trends by focusing on CRA nudge compliance efforts aimed at the small business community.
Nudges as they relate to small business compliance became the focus of the evaluation for several reasons:

using nudge techniques to influence desired behaviours and outcomes of a taxpayer is a low-cost method of potentially achieving greater compliance results for the CRA while minimizing the contact burden on the taxpayer
using behavioural insights such as nudges is a widely accepted practice of improving tax administrations as evidenced by the recent guideFootnote 5 published by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
opportunities exist to advance segmentation and nudging by integrating third-party data (such as behavioural data) to develop a more meaningful understanding of a taxpayer (in other words, create a taxpayer-centric perspective)
an extensive review of CRA literature and consultations with key stakeholders revealed there was no horizontal approach to applying nudge techniques as applied to small business across the CRA, thereby limiting measured progress in this field

As a result, the evaluation team:

identified a new sub-set of small businesses (in other words, 5.7M “closely-held” businesses – explained further in Section 4)
developed a taxpayer-centric segmentation system using third-party data (such as attitudinal data) blended with CRA data, and tested the system against past small business nudge compliance campaigns to determine its value



2. Background
The purpose of this engagement was to provide the Commissioner, CRA management, and the Board of Management with an assessment of CRA nudge efforts through the lens of a more taxpayer-centric approach to segmenting the small business population. This report also examines the CRA’s multiple definitions of “small business,” and the CRA’s own data user experiences.
Thaler and Sunstein (2008) described “nudge” as changing someone’s behaviour in predictable ways without having to remove any options or changing their economic incentivesFootnote 6. The nudge literature suggests that the more that can be known about a nudge recipient, the easier it could be to tailor messages that appeal to them, thereby improving the chances that the nudge will succeed.
The CRA’s activities serve wide audiences within the small business population. Based on their information needs, the vast majority of these businesses are either T1 self-employed or T2 owner-operated filers. As a result, at the strategic level, the CRA has tended to communicate with small businesses as a single segment. “Serving you Better,” the small business consultation reporting on a bi-annual reporting cycle, is consistent with this approachFootnote 7. From a compliance perspective, the CRA’s nudge efforts have tended to either be applied to an industrial sector, an entire population of non-compliance, such as T2 non-filers, or a specific aspect of reporting. Some nudges have been further broken down by tax line.
Nudge techniques are used by many tax administrations and there is evidence to suggest that they can work. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2021) report on behavioural insightsFootnote 8 provides an overview of the use and impact of nudges by numerous tax administrations. For example, one tax administration was able to reduce the number of taxpayers owing taxes by 33%, while another tax administration increased filing among prior non-filers by as much as 15%, all through the implementation of targeted nudge letter campaigns.


3. Evaluation methodologies
The evaluation team used the following methodologies:

data analysis of four years (2014-2017)Footnote 9 of:
filing and payment compliance
sources of household and business income
the purchase of a temporary, three-month trial subscription with a third-party data provider, which provided access to a segmentation system and the social values, wealth profiles, and demographics of Canadians at the postal code level only
nudge results from 2015, 2016, 2017, and 2020 pilot projects administered by the CRA


document reviews, including 400 reports from both the Agency Research Inventory and the Business Intelligence Reference System, and benchmarking of best practices with Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries
internal interviews and focus groups with CRA employees
external interviews with other Government of Canada employees
survey of CRA employees who obtain, extract, and prepare data, also referred to as “data users”

Limitations of this research
When managing data, taxpayer privacy is paramount. Consistent with privacy laws, the third-party data (such as social values and behavioural data) purchased for this research is modelled at the postal code level. While modelled postal-code-level data increases the chances of getting the right message to the right personFootnote 10, it is impossible to link modelled data to any individual within a postal code. Further, although it is improbable that postal-code-level generalizations apply to everyone residing in that postal code, such analysis provides valuable contact information that previous internal research using other factors such as region, sex, and industry code does not.


4. Findings, recommendations, and management response
The recommendations presented in this report address issues of high significance or mandatory requirements.
The Service, Innovation and Integration Branch agree with the recommendations in this report and have developed related action plans. The Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch has determined that they appear reasonable to address the recommendations.
4.1 There is no standard definition of “small business” at the CRA, and none that takes a taxpayer-centric view. The evaluation team has developed the concept of a “closely-held” business to address this gap.
There is no standard definition of “small business” at the CRA. Most of the 17 definitions tend to be based on revenue or the number of employees, which can vary widelyFootnote 11. None of these definitions focus on either the individual T2 owner-operated corporation or the T1 self-employed sole proprietor.
The evaluation team developed the concept of the “closely-held business” segment to address this gap. It focuses on the individuals behind smaller businesses and includes all T1 self-employed and T2 owner-operated corporations where there is either a single (or spousal) majority shareholder with a controlling interest (greater than 90% of the corporation’s shares). This distinction is important because in T2 corporations, ownership can be spread among multiple minority shareholders, requiring the use of other criteria (such as revenue or number of employees) to distinguish between small-, medium-, and large-sized businesses. Overall, as of 2017, there were approximately 5.7 million closely-held businesses in Canada, which includes 4.5 million T1 self-employed and 1.2 million T2 owner-operated corporations.
Achieving a taxpayer-centric view is possible with the closely-held business definition because of its focus on the individual who operates the business. The idea behind a taxpayer-centric view is to try to better understand the attitudes, behaviours, situations, and other tendencies of these taxpayers in order to build relationships that improve both service and compliance, all while addressing unique needs. Developing a taxpayer-centric view of small businesses could be ideal because of:

the multiple tax obligations they might have, including T1, T2, GST/HST, and payroll
their large numbers (they represent approximately 85% of all businesses in Canada), coupled with their relatively low taxes payable

These same population characteristics also justify the use of nudge techniques. The Small and Medium Enterprises Directorate of the Compliance Programs Branch developed a report titled “The right intervention for the risk.” Footnote 12 This report states that a more targeted approach to CRA interventions is preferred, where audits and enforcement action are aimed at serious non-compliance, while less serious compliance risks are treated using “softer,” less costly techniques and initiatives, such as enhanced information resources, liaison officer programs, and nudge campaigns.
4.1.1 Although the CRA has developed two small-business owner personaeFootnote 13, which could be used as the basis for segmentation, these currently have limited use.
Personae are fictional representations of segments, or groups, of individuals based on attributes that could reflect their characteristics, values, and behavioural tendencies. Their purpose is to increase an organization’s understanding of the different groups it serves. Their value lies in how clearly they reveal what drives the different types of individuals. Applying the taxpayer-centric view to small businesses lends itself to the creation of unique personae.
The evaluation team’s quantitative analysis revealed that there is an opportunity to refine the CRA’s business-related personae to more accurately reflect the small business population. For example, the CRA’s current “Nate” persona resembles between 0 and 0.2% of small businesses, while the “Beatrice” persona resembles between 0 and 1.0%
It should be noted that these personae are intended for web content developers and others within the Public Affairs Branch to help increase their sensitivity to unique small business needs. As a result, there was no evidence that these, or any other personae, were intended for or have been used as the basis for nudge messaging. Further, given their limited breadth, the personae could not be used to assess the efficacy of CRA nudge efforts.
4.2 A taxpayer-centric segmentation approach could enhance CRA nudge impacts on small businesses.
Mass marketing approaches to communications typically send one message to an entire population. By contrast, the idea behind segmentation is to identify distinctive sub-groups based on their respective tendencies within a population (such as closely-held businesses). This segmentation would be based on a combination of behavioural, demographic, social values, and other tendencies. Identifying segments this way provides the basis for achieving specific goals, such as increasing the possibility of getting the right message to the right person, which is a key consideration in small business nudge efforts.
This section provides an overview of:

the taxpayer-centric segmentation system developed by the evaluation team for the closely-held business population
insights on how to optimize the results from four CRA small business nudge initiatives (2015, 2016, 2017, and 2020)

4.2.1 Overview of the taxpayer-centric segmentation system developed by the evaluation team
The evaluation team found that the optimal number of closely-held business segments is six, a result that is aligned with previous CRA public opinion research. Table 1 includes the following information about each segment:

segment label and the percentage of the closely-held business population that it represents
social value tendencies
ranking of filing and payment compliance behaviours
percentage of taxes unpaid when due
ability to pay, an indication of their financial situation
nudge response rank


Table 1: Summary of the closely-held business taxpayer-centric segmentation system
Segment label (% of overall population)
They tend to value:
Compliance rank
% of unpaid taxes (%)Footnote 14
Ability to pay rankFootnote 15
Nudge response rankFootnote 16
Filing rankFootnote 17
Payment rankFootnote 18
Altruistic compliers (16%)
Civil obedience, gov’t action, community
1
2
42
5
4
Deferent compliers (4%)
Personal duty, civil disobedience, gov’t action, physical force
2
1
41
1
1
Pseudo compliers (41%)
Respecting authority, private sector over gov’t
3
4
44
3
5
Situational non-compliers (8%)
Risk taking, traditional values, private sector over gov’t, inequality as inevitable
4
6
52
2
6
Potential non-compliers (25%)
Civil disobedience, individualism, work ethic, inequality as inevitable
5
3
58
6
2
Rebels (5%)
Eliminating inequality, civil disobedience, individualism
6
5
54
4
3

As Table 1, above, illustrates, both similarities and differences between the segments emerge when comparing information by row. For example, while altruistic compliers and deferent compliers were consistently the most filing and payment compliant, the two segments tend to differ in their financial situations, social values, and response to CRA nudges. Pseudo compliers and Situational non-compliers are the only two segments to tend to value the private sector over government in dealing with societal issues. They are also both more likely to be in good financial health and less likely to respond to CRA nudges. However, not only do their remaining social values diverge, but situational non-compliers are more likely to be payment non-compliant and carry a larger portion of tax debt. Understanding the tendencies and situations of each segment can assist the CRA to determine the appropriate compliance actions for each segment of the closely-held business population. The next section describes how the proposed segmentation system can be applied within the CRA.
4.2.2 Applying the segmentation systems
The CRA has a stated objective of using the right intervention for the risk. Within the context of nudge, this means determining which segments of the population are most likely to respond to a compliance intervention, such as a nudge, and use these insights to improve non-compliance. This also means understanding which segments are not likely to respond to nudge techniques and using different compliance approaches for these segments. Table 1 highlights that different segments of the population had different response rates to CRA nudge experiments. Deferent compliers were the most responsive and situational non-compliers were the least likely to respond.
The differences in response rates between the segments highlights the need for enhanced monitoring. The evaluation team created an indicator to monitor and optimize the use of nudge within specific segments of the closely-held business population. The indicator calculates the percentage of letters/contacts received by taxpayers compared with the percentage of responses that were subsequently received by the CRA. To optimize its impact, the CRA would nudge the segments that are most responsive and limit the letters sent to those who are the least responsive.
The evaluation team tested its taxpayer-centric segmentation system using the data collected during the four CRA nudge experiments. A summary of the test results can be found in Table 2.

Table 2: Frequency of nudge optimization by taxpayer-centric segment
Impact
Nudge conditionsFootnote 19 applied to each segment
Altruistic compliers
Deferent compliers
Pseudo compliers
Situational non-compliers
Potential non-compliers
Rebels
Overall averages
Near-optimal
9%
64%
100%
64%
45%
82%
61%
Sub-optimal
91%
36%
0%
36%
55%
18%
39%

Overall, the test results were positive and suggest that the CRA optimized its return in a total of 61% of the segments/nudge conditions included in the analysis. Based on their response rates, “pseudo-complier” and the “rebel” segments tended to be optimally targeted and combined, these two segments represent approximately half of the closely-held business population.
The tests also revealed some opportunities for improvement in the targeting approach for certain nudge experiments. In about 39% of the conditions CRA nudge achieved a sub-optimal impact because it either did not send enough nudges to highly responsive segments or it sent too many nudges to largely unresponsive segments. For example, the CRA could have attempted to reach more taxpayers in the “potential non-complier” segment but, by contrast, the CRA sent too many letters to altruistic compliers.
The evaluation team also tested a third-party segmentation system using the data collected from the four CRA nudge experiments. Overall, the third-party segmentation system produced inconsistent results across the various nudge experiments. A few segments showed consistently above or below average response rates while most did not produce detectable differences. This led the evaluation team to conclude that a taxpayer-centric segmentation system has greater potential to optimize future small business nudge performance.
4.2.3 Key takeaways from segmentation system testing
The observations emerging from this evaluation should be considered tentative because they are only based on four previous nudge studies. Despite this, the taxpayer-centric segmentation system raises questions that warrant further exploration. For example, altruistic compliers were expected to be most responsive to a nudge based on their value systems. However, their filing and payment compliance rates, and their low proportion of late taxes owed, suggest that they are already among the most compliant segment of the closely-held business population despite their comparatively weak financial situations. It is possible that nudges are less effective with this segment because they are confident that they are already compliant, because their weaker financial situations impedes their ability to pay more, or both. Pseudo-compliers and situational non-compliers were also among the least responsive segments to a nudge. These segments share a skeptical view towards the role of government and are among the most payment non-compliant despite being the wealthiest. The differences between the segments suggest that the CRA could do more to target, optimize, and monitor its nudge efforts. Given the potential using and applying behavioral data to nudging, alternative strategies to addressing these segments should be explored.
Implications for CRA nudge experimentation structures, mechanisms, and processes are discussed in section 4.3.1.
Recommendation 1
SIIB should develop BE research standards for the Agency outlining the required steps in establishing rigorous behaviour-centric segmentation, specific to the appropriate target groups (treatment groups) and desired outcomes.

Management response
The Service, Innovation and Integration Branch agrees with this recommendation.
Behavioural Economics has increasingly been used to develop nudge techniques in an effort to increase voluntary compliance, service provision and internal operations. In order to design effective nudge interventions, the most suitable nudge intervention for a given project will capitalize on both the cause of the behavioural issue and specific characteristics of the target population. Both rest on the availability of data and its reliability.
SIIB, in consultation with CRA stakeholders will:

Establish a “BE Research Standard” that codifies the controls required in the course of BE research (Q4 2022-2023).
Assess the viability of applying third party attitudinal survey data to CRA micro data (Q3 2022-2023).
Establish and maintain a list of experts that can be consulted for BE Research (Q2 2022-2023).

4.3 Many of the concerns regarding CRA nudge experimentations can be traced to a culture and practice of vertical rather than horizontal integration.
The CRA’s functional model reinforces vertical integration, as different branches specialize in processes, tax lines, and compliance activities. Within this structure, quantitative behavioural research teams are mandated to serve the nudge experimentation needs of their own branches, rather than embrace the Chief Service Officer’s mandate to employ a “client-centric lens in its development of service strategies.”Footnote 20 CRA nudge efforts have evolved within this operating framework, yet they are different because, unlike other forms of research, they impact the taxpayer directly.
The CRA has the resources to develop taxpayer-centric segments. It has highly skilled nudge research communities within several of its branches, its own public opinion research function, and one of the single largest data repositories of Canadians’ behaviour (for example, filing and payment behaviours).
Despite these resources, the CRA has not been able to leverage these resources to create its own taxpayer-centric segmentation system for nudge purposes. As almost all surveys do not collect personal identifiable taxpayer information, it is not feasible to join this information with the behavioural and attitudinal data collected by the CRA at the individual level. Privacy and ethical practices also do not support joining personal identifiable taxpayer information to the attitudes and opinions of the individuals. This disconnect between these two types of information impacts their use in practice when CRA nudge experiments are developed and carried out.
The following section reviews the structures, mechanisms, and processes that support current nudge efforts, and highlights some of the impacts associated with these findings. Overall, there appears to be numerous ways that the CRA could increase its cross-branch, or horizontal, collaboration, which could positively impact taxpayers, researchers, and management.
4.3.1 The challenges nudge researchers face with CRA data are complex, leading them to spend a significant
Elements of the Agency Digital Business StrategyFootnote 21 imply data quality is a priority, including references to “reducing the burden on Canadians by leveraging data and emerging technologies,” solutions that perform real-time analysis, and “agile and risk informed decision-making.”
The evaluation team conducted a survey of 45 CRA data usersFootnote 22, and examined their experiences related to the locating, understanding, obtaining, and verifying of data quality on their current or most recently completed projects. The common element underlying many of their concerns (such as a lack of documentation or identifying an owner) was the need for confidence in their data prior to analyzing it. Overall, they spent 31% of their time ensuring data was of a high quality, while another 53% of their time was spent locating and understanding the data.
Overall, the majority of CRA data users felt that the CRA had the potential to improve their data experience by facilitating their “understanding of data” or “locating of data.”
In addition, nudge researchers revealed that they sometimes wait months to obtain data, which has led to delaying or redirecting their projects. Specifically, obtaining address data is a challenge for nudge researchers. Currently, the CRA requires a mailing address from T1 filers, not a home address. The evaluation team’s data analysis found that 19.5% of business owners who were nudged in early 2020 (for not filing their corporate return) did not report a valid residential address. Postal boxes are not where the taxpayer actually resides, limiting the value of postal-code-level insights.
The evaluation team also identified concerns in the two-way communications with the data user community. The evaluation team ran a test that identified how transformations to original source data made some records appear differently in the Agency Data WarehouseFootnote 23, a problem that the Information Technology Branch committed to address when notified. At the time of writing, users had not been informed of the data error in a systematic way, and user support documentation has not been updated. Additionally, apart from the evaluation team’s survey, only one other survey has been conducted with CRA data users over the past five years. We found that the previous survey did not provide a full picture of data user experiences, including concerns regarding their levels of trust in the quality of the data.
The Service, Innovation and Integration Branch and the Information Technology Branch have recently launched numerous data quality initiatives such as the data quality framework, the data stewardship program, and the Agency Metadata Repository. While there were numerous references to improving data quality in the Service, Innovation and Integration Branch and the Information Technology Branch in senior management annual performance accords, the evaluation team could not find anyone explicitly accountable for monitoring and continuously improving the data user experience.
4.3.2 There is a lack of minimum, common standards regarding nudge details.
The CRA developed the CRA Nudge Development Guide to support nudge researchers, including those conducting experiments on the small business population. While this guidance document is comprehensive, there is no horizontal mechanism in place that monitors whether it is followed. As a result, the CRA appears to rely on researcher judgement at the branch level rather than ensuring there are minimum standards across branches regarding some methodological details. Subtle differences in approaches could make it a challenge for senior management to monitor success and strategically deploy CRA resources towards nudge campaigns.
For example, contrary to the advice in the CRA Nudge Development Guide, two of the nudge studies used in this evaluation’s nudge analysis did not create a control group. A control group provides baseline information regarding how many people would undertake the desired behaviour without any intervention. In these two instances, post hoc control groups were developed based on taxpayer-requested adjustments during a comparable time period.
Further, different combinations of success criteria were used across nudge studies, and the number of measures varied between one and eight. Some of these criteria were found to be statistically significant, while others were not. This made it challenging for the evaluation team to determine whether one nudge experiment was more successful than another.
Part of the nudge planning process is to review previous research related to the targeted population, such as small businesses, in order to gain understanding of the population, the drivers of its compliance behaviour, and risk factors associated with different pockets of the population. We noted concerns regarding the documentation and usage of small business research that could potentially feed nudge research decisions. For example, in one analysis, the top 1% of the closely-held taxpayer population represented 37% of debt on initial assessment and 47% of the total debt 90 days after the assessment (in other words, a large proportion of the population). Such skewness is common, yet many reports that the evaluation team reviewed made no mention of outliers or extreme values in their reports.
4.3.3 Impacts of this evaluation on key stakeholder groups
The findings identified above impact different CRA stakeholders in different ways. Nudge researchers, field staff, management, and authors of the CRA Nudge Development Guide are considered below.
Nudge researchers and field staff
Nudge researchers indicated that not all of their research reports are available in the CRA’s central repository for research. Reasons cited include:

a lack of storage space
their reports are too complex and external readers would not understand them
some of their reports are actually a measurement of the performance of taxpayer compliance
they tend to require approval from their field clients or program areas, who might prefer that the results are not widely shared

There was no evidence that any branch’s nudge research cited (much less attempted to replicate) the research of another branch, nor was there any evidence of cross-branch (inter-disciplinary) collaboration on published reports. Additionally, although nudge researchers review their work within their branch and with their functional clients, there was no evidence of cross-branch peer review either prior to launching the nudge (to ensure its approach meets minimum standards) or after the launch.
In addition, there is no central repository through which to post, share, or access nudge results data or to know which taxpayers have been contacted and have responded to a nudge. Nudge responses are not evaluated across branches to recognize and act on patterns that could initiate the development of a taxpayer-centric segmentation system.
Nudge field staff have a high demand for research, but there is a disconnect between published research and its usability in the field. When employees were asked how this information is used, different perspectives emerged. On the one hand, CRA nudge managers receive individual taxpayer data showing (possible) non-compliance, including personal contact information. On the other hand, CRA nudge managers can also access CRA research that has combined compliance or behavioural and attitudinal data, but they do not know who the individuals are or how to contact them. The two types of research exist in parallel, with no ability to integrate them.
Some field staff revealed that they are building their own data analysis groups to meet their unique needs.
Overall, the unavailability of self-serve options for accessing nudge data and detailed methodologies has made the re-using and learning from previous nudges impractical and time consuming.
A more horizontally integrated research community can support nudge researchers by:

facilitating the replication of research through the sharing of data and processes
promoting cross-branch collaboration that takes a taxpayer-centric view
providing an independent lens to challenge research findings prior to conducting field work and publication

Management
The current organizational design might not be optimizing the relationship between accountabilities and expertise, and this is relevant because unlike other research, nudge efforts directly impact targeted taxpayers.
According to interviewees, there is a tendency for nudge activities to be prioritized, planned, and administered by Headquarters and field program staff. However, instead of being involved from the initial planning stage, this model tends to limit CRA research and communications expertise to mostly advisory roles in the nudge management process.
On the research side, this practice represents a barrier to developing minimum methodological nudge standards, and as long as such standards are not adhered to, the CRA could be challenged in its sharing, aggregating, and monitoring of overall nudge results. This, in turn could impact the CRA’s ability to optimally implement its non-audit treatments/nudge activities. On the communications side, the CRA cannot easily know which taxpayer has received which message, whether the message was appropriate or optimal, and whether the same taxpayer has been targeted multiple times.
Although each research team measures and documents its nudge results, there was no evidence of a CRA-wide nudge monitoring strategy. With the reliance on researcher judgement, no central repository to store and mine previous nudge results, and a wide variety of success criteria employed, it can be a challenge, at the CRA level, to know which nudges have been more or less effective and why, impacting the CRA’s ability to deploy nudge resources in a strategic fashion.
Updates to the CRA Nudge Development Guide
The evaluation team’s analysis suggests several claims from the CRA Nudge Development Guide could be re-visited based on the findings stated throughout this report.
Recommendation 2
The Service, Innovation and Integration Branch, with the support of the program branches, should improve collaboration and sharing of small business nudge related research and projects across the Agency.

Management response
The Service, Innovation and Integration Branch agrees with this recommendation.
SIIB recognizes the need for further collaboration and sharing of nudge research across the Agency. SIIB houses the Centre for Excellence in Behavioural Economics Research (CEBER), which promotes methodological rigour in Agency nudge activities.

SIIB will improve functionality of the Agency Research Inventory that facilitates sharing and identification of BE research (Q4 2022-2023).
SIIB, through the planned relaunch of the Research Network, will act as a hub for analysts across the Agency to share their work (Q3 2022-2023).

Recommendation 3
The Service, Innovation and Integration Branch, with the support of the program branches, should improve small business nudge monitoring and reporting.

Management response
The Service, Innovation and Integration Branch agrees with this recommendation.
Behavioural economics research in the CRA is distributed across different program areas. To provide an enterprise-level view of nudge projects, SIIB will develop a mechanism of annual reporting on nudges, including small businesses.

SIIB will establish guidelines for data analysis of nudge and behavioural economics activities, including a “BE Research Standard” that codifies the controls required in the course of BE research (Q2 2023-2024).
SIIB, in consultation with other CRA stakeholders, will develop a mechanism of annual reporting on nudges including small businesses (Q4 2023-2024).



5. Conclusion
Tax administrations around the world have started using behavioural insights to improve their relationships with taxpayers. Nudging has the potential to have a positive impact on taxpayer services and compliance, and it is consistent with CRA strategies of putting people first and customizing its service offering and its messaging to the different segments it serves.
While the CRA has undertaken many initiatives in nudging taxpayers in the past, the advancements in the areas of behavioural insights, the CRA’s investments in data analytics tools and skills, and the CRA’s openness to a more iterative and lean approach of continuous improvement provide good conditions for making further advancements in the way the CRA facilitates voluntary compliance.
The recommendations and action plans developed have the potential to help the CRA reach its objectives in serving the diversity of its small business client base. This said, AERB will conduct a follow-up assurance engagement after allowing adequate time for key action plan items to be completed to determine whether any gaps continue to exist and what opportunities should be further explored.


6. Acknowledgement
In closing, the evaluation team would like to acknowledge and thank the branches for the time dedicated and the information provided during the course of this engagement: the Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch; the Collections and Verification Branch; the Compliance Programs Branch; the Information Technology Branch; the Public Affairs Branch; and the Service, Innovation, and Integration Branch.


7. Appendices
Appendix A: Evaluation issues and methodology
Issue 1: What outcomes are being achieved in the small business ownership population?

What are these businesses’ perceptions of and experiences with the CRA?
What are the compliance trends of this population with multiple tax obligations?

Issue 2: In what ways could a full taxpayer view impact the CRA’s administration of the small business population?

In what ways could a full taxpayer view impact current monitoring and reporting approaches to this population?
Can current operating assumptions regarding risk scoring, file selection, resource allocation, governance, coordination, technology, and legal frameworks be validated using a full taxpayer view?

These two issues will be studied over a series of reports. The first report, “Audit Yield,” was presented in November 2019. The current report is the second in this series. This report examines the labels and definitions surrounding “business” at the CRA and elsewhere. It summarizes the similarities and differences between the overall T1 and T2 populations and highlights any data-related experiences encountered. Among other things, the analysis explores the nature of an individual’s dependence on their business income in order to support data-driven decision-making around definitions of “small business.”
Methodology
The methodologies for examination included the following:

data analysis of four years (2014-2017) of:
filing and payment compliance
sources of household and business income


the purchase of a temporary, three-month trial subscription, which provided access to a segmentation system and the social values, wealth profiles, and demographics of Canadians
nudge results from 2015, 2016, 2017, and 2020 pilot projects administered by the CRA
document reviews, including 400 reports from both the Agency Research Inventory and the Business Intelligence Reference System, and benchmarking of best practices with Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries
internal interviews and focus groups with CRA employees
external interviews with other Government of Canada employees
survey of CRA employees who obtain, extract, and prepare data, also referred to as “data users”

A third-party segmentation system was purchased on a temporary licence in order to understand the attitudinal, lifestyle, and wealth profiles of the CRA’s nudged population. This segmentation system attributes, to each postal code, a specific segment based on the social, economic, and attitudinal attributes attached to each postal code.
The evaluation team used two approaches: one that used the third-party segmentation system as is, and the other consisted of creating an in-house segmentation system using the aggregated statistics, and then combining the behavioural and administrative data to the segmentation data.
The algorithm used in the development of the segmentation system has a small level of instability, where one in every five records can belong to a different segment when the algorithm is replicated. This instability is expected in social sciences, and does not impact the overall analysis and findings.
Appendix B: List of reports for the thematic evaluation
This multi-year thematic approach to business compliance will respond to the issues and research questions listed above by generating a series of reports whose content varies in depth and breadth. The evaluation team will periodically review the series and will provide updates to the Management Audit and Evaluation Committee to ensure continued relevance and feasibility. This approach enables the evaluation team to remain agile in responding to senior management’s needs, which could be shaped by findings in the reports.
The CRA’s exploration of this theme began in 2018 with the framework for the Evaluation of CRA Information Resources for Small Businesses. That evaluation examines the extent to which a variety of CRA information resources facilitate small business compliance as well as how effective the CRA’s administration is in this area.
Wave 1 reports

Audit Yield – This report assessed how effectively the CRA successfully recovers amounts from most of its business-related income tax (and an update on GST/HSTFootnote 24) audits within a given timeframe. It examined integrated, population-level performance measures that take into account the results of activities across multiple branches or functions. It explored recent, multi-year tracking of CRA business audit efforts across the T2, T1, GST/HST, and payroll tax lines. Such a horizontal indicator would assess the CRA’s effectiveness in resolving audit re-assessments (for example, estimating how much extra in tax dollars are generated as a result of audit work that targets business).
Current report: CRA Management of Small Business Nudge – This report assessed the aggregated comparability, stability, and practicality of segmenting and managing small business data. It examines the labels and definitions surrounding “small business” at the CRA and elsewhere. It summarizes the similarities and differences between the overall T1 and T2 populations and highlights any data-related experiences encountered. Among other things, the analysis explores the nature of an individual’s dependence on their business income in order to support data-driven decision-making around definitions of “small business.” In March 2021, the evaluation team advised the Management Audit and Evaluation Committee along with the Audit Committee of the Board of Management that this report would also evaluate the CRA’s nudging of businesses.

Appendix C: Glossary

Glossary
Term
Definition
Agency Data Warehouse (ADW)
The ADW is a data repository that stores corporate, sharable data from over 55 CRA business operational systems in a manner suitable for use in Business Intelligence (BI) analysis, research, and reporting.
Inferential study
Inferential studies focus on finding relationships and making predictions or generalizations about a larger dataset, based on a set of collected data.
Nudge
A nudge is an intervention technique that targets individuals’ economic decision-making process in order to facilitate behaviour change. The intervention typically adds, changes, or re-arranges information that individuals use to make specific economic decisions (for example, saving, spending, reporting income, and paying debts) in an effort to increase desired behaviour or decrease undesired behaviours. Nudge techniques are characterized by their subtle and encouraging nature. Sending educational letters to taxpayers who are at risk of under-reporting their income, to inform them on what income should be reported and to correct errors after the fact, is an example of a nudge.
Persona
CRA personae are fictional characters representing the key audience segments that use the CRA’s products and services. Although the individuals are not real, they are based on data and research about actual users. The five CRA personae are:
Persona 1: Tax Service Provider – Wayne
Persona 2: Business Owner – Beatrice
Persona 3: Typical Tax-filer – Lara
Persona 4: Vulnerable – Fatima
Persona 5: Needs help with taxes – Nate


Segmentation
Segmentation analysis attempts to obtain and analyze an individual’s attitudes, behaviours, financial situations, demographics, and other tendencies. This data is used to group like-minded and similarly-situated individuals to determine the optimal way of communicating with them.
Trend
A trend is a pattern found in data; it is used to describe if the data is showing an upward or downward movement for part, or all of, the time.




Footnotes

Footnote 1 A nudge is an intervention technique that targets individuals' economic decision-making processes in order to facilitate a behaviour change (CRA Nudge Guide). The CRA has been implementing nudges for approximately 10 years.
Return to footnote 1
 Footnote 2 The CRA can use nudge techniques to encourage behaviours in a variety of ways beyond tax compliance (e.g. encouraging benefits uptake). This evaluation examines nudges as they specifically apply to encourage tax compliance among the small business population.
Return to footnote 2
 Footnote 3 CRA’s Nudge Development Guide (accessible only on the Government of Canada network)
Return to footnote 3
 Footnote 4 Behavioural Insights for Better Tax Administration: A Brief Guide
Return to footnote 4
 Footnote 5 Forum on tax administration, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2021; Behavioural Insights for Better Tax Administration
Return to footnote 5
 Footnote 6 Thaler, R and Sunstein, C, 2008. Nudge: improving decisions about health, wealth, and happiness. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Return to footnote 6
 Footnote 7 2018 Serving You Better consultations with small and medium businesses
Return to footnote 7
 Footnote 8 Forum on tax administration, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2021; Behavioural Insights for Better Tax Administration
Return to footnote 8
 Footnote 9 This period of data was selected and extracted in 2020 given the relative stability of the taxpayers’ accounts (for example, appeals rights had been exhausted or late filers were captured)
Return to footnote 9
 Footnote 10 Using the Nudge in Tax Compliance: Leveraging Behavioral Insights to Boost Tax Revenues. Deloitte Consulting LLP.
Return to footnote 10
 Footnote 11 For example, small businesses generate between 11% and 58% of the net income of all businesses.
Return to footnote 11
 Footnote 12 Small & Medium Enterprises Directorate, Strategic Business Plan, The right intervention for the risk, Fiscal Year 2015 to 2018. According to this report, “Implementing ‘the right intervention for the risk’ means that we seek to find the least intrusive and most economical way to promote compliance. A range of interventions will be deployed to reach the most taxpayers possible within the SME population. Soft interventions or nudge approaches will be used instead of after-the-fact audit interventions where these less intrusive methods are more effective in ensuring compliance. While still an important part of our mandate, audits and penalties are reserved for the most serious cases of non-compliance.”
Return to footnote 12
 Footnote 13 CRA personas (accessible only on the Government of Canada network)
Return to footnote 13
 Footnote 14 Ratio of the average taxpayer debt per segment after 90 days based on the average taxes owing per segment on initial assessment over a four-year period.
Return to footnote 14
 Footnote 15 Average liquid assets per segment.
Return to footnote 15
 Footnote 16 Overall ranking of response rates to all nudges studied.
Return to footnote 16
 Footnote 17 Combined average of the T1/T2 filing non-compliance over a four-year period.
Return to footnote 17
 Footnote 18 Ranked by aggregated averages per segment of paying in full on time over a four-year period.
Return to footnote 18
 Footnote 19 Conditions refer to the 11 experimental groups used in previous CRA nudge campaigns.
Return to footnote 19
 Footnote 20 Putting people first at the Canada Revenue Agency
Return to footnote 20
 Footnote 21 Update: Digital Business Strategy 2020-2022 (accessible only on the Government of Canada network)
Return to footnote 21
 Footnote 22 The survey was directed at CRA employees who obtain, extract, and prepare data (e.g. power BI users).
Return to footnote 22
 Footnote 23 The Agency Data Warehouse holds taxpayer data from over 50 CRA databases.
Return to footnote 23
 Footnote 24 Evaluation Study – Horizontal Compliance Management: GST/HST Audit Programs, 2018
Return to footnote 24







Report a problem or mistake on this page












Please select all that apply:

A link, button or video is not working



It has a spelling mistake



Information is missing



Information is outdated or wrong



Login error when trying to access an account




I can't find what I'm looking for



Other issue not in this list



Submit



Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries, contact us.










Date modified:
2022-09-16





Internal Audit and Program Evaluation


The CRA's internal audit and program evaluation functions support the achievement of the CRA's strategic goals by providing independent and objective information, advice, and assurance on the soundness of the Agency's operations.
The results of the CRA's audits and evaluations are posted on our Web site to promote public accountability and transparency.



Select a year:


2023
2022
2021
2020
2019
2018
2017
2016
2015
2014
2013
2012
2011
2010
2009
2008
2007
2006
2005





Internal Audit: The practice of internal auditing is a critical means for ensuring effective and appropriate governance. The internal audit function provides professional and independent assurance information focused on improving the overall efficiency, effectiveness and risk management of an organization's operations. CRA audits are risk-based and focus on the Agency's strategies and practices related to risk management, management control frameworks, and information used for decision-making and reporting. All audits are conducted in accordance with the International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing. Program Evaluation: Public service managers are expected to define anticipated results, continually focus attention towards results achievement, measure performance regularly and objectively, and learn and adjust to improve efficiency and effectiveness. Managers are accountable for their performance to senior management, Ministers, Parliament and Canadians. Evaluation, like internal audit, risk management and other management tools, helps managers to operate effectively in this environment. Evaluation supports managers' efforts to track and report on actual performance and help decision-makers objectively assess program or policy results. Evaluation contributes to improvements in policy, as well as program design and delivery.





Report a problem or mistake on this page












Please select all that apply:

A link, button or video is not working



It has a spelling mistake



Information is missing



Information is outdated or wrong



Login error when trying to access an account




I can't find what I'm looking for



Other issue not in this list



Submit



Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries, contact us.










Date modified:
2022-03-22





Program Evaluation Study GST/HST Delinquent Filing and Remitting


Final Report
Corporate Audit and Evaluation Branch April 2009 




Table of Contents  
 Executive Summary 
 Introduction 
 Background 
 Evaluation Methodology 
 Limitations and Constraints 
 Findings from the Evaluation

 1.0 Client Profile

 1.1 Evidence of repeat non-compliance 
 1.2 Half of new registrants failed to file or remit on time 
 1.3 Evidence indicates that the majority of GST/HST non-compliance occurs in the $30,000 to $100,000 gross annual sales range 
 1.4 Province of registration does not affect the level of non-compliance 
 1.5 Industry sector does not appear to affect the rate of non-compliance 
 
 2.0 Causes of Non-compliance 
 3.0 The Impact of Non-compliance

 3.1 Non-compliance affects the integrity of the tax system 
 
 4.0 Effectiveness of Program Delivery

 4.1 Majority of Non-compliant inventory is less than 5 years old 
 4.2 Growth in non-compliance affects resolution rate 
 4.3 Opportunities exist to optimize resources 
 
 5.0 Opportunities for Improvement

 5.1 Evidence suggests that the business registration process may not adequately support CRA compliance and enforcement efforts 
 5.2 GST/HST Redesign has had unintended impacts on client service 
 5.3 Prosecution of those who fail to file 
 5.4 Implementation of a risk management framework 
 5.5 Horizontal working relationships – A catalyst for change 
 
 6.0 Going Forward 
 
 Annex A 



  Executive Summary
This report presents the findings of the GST/HST Delinquent Filing and Remitting Evaluation Study. The purpose of this evaluation was to assess program effectiveness, to examine the profile and attitudes of the non–compliant populations, and explore opportunities for improvement. The Taxpayer Services and Debt Management Branch (TSDMB) is responsible for these programs. Other branches within the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) play a significant role in supporting TSDMB in achieving its objectives. This includes activities such as registration, payment and return processing and communications. For this evaluation, we profiled the GST/HST registrant base and looked at macro level delinquency rates, trends over five years, and compliance patterns of 3.2 million active GST registrants. Through CRA interviews, public focus groups and literature reviews, we gathered information from all regions and from other jurisdictions with similar tax collection systems. TSDMB is currently implementing a multi–year strategic plan to address non–compliance. We note that TSDMB's business transformation strategy represents a departure from the way the branch currently conducts business, in particular the move to a more holistic client view. We observed a high level of commitment by TSDMB and regional operations to program delivery, client service and the TSDMB business transformation strategy. We believe that these planned future strategic directions combined with commitment to client service should provide a stronger foundation for managing compliance at the CRA. On March 31, 2007 there were 3.2 million GST registrants. Of this total population, 776,432 [Footnote 1] accounts remained unresolved with one or more returns or remittances outstanding. Our client profiles show that most non–compliance occurs in the $30,000 to $100,000 gross annual sales range and that the province of registration and the industry sector does not appear to affect the rate of non–compliance. Our analysis from 2005–2007 indicates that 50% of the 297,889 new registrants in 2005–2006 did not meet their first filing or remitting obligation. Furthermore 60% of the non–compliant population had one or more non–compliance events in the previous four fiscal years. TSDMB resolved a comparable number of GST/HST non–compliant accounts from 2002–2003 to 2006–2007. In 2002–2003, TSDMB resolved 95% (617,920) of the accounts that became non–compliant during that year. In 2006–2007, the resolution rate decreased to 62% (614,867). During this same period, TSDMB increased actual dollar recovery by 20% with a 10% reduction in resources. However, trend analysis of program data from 2002–2007 indicates that there has been a 52% growth in non–compliant inventory levels. As a result, TSDMB's capacity to address non–compliance has become more difficult due to the increase in the non–compliant inventory. GST registrants consulted as part of the independent public opinion research indicated that they did not have any great difficulties learning about their GST/HST filing and remitting requirements, and associated with this, few reported instances of non–compliance that can be attributed to lack of information. The most common reason for failure to comply with their GST/HST filing and remitting obligations was cash flow. This is consistent with the observations of most CRA managers and staff interviewed who felt that the majority of repeat non–compliant behavior is a conscious decision on the part of the GST registrant. When cash flow is low, registrants may give priority to other suppliers and themselves, and postpone or avoid filing and making payments to the CRA. Opportunities exist for the CRA to improve program effectiveness and change the behavior of new GST/HST registrants and those who repeatedly fail to file or remit. We recommend the following actions be explored: 
develop an early intervention strategy to positively influence new registrants' behavior towards compliance;
review the program delivery model and business rules to identify and reduce duplication of effort and improve program efficiency;
strengthen the business registration process to capture all relevant information to support CRA compliance and enforcement actions;
reinstate account maintenance activities to TSDMB personnel;
increase the level of GST/HST prosecutions for "Failure to File";
implement a risk management framework; 
continue to develop horizontal working relationships as a catalyst for change; and
build on best practices such as those in the Atlantic and Pacific regions.



  Introduction
In May 2007, the CRA Management Committee approved the framework for the GST/HST Delinquent Filing and Remitting Evaluation. The framework identified the following three issues for the evaluation. 
How effectively is the CRA addressing GST/HST filing and remitting non–compliance?
To what extent are GST/HST non–compliant profiles and constraints influencing GST/HST filing and remitting non–compliance?
Are there alternatives or modifications that will improve the CRA's effectiveness and efficiency in addressing GST/HST filing and remitting non–compliance?
 This evaluation report summarizes the findings related to these issues.


  Background
The Excise Tax Act (ETA) requires any person carrying on a commercial activity in Canada to register for GST/HST purposes where his or her annual taxable supplies are more than $30,000 or if the person is a public service body, more than $50,000. A person who makes $30,000 or less or $50,000 or less for a public service body is considered to be a "small supplier" under the ETA and is not required to register but may do so voluntarily. GST/HST registrants are required to charge their customers tax on the taxable goods and services supplied to them and collect the tax in trust for the Government of Canada. GST/HST registrants can also claim an input tax credit to recover the GST/HST paid or owed for goods or services acquired, imported, or brought into a participating province for use, consumption, or supply in the course of their commercial activities. The Taxpayer Services and Debt Management Branch (TSDMB) is responsible to ensure GST/HST registrants meet their filing and remitting obligations for all revenue lines, including GST/HST. The Debt Management Compliance Directorate is responsible to ensure GST/HST registrants self–assess their tax liability and file tax returns and the Accounts Receivable Directorate ensures any outstanding debt is collected. When GST/HST registrants fail to comply with their filing and remitting obligations, the CRA intervenes with compliance activities. Automated enforcement actions and human intervention in regional field offices are used to obtain outstanding returns and tax debts. A more detailed description of the programs and their activities can be found in Annex A, which includes a combined logic model for these two programs. A logic model illustrates the interrelationships and linkages of the major activities of the program, the sub–activities, program outputs, and program outcomes. In recent years, TSDMB has faced challenges with respect to the growth in workloads and trends in non–compliance as well as technical limitations that have impaired its ability to develop integrated reporting and analytical capabilities. At the same time TSDMB was required to manage its programs within budgetary constraints while pursuing improvements to business processes to achieve greater operating efficiency and to strengthen GST/HST compliance. In response to these challenges, TSDMB is undertaking a multi–year business transformation strategy that supports the CRA's two strategic themes of Excellence in Program Delivery and A Workplace Committed to Excellence. To accomplish operational excellence and to ensure the integrity and fairness of the Canadian system of tax and benefit administration, TSDMB's focus is on: 
strengthening service; 
enhancing our efforts to address non–compliance;
reinforcing trust; and
maintaining effective relationships.
 In respect to a workplace committed to excellence, TSDMB's focus is on the CRA's goals to: 
develop and implement human resource strategies; 
have the right people, in the right place, at the right time with the appropriate skills, knowledge and motivation to do the job; 
attract, recruit, and retain resources strategically; and
utilize competency–based HR management principles.
 As part of this strategic plan, TSDMB has introduced numerous initiatives and program changes over the last five years, one of which was a modified delivery model with the establishment of the GST/HST National Compliance Inventory Centres and Collections Pools in April 2004. The goal of this modified delivery approach was to manage workloads in a cost effective manner by evolving the programs from geographically–based programs into a more holistic program that will consider all aspects of the compliance and collections actions when managing an account. It was also meant to complement compliance activities undertaken by Tax Services Offices and the National Collections Call Centre, and to ensure timely actions are taken against non–compliant taxpayers. The main responsibilities of the three tiers of the delivery model are: 
The National Collections Call Centre conducts mainly outbound calls to collect tax debts below specified dollar limits and to obtain outstanding GST/HST returns;
The National Compliance Inventory Centres and National Collection Pools conduct mainly outbound calls to collect tax debts below specified dollar limits and to obtain outstanding GST/HST returns that were not resolved by the National Collections Call Centre within specified timelines. The National Collection Pools conduct enforcement actions such as garnishees, and the National Compliance Inventory Centres conduct enforcement actions such as preparing notice of assessments; and
The Tax Services Offices perform reviews of books and records and conduct a full range of legal actions, such as seizing assets and placing liens on the property of tax debtors.
 Another major initiative included implementing a redesigned GST/HST Production System in April 2007. This system identifies non–compliant accounts and allocates workloads, based on risk scoring of dollar amounts and business rules, to regional field offices for compliance activities. GST/HST Redesign is part of the Business Suite initiatives to move towards common platforms for business tax revenue systems. With respect to the collection of accounts receivable including GST/HST debts, in 2006 the Office of the Auditor General (OAG) and the Standing Committee on Public Accounts (PAC) expressed concerns with the increasing tax debt and ageing accounts; lack of a risk management framework, including an effective risk scoring system and debtor profiles. The CRA responded to the OAG concerns with information on planned actions, and those completed. The PAC recommendations were responded to through an action plan tabled by the CRA in September 2006.


  Evaluation Methodology
For this evaluation study, we used the following methodologies: 
analyzed the non–compliant accounts from the CRA GST Production System [Footnote 2] and profiled the GST/HST non–compliant population from the GST registrant base; 
established macro–level statistics on delinquency rates, trends, and compliance patterns based on 3.2 million GST/HST registrants; 
conducted interviews and focus groups with 325 CRA managers and staff in headquarters and in the Atlantic, Ontario, Prairie and Pacific Regions; 
commissioned an independent consulting firm, to conduct public opinion research with 80 non–compliant registrants [Footnote 3] in 2006, to determine GST/HST registrants' opinions on the constraints and obstacles faced in meeting their tax obligations; and 
reviewed the results of related studies and literature from other jurisdictions and countries. 



  Limitations and Constraints
The Excise Tax Act does not define degrees of non–compliance. There is no distinction between one day, one month or one year in terms of non–compliance with the Act. Our client profile was based on the Act's definition of non–compliance, i.e. a GST/HST registrant who has failed to file a return or make a remittance by the due date. A repeat non–complier is a registrant having more than one event of delinquency as described in the previous sentence. We were interested in examining the degree of non–compliance; however in the absence of a formal definition it would be arbitrary on our part to define these degrees. Thus our analysis was focused on repeat non–compliers and new registrants drawn from the GST/HST registrant population. Our capacity to analyze the non–compliant accounts and to evaluate the most effective method to resolve an account was limited. This was largely because there was no central system to exchange, capture and track registrant information from the various systems used by the three tiers of the program delivery model. Therefore our analysis of the effectiveness of program delivery was based on available information from the GST Production System and focused on overall changes and trends over a five–year period.


  Findings from the Evaluation
Our main evaluation findings are discussed in the following sections:  
Client Profile;
Causes of Non–compliance;
Impact of Non–compliance;
Effectiveness of Program Delivery;
Opportunities for Improvement; and
Going Forward.



  1.0 Client Profile
GST/HST registrants act as trustees for the Canadian government and are required by law to ensure these monies are remitted to the government for the benefit of all Canadians. GST/HST registrants must submit returns and remittances to the CRA on a monthly, quarterly or annual basis depending on their sales volumes. GST/HST charged to customers and input tax credits claimed on purchases are both recorded on the return. GST/HST non–compliance occurs when a registrant fails to file a return or to pay an amount owing when it becomes due. On March 31, 2007 there were 3.2 million GST registrants. Of this total population, 776,432 [Footnote 4] accounts remained unresolved with one or more returns or remittances outstanding. To better understand the types of non–compliant behavior that may be contributing to non–compliance, we explored the prevalence of two types of non–compliance: repeat non–compliance and new registrants. We also looked at potential predictors of non–compliance which included gross annual sales; province of registration and corresponding level of non–compliance; and the industry sectors most prone to non–compliance.


  1.1 Evidence of repeat non–compliance
Analysis of a representative and statistically valid sample [Footnote 5] of 478 non–compliant accounts, revealed that in 2006–2007, 60% had non–compliant events in the previous four years with an average of two periods of non–compliance per fiscal year. In comparing each of the four previous years to the 2006–2007 non–compliant population, we found that 36% of the 2006–2007 non–compliant population also had non–compliance in 2005–2006, 32% in 2004–2005, 30% in 2003–2004 and 26% in 2002–2003. Repeated non–compliant events over multiple successive years indicate a pattern of non–compliance which can impact the effectiveness of program delivery.


Figure 1





Fiscal Year
Percentage of non–compliant accounts in 2006–2007 found to be non–compliant in a previous fiscal year


2005–2006
36%


2004–2005
32%


2003–2004
30%


2002–2003
26%





Source: GSTProd


  1.2 Half of new registrants failed to file or remit on time
The CRA recognizes that some non–compliance may relate to last minute filing and remitting and record keeping. To offset this, intervention by the CRA occurs at a minimum 30 days after the filing and remitting due date. Our analysis revealed that in 2005–2006 there were 297,889 new GST/HST registrants. Of this population, 50% or 147,546 registrants did not meet their first filing and/or remitting obligation [Footnote 6] . Further analysis revealed that from 2002–2003 to 2006–2007, there has been a 10% growth in the proportion of new registrants who failed to meet their first filing and remitting obligation. This suggests that the CRA needs to have an early intervention strategy to address concerns with new registrants.  This new strategy could include exploring a new practice of the Australian Taxation Office [Footnote 7] (ATO). In February 2007, the ATO advised that they piloted an innovative approach of text messaging their taxpayers advising them of their filing obligations before the due date. According to the ATO, this resulted in an 82% improvement in on–time filing. This trial was further expanded in October 2006 to those who filed their 2005 individual tax return late. This resulted in a 92% improvement in on–time filing. Results such as those obtained by the ATO indicate that early intervention strategies have the potential to significantly increase compliance.  Recommendation   TSDMB should explore the development of an early intervention strategy in an effort to positively influence new registrant behavior towards GST/HST filing and remitting compliance.   Management Response   We concur with this finding and recommendation. TSDMB is exploring new ways to prevent or detect taxpayers' non–compliance with their filing and remitting obligations prior to their entry into any resource intensive workflows relating to the Debt Management programs.   We agree that targeted strategies are necessary to address non–compliance and are developing a proposal for proactive communication with taxpayers.  


  1.3 Evidence indicates that the majority of GST/HST non–compliance occurs in the $30,000 to $100,000 gross annual sales range
The CRA assigns an initial filing and remitting frequency to a GST/HST registrant based on the estimated level of gross annual sales. Adjustments to the filing and remitting frequency can be made as a result of a change in the actual reported level of gross annual sales or a request by the registrant. In reviewing data, most GST/HST non–compliance for filing and remitting occurs in the $30,000 to $100,000 gross annual sales range. Further analysis showed that information on the estimated gross annual sales was not available for 59% of non–compliant registrants. This affects the CRA's ability to estimate and assess the amount of GST/HST as a necessary first step to achieving compliance. The need for this information at registration is addressed in more detail in "Opportunities for Improvement". 


  1.4 Province of registration does not affect the level of non–compliance
In comparing the registrant population by province to the level of non–compliance we found that the province of registration has no impact on delinquency, as the breakdown of the non–compliant population is consistent across the provinces. 


  1.5 Industry sector does not appear to affect the rate of non–compliance
Analysis of data and interviews with CRA managers and staff revealed that non–compliance was most prevalent in the Construction (15%), Professional, Scientific and Technical Services (13%) and Retail Trade (8%) sectors. These figures are consistent with the distribution of GST registrants by major industry group. Therefore the industry sector does not appear to affect the rate of non–compliance for GST/HST filing and remitting. However, it should be noted that the industry code was not available for 20% of the 2005–2006 registrant base. The need for this information at registration is addressed in more detail in "Opportunities for Improvement". 


  2.0 Causes of Non–compliance
Our analysis revealed that there is no common denominator for GST/HST accounts that become non–compliant after registration. Once registered, similarity between registrants who become non–compliant is difficult to identify since the accounts take on their own unique characteristics depending on the actions taken by the CRA and the registrants' behavior towards non–compliance. CRA staff observed through their interactions with registrants that some non–compliance may be attributable to a lack of understanding, record keeping and attitudes towards collecting and remitting GST/HST on behalf of the federal government. It was also their belief that much of the repeat non–compliance was a conscious decision on the part of the registrant. GST registrants consulted as part of the independent public opinion research indicated that they did not have any great difficulties learning about their GST/HST filing and remitting requirements, and associated with this, few reported instances of non–compliance that can be attributed to lack of information. Analysis of the GST/HST non–compliant accounts revealed that 57% were related to registrants not meeting their filing obligations. There are indicators that the majority of these accounts would eventually result in an outstanding debt. This is supported by the public opinion research that was commissioned as part of this evaluation. Non–compliant registrants indicated that the most common reason for not filing was cash flow. If registrants chose not to make a remittance they most likely would be non–compliant for filing the GST/HST return. In situations where registrants fail to file a return, the CRA must issue a demand to file or raise a notice of assessment before starting further enforcement actions such as garnishment or seizures and sales. This allows for the establishment of an estimated GST/HST net amount payable and results in a remitting non–compliance. Many managers and staff observed that when cash flow becomes a problem registrants may delay remittances and returns by not taking these funds from operating revenue. While this may meet their short term objective of remaining current with other obligations, any delay in meeting their tax obligation can result in unmanageable tax consequences. The ATO experience [Footnote 8] with cash flow is similar to the opinion of CRA managers and staff interviewed and is consistent with the public opinion research that was undertaken with GST/HST registrants. Managers and staff also believe that most repeat non–compliant registrants are aware of the environment in which the CRA operates. By this they mean registrants delay taking appropriate action to resolve their non–compliance until the CRA arrives at their door or initiates strong enforcement actions such as garnishment or seizure and sale. It was observed that registrants having a history of repeat non–compliance have learned to manipulate the CRA's efforts to recover tax returns and arrears payments. Staff stated that arrangements for payment often extend into subsequent filing periods which challenge the registrant to pay both current and future filing and remitting obligations. In their opinion, arrangement parameters should reflect the nature of the tax debt as "Trust Funds" and should only be accepted after assessing the ability of registrants to pay their debt. This would have a positive effect on inventory levels and convey the importance of meeting filing and remitting deadlines. In addition, external factors such as the state of the economy, can impact the ability of registrants to meet their financial obligations, including payment of tax. During downward shifts in the Canadian economy, there could be a corresponding impact on the CRA's efforts to improve compliance as GST/HST registrants focus their attention on their other credit obligations. There is no single factor that explains why non–compliance occurs. That being said, opportunities for the CRA to improve its program administration exist. This is corroborated by the majority of managers and staff interviewed who stated that the CRA needs stronger enforcement and new strategies to deal with non–compliance. This topic is addressed in more detail in the section on "Effectiveness of Program Delivery and Opportunities for Improvement".


  3.0 The Impact of Non–compliance
The primary goal of a revenue authority is to collect taxes and duties payable in accordance with the law and to do this in such a manner that will sustain confidence in the tax system and its administration.


  3.1 Non–compliance affects the integrity of the tax system
On an individual basis, the tax risk from non–compliant registrants may be insignificant, but collectively, the amounts are significant [Footnote 9]. However, there is a related concern beyond the value of overdue accounts receivable in that non–compliant registrants enjoy a distinct competitive advantage over compliant registrants. This statement is consistent with the opinion [Footnote 10] of the ATO authorities who recognized the importance of strong debt recovery mechanisms. For the CRA, industry associations consulted as part of a previous CRA evaluation [Footnote 11] have made the point that unless CRA corrects non–compliance and levels the playing field, compliant businesses may become non–compliant to ensure they can remain competitive.  Notwithstanding the above adverse impacts of GST/HST filing and remitting non–compliance, there is an unfair tax burden for Canadians having to pay GST/HST on their purchases of goods and services, if the money collected is not remitted to the government in accordance with the Excise Tax Act.


  4.0 Effectiveness of Program Delivery
During this study, we reviewed a number of corporate documents produced by the CRA and TSDMB, which reflect the transformation strategy currently underway to improve compliance. We note that TSDMB's strategic plan is a departure from the way the branch currently conducts business, in particular the move to using a more holistic client view. We also noted that the new Integrated Revenue Collections (IRC) technological platform will enable TSDMB to begin making strategic use of information and to improve the way the branch identifies, manages and distributes workloads, and measures results. We observed a high level of commitment to program delivery and client service among managers and staff in TSDMB and in regional field offices visited. TSDMB and regional personnel interviewed had a consistent understanding of legislation, policies, procedures, and business rules and are aware and support the TSDMB strategic plan. The human resource element will continue to be a critical factor in achieving TSDMB's strategic goals. We agree that these planned future strategic directions should provide a stronger foundation for managing compliance at the CRA. A description of the current delivery model is outlined in Annex A.


  4.1 Majority of non–compliant inventory is less than 5 years old
To reduce the overall portfolio of non–compliant accounts, CRA uses various intervention strategies in an attempt to gain compliance. Despite these efforts, it is recognized that there will continue to be instances where registrants do not meet their filing and/or remitting obligations. Accounts that become non–compliant during the year are routed to various levels of the delivery model and form part of the "inventory" or "intake" for that period. By looking at the non–compliant inventory as of March 31, 2007, we found that 89% of accounts became non–compliant within the last five years. The remaining 11% extend beyond the five years and remained unresolved as of March 31, 2007. Figure 2 depicts the composition of the total unresolved accounts since 1991–1992.


Figure 2







Source: GSTProd 


  4.2 Growth in non–compliance affects resolution rate
TSDMB's capacity to resolve accounts has been relatively consistent from 2002–2003 to 2006–2007, however, the number of repeat non–compliers and new registrants who became non–compliant has increased during the same period. This has contributed to the growth of non–complaint accounts remaining unresolved at year end. During 2002–2003, TSDMB resolved 95% (617,920) of its intake [Footnote 12] of 650,433 GST/HST non–compliant accounts. In 2006–2007, TSDMB resolved 62% (614,867) of its intake of 991,721 by March 31, 2007. This represents a 33% decrease from 2002–2003 in the resolution of non–compliant accounts; however, it should be noted that during the same period the total number of non–compliant accounts increased by 52% (Figure 3).


Figure 3







Source: GSTProd  We reviewed TSDMB budget and resource allocation documents for the trust accounts (filing) and accounts receivable (remitting) activities. For all revenue lines, in 2002–2003 approximately 4,064 full time equivalents (FTE) were used compared to 3,619 FTEs in 2006–2007. This represents a 10% decrease in resources. The specific FTEs allocated to the GST/HST revenue line cannot be distinguished as the majority of offices work inventories containing multiple revenue lines. Despite the 10% reduction in FTEs, TSDMB has seen an increase in overall GST dollar recovery of 20%, from 2.25 billion to 2.7 billion. TSDMB has stated that efficiencies may have been gained through technology and work processes.


  4.3 Opportunities exist to optimize resources
Our review found that compliance efforts may be duplicated within the three tiers of the program delivery model. The reasons include re–evaluating the non–compliant account to determine the correct degree of enforcement, timelines or resolution of the account not being met at a previous level of the delivery model, and re–routing of accounts to another area. As part of our analysis, we reviewed a non–representative sample of 305 accounts provided by the National Collections Call Centre that had been arranged for payments, returns, or both. Of these 305 accounts, 45% of registrants maintained their arrangements. The remaining 55% were not resolved as originally reported by the National Collections Call Centre with half being repeat non–compliers with multiple successive non–compliance events. These specific accounts were then sent to the National Compliance Inventory Centres to obtain the return or the National Collection Pools to collect the debt outstanding. Many managers and staff observed through their review of non–compliant accounts that the behaviors of repeat non–compliers are not positively influenced by the National Collection Call Centre since staff cannot initiate any type of enforcement to address non–compliance such as raising a notice of notional assessment, garnishments, seizure and sale, and prosecutions. Our review of the non–representative sample of accounts revealed that business rules allow the National Collections Call Center to accept arrangements for remittances or returns which extend beyond timeframes permitted at other levels of the delivery model. This was consistent with the observations of managers and staff who stated that the business rules for the National Collections Call Centre need to be revised to better reflect the nature of the call centre environment and to evoke real change in repeat non–compliant registrant behavior. Furthermore, managers and staff stated that efficiencies could be gained if the non–geographic National Compliance Inventory Centres and National Collections Pools were merged. The current process which has one officer calling for returns followed by another officer initiating contact to obtain payment could be more efficient. Many considered that the National Compliance Inventory Centres (returns) and National Collection Pools (remittances) activities ought to be combined to facilitate contact by a single officer having the authority to address both filing and remitting non–compliance in a single contact with a GST/HST registrant. This would support TSDMB's strategic plan to transform its operations toward a holistic integrated service and debt management approach for its programs by integrating workloads where it makes business sense to do so. Considering the growth in the number of non–compliant accounts for repeat non–compliance and the high percentage of non–compliance for new registrants, along with the decrease in resolution rate, TSDMB needs to revisit the current delivery model to minimize duplication and adjust business rules in an effort to positively influence taxpayer behavior towards GST/HST filing and remitting compliance.  Recommendation   TSDMB should review the current delivery model and business rules to identify and reduce duplication and positively influence taxpayer behavior towards GST/HST filing and remitting compliance.   Management Response   We concur with this finding and recommendation. We have identified enhancements to the compliance delivery model and will be implementing the Trust Compliance National Inventory (TCNI) in 2009. This model will allow for a new work distribution process based on national risk scoring of all TSOR compliance cases.   We have also identified this issue in the Debt Management Program Delivery Model Action Plan as follows:   4.4.4   Items requiring further study  Integrate compliance workloads and consider further integration with Collections workloads, thereby working cases more holistically.  This action plan was prepared in the fall 2008 and details activities that will be undertaken to study new ways of managing the workload development, workload management, and workload distribution of each program in the Debt Management portfolio. As a result, TSDMB is committed to complete further review and effect changes that will lead to identifying and reducing areas of duplication. 


  5.0 Opportunities for Improvement
The delivery model, even with the recommended changes, is based on reacting to non–compliance by individual GST/HST registrants after non–compliance has occurred. CRA needs to develop a process that prevents and deters non–compliance rather than react to repeat non–compliant behavior. The current procedures for addressing non–compliant registrants do not reflect the differences between those that have one non–compliant event and those with repeat events. In our focus groups, managers and staff supported stronger administration and enforcement, particularly where registrants have a previous history of being non–compliant. This will send a strong message that the CRA is committed to collect taxes and duties in accordance with the law and in such manner that will sustain confidence in the tax system and its administration by all Canadians.


  5.1 Evidence suggests that the business registration process may not adequately support CRA compliance and enforcement efforts
Although registration was not the focus of our evaluation, it was consistently raised as a major impediment to the GST/HST Delinquent Filing and Remitting program. GST/HST registrants act as trustees for the Canadian government and are required by law to collect and remit funds to the government for the benefit of all Canadians. The current registration process was designed to maximize the number of voluntary registrations and minimize the burden on taxpayers who fully comply. We recognize the benefits of having a process which facilitates timely registration, however this presents challenges when GST/HST non–compliance occurs. The majority of CRA managers and staff in TSDMB and Tax Services Offices stated that the lack of comprehensive information at registration causes difficulties in carrying out compliance and enforcement activities. For example, effort is often required to identify, locate, and update the status of proprietors, directors, partners, and shareholders. The process is further impeded by the lack of estimated sales which is critical to initiate enforcement measures such as garnishment, seizure and sale, and prosecutions. CRA managers and staff for registration, payment and return processing also supported the need for a stronger registration process. However, the function responsible for the BN system, within the Assessment and Benefit Services Branch (ABSB), stated most of the information that they would like to see gathered would be out of date between the time lapse of registration, the start of economic activity, and the lapse between these two dates and when non–compliance occurs. It was their opinion that the most up–to–date financial information could be drawn from other sources such as previous GST/HST filings, personal and corporate tax filings, payroll remittances or even internet searches. Although these other avenues exist to gather information, CRA managers and staff responsible for the GST/HST Delinquent Filing and Remitting Program stated that research of other CRA records often does not provide the required information. Based on their experience they believe that once non–compliance has occurred, the registrants are often non–compliant with other revenue lines. Our literature research of best practices in the financial services organizations indicates that individuals or businesses applying for a business loan are familiar with the process of providing significant information to lenders to obtain credit to start and meet their business objective. Our research also revealed that the registration processes for other federal and provincial government departments such as Passport Canada, Employment Insurance, Transport Canada Vessel Regulations and provincial drivers' licenses require comprehensive information prior to issuance. This is considered the norm versus the exception in a registration process. Providing comprehensive information at registration provides the applicant with certain responsibilities, rights and privileges. For GST/HST registrants, they have the responsibility to collect, remit and file GST returns but they are also entitled to credits for GST paid on their purchases. Research also indicated that the Inland Revenue Service in the United Kingdom collects more than 40 data elements at the time of business registration. Our analysis of the GST/HST registrant data revealed 59% of registrant accounts did not contain estimated annual gross sales figures. This is a critical element required to support enforcement and compliance activities. For example, in situations where registrants fail to file a return, the CRA must issue a demand to file or raise a notice of assessment before starting further enforcement actions. This allows for the establishment of an estimated GST/HST net amount payable. The absence of gross annual sales figures (estimated or actual) increases the potential for unnecessary delays to deal with non–compliance. We also noted that 20% of registrants did not include the industry type. This information is critical for profiling registrants and developing risk assessment strategies to deal with non–compliance. We did not undertake any analysis to quantify other missing registration information (e.g. physical address); however, front line officers consistently raised this as an impediment to the timely performance of compliance activities. They also consistently indicated that additional financial information (e.g. bank, account number, incorporation particulars, list of Directors and addresses) would facilitate compliance and enforcement activities. Consultation with the Excise and GST/HST Rulings Directorate confirmed that the CRA can request any information it considers necessary to administer and enforce the Excise Tax Act with the exception of requesting the SIN of the directors or partners of the corporation or firm applying to register for GST/HST. We recognize that it is important to minimize the burden on taxpayers and that a certain degree of non–compliance will exist in any registration process. However any strengthening of the GST/HST registration process has the potential to convey the importance of a registrant's responsibility as a trustee for the Government of Canada. This could also have a positive impact on improving debt recovery and reducing CRA administrative costs. If we consider that registration is a one–time requirement, the CRA needs to ensure that the information gathered is sufficient to support compliance and enforcement activities.  Recommendation   ABSB, in consultation with CRA stakeholders, should explore the costs and benefits of a more comprehensive business registration process to ensure that information gathered supports CRA compliance and enforcement activities.    Management Response    We concur with this finding and recommendation. The Business Returns Directorate will produce an updated strategy for business identification by December 31, 2009. This will be based on existing and new analysis of processes with reference to international benchmarks and will include a cost–benefits analysis of various approaches and consultation with CRA stakeholders. 


  5.2 GST/HST Redesign has had unintended impacts on client service
The GST/HST Redesign initiative was not the main focus of our evaluation, however it was consistently raised as a major concern by managers and staff interviewed from all regions within Canada. In April 2007, administration of GST/HST data moved to a new computerized platform designed to manage all aspects of the non–compliance filing and remitting programs. This redesigned system has built–in efficiencies to improve the management of this workload, ultimately benefiting the CRA and its clients. In large part, the system redesign has been implemented; however, as with any change of this magnitude, some unintended impacts are to be expected.  A review of reports and workload disposal plans from 2007–2008 revealed that the program experienced processing delays for GST/HST returns and payments. While some processing delays were anticipated, additional impacts on client service were experienced as a result of incorrect notices and collection letters being issued to otherwise compliant registrants. Before redesign, front line officers at the National Collections Call Centre, National Compliance Inventory Centres, National Collections Pools, and Tax Services Offices conducted limited account maintenance activities on non–compliant accounts. This included the movement of GST/HST returns and payments to the appropriate filing or remitting periods. This allowed for a timely resolution of administrative errors at first contact with the registrant, reduced the need of forwarding simple requests to other areas within the CRA for completion, allowed front line officers to remove non–priority accounts from their inventories, and improved client service as payments and returns were placed in the appropriate filing or remitting period in a timely manner. However, with the redesigned system, this authority has been removed and all accounting and maintenance transactions have to be processed by the Assessment and Benefit Services Branch (ABSB). ABSB, which processes returns, payments, and adjustments, experienced significant pressures in dealing with the increased workload when the GST Redesign was implemented. Staffing levels increased significantly to address the increased workload during the transitional phase. The early training material provided by all Functional areas to regional staff was not as clear or precise as it could have been. This, combined with the new unfamiliar systems, realigned workloads, misdirected work requests and the large number of system fixes required post–implementation, resulted in backlogs. ABSB has stated that they have addressed the majority of the processing delays and are committed to continuing with a plan of action to improve service delivery.  Although improvements have been realized, many managers and staff from Trust Compliance and Revenue Collections and TSDMB stated that the return of this front–line function, albeit on a limited basis [Footnote 13], would help them manage their workload, resolve more accounts, and, most importantly, give them the tools and the ability to resolve limited account maintenance issues at first contact with the registrant. In an era of constrained resources, the importance of collaborative relationships between CRA business lines cannot be underestimated. We were informed that TSDMB is willing to reinstate this function in collaboration with ABSB. A sharing of resources between TSDMB and ABSB would benefit both groups by optimizing efficiencies and improving overall service delivery.   Recommendation   ABSB, in consultation with TSDMB, should explore the reinstatement of limited account maintenance activities to TSDMB personnel with appropriate training and monitoring.   Management Response    We concur with this finding and recommendation. Major system implementations historically result in workload delays during the transitional period (which was when the evaluation was conducted) and inventory volumes in the Tax Centres are now stabilized.   ABSB agrees to investigate the account maintenance activities referred to in this report, in conjunction with its stakeholders which include TSDMB, so that proper impacting and appropriate action can be undertaken.  


  5.3 Prosecution of those who fail to file
Most managers interviewed do not consider the current level of prosecutions as a "credible enforcement" response to the filing and remitting problem, considering that there are hundreds of thousands of non–compliant filers at any one time, many having two or more overdue returns. The Excise Tax Act provides the CRA with the ability to prosecute registrants who fail to file GST/HST returns as required under the legislation. Anyone who does not file a GST return as required, or who does not comply with a court order to file is guilty of an offence. On summary conviction, a person or corporation is subject to a fine of $1,000 to $25,000 and imprisonment for up to twelve months for each count. In 2002–2003, the CRA completed 19 prosecutions for failure to file GST/HST returns compared to 22 prosecutions in 2006–2007. The T1 and T2 revenue lines average 1,000 prosecutions for failure to file per year. Staff responsible for failure to file activities told us that there is a critical need to improve the results in this area to ensure adequate coverage and reinforce the CRA's commitment to addressing non–compliant behavior. It has been recognized that communication is a powerful tool which influences taxpayer behavior and leverages the impact of our tax administrative efforts. Although no empirical data exists, officers preparing cases for prosecution for failure to file reported that they note a considerable increase in inquiries from non–compliant registrants as a result of a publicized successful prosecution. Registrants call and offer to resolve their accounts to avoid the embarrassment of having their names published by local media. We recognize that costs are associated with the prosecution of those who fail to file; however, successful prosecutions, when publicized, send a clear message to other non–compliant registrants and demonstrate the CRA's commitment to addressing non–compliant behavior. This positive effect is clearly recognized in the Tax Service Offices where they receive an increase in calls from non–compliant registrants immediately after a notice is published.  Recommendation   TSDMB should explore an increase in the level of GST/HST prosecutions and publicize the results of prosecutions to demonstrate the CRA's commitment to addressing non–compliant behavior.    Management Response   We concur with this finding and recommendation. TSDMB will undertake a review of the level of prosecutions to ensure a balanced approach with program productivity. We will also work with the Public Affairs Branch (PAB) to explore and find creative ways of publicizing the prosecutions. 


  5.4 Implementation of a risk management framework
TSDMB utilizes several different enforcement measures to correct non compliant behaviour, based on the severity of each particular case. These enforcement measures are currently in practice by officers to varying degrees within each level of the delivery model, based on CRA–established criteria. While there is a cost associated with enforced compliance actions, there is a corresponding benefit realized in both the dollars recovered and in its impact on client behaviour. TSDMB has recognized both the need for these tools and the need to use them in an effective and responsible manner. The Accounts Receivable Directorate (ARD) recognized the need to manage risk and developed a risk management framework specific to the accounts receivable workloads. This framework outlines the processes that will be followed to assess the risk factors that may impact accounts receivable operations. It sets out ARD goals and objectives, defines the roles and responsibilities of the stakeholders, and details the activities they will perform at each stage in the process. Ultimately, the framework is intended to provide ARD with increased capacity to manage risk by enhancing its ability to identify and track fluctuations and trends in inventories, and to identify specific taxpayer segments that require a modified or enhanced series of enforcement measures. Understanding the effectiveness and appropriateness of the range of CRA enforcement tools (i.e. notices, letters, telephone contact and more enforced measures such as garnishment, debt certification and seizure and sale) and the associated cost for debt recovery, is a critical element of a successful debt management program. This, in turn, should allow ARD to better develop workload strategies that are timely, effective, and coordinated. Any gain in the methods used in the application of enhanced enforcement measures will likely contribute to the overall success of the program. This could include benefits such as: 
efficiencies in program management and delivery;
fewer resources to administer GST filing and remitting programs; and
job enrichment for CRA employees.
 The ARD risk management framework is a complementary piece to TSDMB's front end overall risk assessment strategy. While our review revealed that plans are currently in place to implement the ARD risk management framework there is no formal risk management framework in place for the Debt Management Compliance Directorate (DMCD). DMCD uses a structured approach for the management of risks which includes activities such as the review of statistical results, section action plans, program monitoring and quality review. The impact of compliance activities in one area can extend beyond the area where it was initiated and can have a positive or negative impact on compliance. The development of a formal risk management framework for DMCD, in consultation with ARD, should allow TSDMB to begin making greater strides in improving compliance behaviour.  Recommendation   TSDMB should explore the development of a formal risk management framework for the Debt Management Compliance Directorate.    Management Response   We concur with this finding and recommendation. We recognize that a risk management framework is an integral part of effective program management as set out in the TBS Management Accountability Framework (MAF), and will work towards the development of one for the Debt Management Compliance Directorate.  


  5.5 Horizontal working relationships – A catalyst for change
The GST/HST non–compliant filing and remitting problem is not just a TSDMB problem, rather it crosses CRA program branches. TSDMB can achieve only limited success on its own in dealing with the GST/HST non–compliance challenge, particularly in terms of changing taxpayer behavior. Although compliance committees exist in Headquarters and most Tax Services Offices, managers and staff stated that there is a need to increase horizontal working relationships, which includes the sharing of information and resources towards a common goal to address non–compliance. A positive example of working horizontally to manage and influence compliant behavior can be found in the Pacific Region in preparing for the 2010 Olympics. The objective is to be proactive and to influence compliance behavior up–front by preventing non–compliance before it occurs as opposed to reacting after it becomes a problem. To achieve this objective, the Pacific Region established cross–functional compliance committees to promote compliance with GST/HST registration and filing and remitting obligations, in addition to income tax compliance management. Another example is the New Registrant Outreach Program currently underway in the Atlantic Region. Initially approved in June 2007, this pilot focuses attention on new registrants to ensure a solid compliance foundation within the target group. The objective is to improve tax compliance, attitudes, and behaviors. Officers visit new registrants, explain the legislative requirements for filing and remitting, and discuss the need to maintain proper records, along with issues related to having employees. Although these horizontal working relationships have not been assessed, the individuals responsible stated that they have seen the value of horizontal working relationships. Having open communication and sharing information has assisted them in clarifying their individual role and inter–relationships and in the creation of a common goal towards improving overall compliance activities. The CRA should continue to strengthen horizontal working relationships within the CRA to influence GST/HST registrant behavior.


  6.0 Going Forward
It would take time to implement the recommendations contained in this report. Some recommendations could be implemented now, while others would need to be phased in over the next two to three years. In some respects, the implications are profound and entail fundamental shifts in how CRA management conducts business. This includes changes in the delivery model, changes in external communication practices, and ways to influence GST/HST registrant behavior.


  Annex A
GST/HST Non-compliant Filing and Remitting Logical Model Description  The Debt Management Compliance Directorate and the Accounts Receivable Directorate in the Taxpayer Services and Debt Management Branch provide program management and support to field offices that administer and manage the program. This is achieved through formulating and communicating national guidelines, policies and procedures, allocating resources and workload for program delivery, and providing training and functional direction through program monitoring and reporting to identify risks and strategies to address them. These programs promote and encourage voluntary compliance by educating and providing information to GST/HST registrants through electronic web–based information, general enquiries, and written information as well as through community visits, industry seminars and trade fairs. Media and news releases of the consequences of taxpayers not meeting their tax obligations are used as a deterrent to non–compliance. However, the CRA is required to intervene with compliance activities when a GST registrant fails to comply with their filing and remitting obligations. The first phase of intervention is when the CRA GST/HST system identifies non compliant accounts and issues computer–generated notices to the non–compliant taxpayer. If the return and/or remittance are not received within the specified period, the CRA GST/HST system allocates the account, based on risk scoring of dollar amounts and business rules, to field offices at either the National Collections Call Centre; the GST National Compliance Inventory Centres; the GST National Collection Pools; or the appropriate Tax Services Office for a series of graduated enforcement and collection actions. The National Collections Call Centre conducts mainly outbound calls to collect tax debts below specified dollar limits and to obtain outstanding GST/HST returns from non–compliant filers. The GST National Compliance Inventory Centres and the GST National Collection Pools conduct mainly outbound calls to collect tax debts below specified dollar limits and to obtain outstanding GST returns that were not resolved by the National Collections Call Centre within specified timelines. The GST National Collection Pools conduct some enforcement actions such as garnishees while the National Compliance Inventory Centres conduct some enforcement actions such as preparing notional assessments. The Tax Services Offices work on the larger and more complex accounts. Collectors conduct a full range of legal actions, such as seizing assets and placing liens on the property of tax debtors, while trust examiners conduct reviews of books and records. The modified delivery approach, based on a tiered workload distribution process, is intended to ensure that non–compliant accounts are allocated, in order of relative risk and priority, to the next available qualified employee to take timely action against non–compliant taxpayers. The major activities of the GST/HST Delinquent Filing and Remitting programs support the achievement of the objectives to improve efficiencies in program management and delivery and taxpayer compliance with Canada's tax legislation and regulations governing GST/HST. 




 PROGRAM 
 GST/HST Delinquent Filing and Remitting 


 MAJOR ACTIVITIES 
 Program Management and Support 
 Client Education 
 Compliance 


 SUB–ACTIVITIES 


Legislative review, policy and procedure  development
Resource and workload planning
Functional direction and training
Performance monitoring and  reporting
Risk assessment and strategy development
 


General Enquiries
Web-based general information
Mail Out (forms and general information)
Community Visits 
Industry Seminars 
Trade Fairs
Publicity of prosecution cases
 


Verification
Enforcement
Collection
Account review and maintenance
 


 OUTPUTS 


Policy, procedures and manuals
Resources & workload allocation  
Guidance, training courses and tools
Performance and monitoring reports 
Program delivery changes
 


Electronic–based information and paper–based publications 
Resolved client enquiries
Information, advice and guidance provided to taxpayers on their GST /HST filing and remitting requirements
Media / News Releases
 


Legal warning, failure to file and/or pay notice issued
Trust Examinations and Collection Field Visits
Leads and Referrals
Debt established and notional assessments raised 
Penalties, interest, garnishees and seizures applied
Filing and payment arrangements
Returns obtained and debt collected 
Accounts reviewed and updated
 


 IMMEDIATE OUTCOMES 


Consistent  application of policies and procedures 
Knowledgeable and trained personnel
Improved ability to identify risks and implement strategies to address non-compliance
Improved program delivery
 


Increased level of understanding by taxpayers on tax legislation and regulations governing GST/ HST 
Increased exposure of CRA's competence in delivering equitable treatment to taxpayers
 


Maximize tax debt collection
Reduce the level of aged inventory
Increased compliance to filing requirements
 


 INTERMEDIATE OUTCOMES 


Optimize resource utilization 
Improved effectiveness of the GST/HST Delinquent Filing and Remitting to address non-compliance
 


Increased level of voluntary compliance to GST/HST filing and remitting requirements
 Improved integrity and fairness in the tax system 
 


Increased efficiency in the management of outstanding returns and debt owed 
Improved taxpayer behaviour to comply with GST/HST filing and remitting requirements
 


 ULTIMATE OUTCOMES 


Efficiencies in program management and delivery
Compliance with Canada's tax legislation and regulations governing GST/HST
 







Footnotes


[Footnote 1]


  Includes all unresolved Non-compliant accounts from fiscal year 1991-1992 to 2006-2007 that were still active as March 31, 2007. 
 

[Footnote 2]


  Excludes accounts under the responsibility of Revenue Quebec
 

[Footnote 3]


  Non representative sample
 

[Footnote 4]


  Includes all unresolved Non-compliant accounts from fiscal year 1991-1992 to 2006-2007 that were still active as of March 31, 2007. 
 

[Footnote 5]


  95% confidence level and 5% error rate 
 

[Footnote 6]


  The rate was calculated with the new registration base for each specific fiscal year and then tracked for the following two fiscal years to identify the first non compliance event in order to accommodate annual filing which is the most common filing frequency for new registrants. 
 

[Footnote 7]


  Lodgment compliance: improvement, innovation and lock-in, Australian Taxation Office, February 2007
 

[Footnote 8]


  GST Non-compliant Remitters – processes, penalties and program impact, Australian Taxation Office, February 2007
 

[Footnote 9]


  CRA Annual Report to Parliament 2007-2008, p. 50
 

[Footnote 10]


  GST Non-compliant Remitters – processes, penalties and program impact, Australian Taxation Office, February 2007
 

[Footnote 11]


  Contract Payment Reporting System Evaluation, Canada Revenue Agency, 2005
 

[Footnote 12]


  Non-compliant accounts created in the fiscal year with no carry over to the subsequent year
 

[Footnote 13]


  Exclude deregistration and stop file activities
 






Report a problem or mistake on this page












Please select all that apply:

A link, button or video is not working



It has a spelling mistake



Information is missing



Information is outdated or wrong



Login error when trying to access an account




I can't find what I'm looking for



Other issue not in this list



Submit



Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries, contact us.










Date modified:
2009-07-10





Evaluation Study – CRA administration of domestic T3 trusts



Notice to the reader:
Please note that in the spirit of the Access to Information Act, some information within this document cannot be disclosed for reasons related to the operations of Government and the enforcement of the Income Tax Act.



Final Report
Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch
August 2018


Table of contents

Executive summary 
1. Introduction 
2. Background 
3. Evaluation methodologies 
4. Findings

4.1. Trust environment

4.1.1 Trusts have become increasingly complex and involved in substantially higher value transactions 
4.1.2 PROTECTED 


4.2. Trust compliance outcomes

4.2.1 PROTECTED 
4.2.2 Several measures suggest T3 trust reporting compliance is improving 
4.2.3 The vast majority of trusts are payment compliant and where non-compliance exists it can often be traced to factors outside of the CRA’s control 


4.3. Beneficiary reporting compliance

4.3.1 PROTECTED 


4.4. PROTECTED

4.4.1 PROTECTED 
4.4.2 PROTECTED 
4.4.3 PROTECTED 
4.4.4 Certain program areas are recognized as having trust experts and can contribute to the development of expertise among front line officers 
4.4.5 Evidence suggests that centralization of workloads has had mixed results 
4.4.6 The timeliness or clarity of some of the CRA’s trust resources may be leading some experts to seek alternative sources 




5. Conclusion 
6. Recommendations and management response 
7. Acknowledgement 
8. Appendices

Appendix A: Evaluation issues and research questions 
Appendix B: T3 trust stakeholders 
Appendix C: Glossary 





Executive summary
The Income Tax Act treats all trustsFootnote 1 as individuals for tax purposes and has imposed limited requirements in recognition that trusts have historically been used to protect assets of an individual once they are deceased and ensure that beneficiaries receive the benefit. Similarly, CRA administrative policies related to trusts also set limited reporting requirements on all trusts regardless of their use.
Trusts have evolved to increasingly be used in business and investment generating activities. Average annual net business income reported by trusts between 1993-1998 increased 3400% when compared to the 2010-2015 annual averages, but no information is required to be reported by the trust to support the source of that income. In particular, Mutual Fund TrustsFootnote 2 have increased in use over the past two decades, and account for the vast majority of income reported and allocations made by trusts.
Current CRA measures and understanding of trusts have not evolved with the change in the industry. This is because the legislated reporting requirements of trusts have been minimal given their historical use. PROTECTED.
PROTECTED.
The 2018 Federal Budget dedicated funds to modernize the CRA’s trust-related information technology infrastructure and introduced enhanced filing and reporting requirements for trusts. The changes require most trusts to file annually and provide identifier information for all parties, PROTECTED.
Pockets of expertise on the trust business line exist in the CRA; however, program areas that do not have regular exposure to trusts face informational and capacity challenges when dealing with the business line, and no formal mechanisms exist to connect the two groups. Currently, the informal governance structure has separated front-line officials from those with expertise in the business line, and this has impacted external stakeholders’ confidence in the sources provided to them by the CRA to help guide them through their tax obligations. With over 20 programs across the CRA contributing to the administration of the Trust business line, there is an opportunity to leverage existing expertise to further strengthen CRA capacity through improved coordination.
Summary of recommendations
The recommendations aim to first, improve the CRA’s ability to verify trust and beneficiary related reporting and second, to strengthen CRA capacity and coordination across areas administering the trust business line.
Recommendation 1
The CRA should develop and implement an integrated and horizontal strategy to address gaps in its administration of trusts that would consider the following elements:

Policies that provide for the information gathered on Trusts and their main parties (i.e. settlor, trustee, beneficiaries).
The information technology system requirements and human resource capacity to support all administrative and compliance functions.
The interventions that target various trust types and the related amounts reported by their main parties.

Recommendation 2
The CRA should adopt performance measures which would be jointly held across functions and reflect the related amounts flowed through the various parties of the trust.
Recommendation 3
The CRA should develop and implement a coordinated, cross-program plan to recognize, resource, and further develop the trust knowledge-base and expertise within the areas that administer the business line.
Management response
The CRA agrees with the recommendations in this report and will develop a detailed action plan through the establishment of a holistic tax compliance strategy. The Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch will review the strategy and action plan to determine the extent they appear reasonable to address the recommendations.


1. Introduction
This evaluation was first included in the Board of Management approved Risk-Based Audit and Evaluation Plan 2015-2018. The Evaluation Framework was approved by the Management Audit and Evaluation Committee on February 9, 2016. Execution of the evaluation study began in November 2016. This report summarizes the findings related to the evaluation issues and research questions identified in the Evaluation Framework (Appendix A).
The purpose of this engagement is to provide the Commissioner, Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) management, and the Board of Management with information on the outcomes achieved and the effectiveness of CRA’s administration of the T3 trust business line.


2. Background
The CRA is responsible for administering hundreds of billions of dollars in taxes annually. The tax revenue it collects is used by federal, provincial, and territorial governments to fund the programs and services that contribute to the quality of life of Canadians. The CRA seeks to protect the integrity of Canada's voluntary compliance system by identifying non-compliance and pursuing individuals, corporations or trusts that do not comply despite a legal obligation to do so.
The Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch, Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs Branch, Domestic Compliance Programs Branch, and International, Large Business and Investigations Branch are key areas involved in administering the trust business line for the CRA (Appendix B).
A trustFootnote 3 is a legal relationship between three main parties, a “settlor” who transfers assets to a “trustee”, who then manages the assets on behalf of the “beneficiary”. The trust allows the settlor to separate themselves legally and beneficially from the ownership and management of the assets.Footnote 4
For most trusts, the settlor sets the conditions of how, when, and to whom the assets are, or may be, allocated within a trust agreement. Control over the trust assets is assigned by the settlor to the person(s) known as the trustee(s). The trustee is able to make financial transactions and must manage the trust assets according to the terms and conditions set out in the trust agreement. The beneficiary (individual, corporation, or other trusts) is the intended recipient of the benefits of the assets held within the trust. The terms of these trust agreements govern most transactional matters between the parties.
A trust is either a testamentary trust or an inter vivos trustFootnote 5:

Testamentary trusts are generally created on and as a consequence of the death of an individual. The terms of the trust are established by the will or by court order in relation to the deceased’s estate under provincial or territorial law.
 Inter vivos trusts are typically established by a settlor while they are still living and do not end upon their death. There are many types of trusts that fall under this category.

Inter vivos trusts can be further classified as Unit Trusts, of which Mutual Fund Trusts account for the majority of reported amounts. Mutual Fund Trusts are unique in that, as commercial trusts, parties become beneficiaries by purchasing their interest in the trust, rather than being selected by the settlor or trustees. Unit Trusts constitute a significant portion of the growth in amountsFootnote 6 reported by trusts.
The Income Tax Act treats trusts as individuals for tax purposes and, as of 2016, almost all trusts have been taxed at the highest marginal Federal tax rate for amounts held within the trust. Trusts can reduce the amounts they are taxed on through expenses, deductions and allocations to beneficiaries (Figure 1).
Figure 1: Taxation of trusts








Figure 1 - Image description

The objective of this figure is to illustrate the taxation of income reported by the trust. The figure illustrates the difference between total income reported by the trust and actual taxes owed by the trusts.
The actual taxes owed by trusts is the result of the taxable trust income minus any applicable credits. Taxable trust income is calculated by the trust’s reported total income less its expenses, deductions, and allocations made to beneficiaries. The allocations are taxed at the hands of the beneficiaries of the trust.




The trust business line is administered by over 20 programs within the CRA and has multiple external stakeholders including financial institutions and the Society of Trust and Estate Practitioners.
3. Evaluation methodologies
This evaluation study covers the period from 1993 to 2017. The evaluation used the following methodologies:

Point in-time and trend analysis of trust production data ranging from the years 1993 to 2015. CRA systems include the Automated Trust System, Audit Information Management System, and Information Declaration System.
Document and file reviews related to T3 trust activities including legislation, frameworks, guides, policies, procedures, roles and responsibilities, audit reports and quality assurance reports.
Benchmarking with the United States of America’s Internal Revenue Service.
Internal auditor survey with 305 respondents conducted during the summer 2017 and interviews with CRA staff responsible for or impacted by T3 trust returns from 8 programs and 5 regions. Approximately 110 officials represented the Assessment, Benefit, and Service, Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs, Domestic Compliance Programs, International, Large Business and Investigations, Strategy and Integration, Legal Services, Collections and Verifications, and Appeals Branches.
External survey with 80 respondents conducted during the fall 2017 and interviews with members and representatives of the Society of Trust and Estate Practitioners.



4. Findings
4.1. Trust environment
4.1.1 Trusts have become increasingly complex and involved in substantially higher value transactions
The trust industry has evolved substantially over the last two decades from a primarily asset protection mechanism to an income generating one. Several indicators document this trend.
Increase in the use of trusts as a flow-through entity
The rise in inter vivos trusts is evidence of trusts being established to take advantage of the flow-through nature of the tool. Historically, trusts were established under common law as a means of ensuring that beneficiaries receive benefit from certain property, primarily through the use of testamentary trusts which protect assets of an individual once they are deceased. By contrast, inter vivos trusts act as a flow-through entity that allows for income generated by property to be split and allocated to multiple beneficiaries to the trust. For instance, between 1993 and 2015:

Inter vivos trusts represented 27% of trusts filers at the beginning of this period compared to 57% at the end; and,
the average allocations to beneficiaries increased by almost 270%.

Increase in income relative to taxes payable
Trusts have increasingly been involved in income generating businesses and investment activities. For example, when comparing the annual average reported amounts between the five-year periods of 1993-1998 and 2010-2015:

the average net business income in a trust increased by nearly 3400% ($72 million to $2.5 billion); and,
average proceeds of dispositions reported by trusts also increased by nearly 475% ($162.4 billion to $930.4 billion).

Together, these indicate substantial increases in investment and explain why reported capital gains increased by 164% ($11.1 billion to $29.3 billion) during the period. Because of the flow-through nature of trusts and the fact that most trusts are taxed at the highest marginal tax rate, it is expected that the increased income and capital gains realized by trusts should be reflected in the tax returns of their beneficiaries rather than being subject to tax in the trusts.
Increase in trust involvement with business and investment activities
Trusts apply deductions and credits to further reduce their taxes payable. Data analysis found that between 2010 and 2015:

average annual total income reported reached approximately $105.9 billion;
taxes payable amounts averaged $3.9 billion annually; and,
when removing credits and deductions, that amount reduced to an average of $0.93 billion annually.

While the majority of amounts related to trusts need to be tracked in other business lines, the CRA has focused on tracking payment compliance of the amounts specifically owed by trusts.
Mutual Fund TrustsFootnote 7 are investment tools defined as trusts and account for the majority of the changes illustrated in the three points above. Mutual Fund Trusts account for only 1% to 2% of all trust filers, yet report:

69% of total income from all trusts
76% of total capital gains
63% of total allocations from trusts

In 2015, Mutual Fund Trusts also accounted for 82% of all T3 slips, a 51% increase from 2010. A significant portion of the credits and deductions that decrease the taxes payable comes as a result of the capital gains refund mechanism available to Mutual Fund Trusts (approximately $4 billion in federal taxes were deducted using this mechanism in 2015 alone).
4.1.2 PROTECTED
PROTECTED


4.2. Trust compliance outcomes
This section summarizes the known filing, reporting, and payment compliance outcomes achieved by the CRA with respect to the T3 domestic trust population in Canada. Overall, while trust filing compliance cannot be known, reporting compliance appears satisfactory and payment compliance issues tend to be outside of the control of the CRA due to legislative and provincial requirements.
4.2.1 PROTECTED
PROTECTED
4.2.2 Several measures suggest T3 trust reporting compliance is improving
One potential indication of improving reporting compliance is the increasing number of audits that result in no adjustments to the taxes paid by the trust. While approximately 75% of trust audits resulted in a tax change in 2007 to 2008 this figure has trended downward, to 58% in 2015 to 2016.
Other than reliance on audit results, there are alternative ways insight can be gained with respect to trust reporting non-compliance. For example, the total taxable capital gains reported on line 23 of Schedule 1 is supposed to correspond with the amount on line 1 of the T3 Return. Results show that on average, 84% of the amounts claimed on line 1 of the T3 return is supported by total taxable capital gains reported in schedule 1.
Other proxy indicators suggest trust reporting compliance is high. Over the period 2010 to 2015, 95% or more of trusts have reported using:

A schedule 8, carrying charges and interest expenses, to support these expenses which work to decrease the taxable income of the trust. These amounts aligned with allocations reported on the T3 return 99% of the time.
A schedule 9, Income Allocations and Designations to Beneficiaries, to support the total amount of allocations they reported on the T3 trust return. These amounts aligned with allocations reported on the T3 return 100% of the time.
A schedule 11 federal taxes payable in their T3 return. Approximately 99% of trusts reporting federal taxes payable are supported by this schedule.

4.2.3 The vast majority of trusts are payment compliant and where non-compliance exists it can often be traced to factors outside of the CRA’s control
Between 2010 and 2015, taxes payable from trusts were, on average, $3.9 billion. Trust payments after adjustments have increased by nearly 55%, from $830 million in 2010 to $1.3 billion by 2015. Interviews with CRA officials identified two issues that contribute to payment outcomes within the trust business line.
Firstly, according to the Income Tax Act, some trusts can select their fiscal period end. The Income Tax Act places a deadline of 90 days after year end for individuals to submit their reporting requirements—so, for trusts with a December 31st year end, the deadline for submitting all T3 slips is the end of March. Trust professionals have stated that this does not give them enough time to calculate the correct amounts to report on their trust returns where their filing deadline is close to the date, or on behalf of their individual beneficiary clients’ returns by April 30th.
Secondly, provincial governments may change the tax rates on trusts at any time. The CRA has to use existing provincial and federal tax rates at the time of assessing and inform taxpayers that the amounts assessed may change as a result of updated tax rates.
These two issues impact overall payment compliance within the business line. The data suggest that a consistent percentage (4%) of filers overpaid taxes to the CRA representing an average of $502 million over the period 2010 to 2015. Program officials acknowledged this issue was difficult to fix because of the variability of fiscal period ends within the trust filer population. According to the data and interviews with CRA officials, an average of 10% of filers were payment non-compliant between 2010 to 2015, underpaying, on average, $134 million annually over the period.


4.3. Beneficiary reporting compliance
The previous section focused on the compliance behaviour of domestic trusts, this section explores the trends and dynamics associated with beneficiaries in the Canadian trust environment.
CRA audit programs verify reporting compliance of taxpayers which may include beneficiaries of trusts. PROTECTED.
4.3.1 PROTECTED
PROTECTED


4.4. PROTECTED
PROTECTED
4.4.1 PROTECTED
PROTECTED
4.4.2 PROTECTED
PROTECTED
4.4.3 PROTECTED
PROTECTED
4.4.4 Certain program areas are recognized as having trust experts and can contribute to the development of expertise among front line officers
There are three classes of programs involved in the administration of the trust business line:

Mature, dedicated trust teams that have the highest exposure to, and highest expertise in, trust workloads;
Program areas where trusts are a minor part of their overall workload; and,
Transitioning, dedicated trust teams that are developing capacity.

A few key areas are widely viewed across the CRA as experts in the trust business line. Legal Services has dedicated T3 expertise that ensures CRA administrative policy is consistent with the legislative landscape while Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs Branch has two dedicated trust teams responsible for responding to both internal and external rulings requests on trust issues. The T3 Trust Returns Assessing Section manages the trust assessing program and is instrumental in developing CRA administrative policy related to the business line.
For its part, the T3 Trust Returns Assessing Section routinely responds to requests and collaborates with colleagues in other trust programs. The Section officials also stated that the volume of enquiries they receive from various areas in the CRA can be a challenge to address given their mandate and available resourcing. Steps have been taken to encourage other areas to do their own research so that they may develop capacity within their teams. As part of this initiative, the T3 Trust Returns Assessing Section worked with the Learning Development Program to develop an online tool called @T3Help which generated praise among users.
Knowledge transfer such as this supports other CRA program areas for which trusts are a minor part of the workload. Representatives from T1/T3 accounting sections, T1/T3 accounting enquiries sections, Technical Applications Section, Legislative Services Section, Payments Processing, among others, indicated that they do not have sufficient T3 exposure in their workloads to develop the level of expertise required to address the various challenges that can emerge in the trust workload. One consequence identified was that in many cases roles and responsibilities for the trust workloads were not well-defined where the program was combined with other business line workloads.
The T3 Audit Program and the Telephone Services Centre of Expertise for trusts (established in 2014) were introduced as dedicated T3 programs. In both of these cases, part of the rationale for the changes in mandate was to develop the specialized knowledge requirements associated with trusts by centralizing the workloads in order to concentrate exposure to the comparatively small business line, thereby developing expertise.
4.4.5 Evidence suggests that centralization of workloads has had mixed results
Between 2005 and 2008 the small and medium enterprises section within the Domestic Compliance Programs Branch conducted a Trust Pilot Project which aimed to come up with a comprehensive compliance strategy for domestic trusts. The project found that CRA audit efforts focused on testamentary trusts and were insufficiently resourced. The report recommended increase in inter vivos trust audits which were identified as higher risk, as well as centralization of workloads and resources to build expertise in trust compliance.
In response to these findings the CRA established a dedicated trust audit program in 2015 with the mandate to audit T3 trust returns filed by inter vivos trust types, while nationalizing the testamentary trust workload. Evidence suggests that the program was successful in increasing the proportion of audits on inter vivos trusts and that, as a result of this shift in focus, the dedicated program saw an increase of 187% (increase of $27.6 million) in total Tax Earned by Audit compared to results from the Small and Medium Enterprises Section the year before it was established.
One of the objectives of the dedicated program was to increase resources dedicated and used to conducting trust audits; however, the number of CRA-wide trust audit cases actually decreased by 10% during the transition period to the newly dedicated program. Despite the decrease in volume, average Tax Earned by Audit across all audit programs increased by 322% (increase of $53 million) between fiscal years 2014 to 2015 and 2015 to 2016. This increase may be indicative of the benefit which having a dedicated trust program provide insight to larger entity compliance areas such as Aggressive Tax Planning and Related Party Initiative workloads.
However, there have been challenges in developing capacity which can be traced to CRA filing and reporting requirements.
Interviews with officials from the dedicated audit program noted that the T3 Workload Selection System provided at the beginning of the transition was insufficient for their needs. In response, a new query using the information available on the Automated Trust System was developed in mid-2017, but officials agree this has had limited impact on file selection due to current filing and reporting requirements, specifically the lack of financial statement information.
PROTECTED
The dedicated trust audit program has been resourced primarily at a junior level, AU-01. This may not be appropriate given the increasing complexity within trust structures. The AU-01 level experiences regular turnover which hinders progress towards building expertise. The level also prevents dedicated trust auditors from receiving training which is only made available to higher audit levels. For example, AU-01 auditors in the trust program have to deal with corporate reorganization issues, for which training is only available to AU-02 auditors and above.
Additionally, the internal survey revealed that auditors were much more confident in their ability to complete audits on trust types with which they had experience (such as personal trusts); those with which they had less exposure (such as Mutual Fund Trusts and Unit Trusts) were often considered more complex and auditors self-assessed less confidence in their ability to audit them. PROTECTED.
In spite of the limited capacity and historical focus on inter vivos trust compliance, in-house trust-related training has been developed to help build the knowledge base, and initiatives such as the Aggressive Tax Planning Montreal Centre of Expertise are working to develop ways to identify the prevalence of trust-related risk in the Canadian population.
4.4.6 The timeliness or clarity of some of the CRA’s trust resources may be leading some experts to seek alternative sources
The evaluation reviewed a sample of the trust-related supports the CRA makes available, including the T3 Guide, tax folios, interpretation bulletins and information circulars on its web site, as well as its telephone services.
With respect to guides and web pages, trust professionals tend to use CRA resources primarily for processing requirements, such as accessing forms or obtaining a trust number. Beyond these, approximately 80% of trust professionals stated that they accessed non-CRA resources primarily because CRA resources did not provide an adequate level of detail or examples to deal with the complexities of their clients’ needs.
For example, while over 40% of trust professionals identified calculations of paid/payable, capital gains exemptions, and loss carry-back or carry-forward as the most challenging areas to calculate for their clients, none of the topics included examples to help guide users of the information, or specific definitions of the topic. Given the rising amounts being allocated, and increasing proceeds of dispositions being reported, the importance of providing resources to ensure the complete and accurate reporting of amounts becomes increasingly important.
The 2016 T3 Guide included hyperlinks to the following information:

6 Income Tax Folios, which are new tools replacing Interpretation Bulletins;
21 Interpretation Bulletins, which provide the CRA’s interpretation of specific Income Tax Act provisions; and,
8 Information Circulars, which inform of a new administrative policy.

Nearly 60% of Society of Trust and Estate Practitioners members stated that they use the above three information sources. To review the quality of these materials, available information was assessed based on how up-to-date it is and the extent to which it clarifies the Income Tax Act.
The Income Tax Folios, which reflect the CRA’s efforts in improving Interpretation Bulletins and Information Circulars are up-to-date. Almost two-fifths of the Interpretation Bulletins provisions (37%) and Information Circulars provisions (39%) are “archived” which includes a disclaimer warning that users are responsible for ensuring their reporting applies the most recent tax laws. No direction is provided on how or where to obtain updated information.
While this may be a concern for new trustees or other parties who seek up-to-date information on the CRA’s positions on trusts, interviews with Society of Trust and Estate Practitioners members found that some appreciated still having access to archived content as their clients’ requirements are based on decisions made years prior. This is supported by the relatively high proportion (59%) of Society of Trust and Estate Practitioners survey respondents who stated that they had used Interpretation Bulletins and Information Circulars over the past couple of years.
Finally, the presence of the Centre of Expertise telephone line has improved perceived response times by callers, but a large majority noted concerns with the quality of responses received. The Centre of Expertise has also contributed to development of trust specific training materials for enquiries staff, and when needed, turned to sections in Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs Branch and T3 Trust Returns Assessing Section to improve their knowledge capacity.
Given that the majority of income reported by the trust is flowed-out to beneficiaries, a review of the resources available related to reporting amounts from trusts was conducted. It was found that while individual beneficiaries have webpages dedicated to how to report amounts from T3 slips and T5008 slips, including how to calculate the cost of dispositions, there are no similar resources available for corporate beneficiaries.


5. Conclusion
Overall, trusts are mostly compliant with their trust-specific reporting requirements. However, evidence suggests there is a lack of understanding of the impacts of trusts on the T1 and T2 business lines and the reporting compliance within those populations. PROTECTED.
PROTECTED
6. Recommendations and management response
CRA has an opportunity to improve its administration of the trust business line by adopting a horizontal approach to its performance management, and improving internal business intelligence and expertise within the CRA. The recommendations aim to first, improve the CRA’s ability to verify trust and beneficiary related reporting and second, to strengthen CRA capacity and coordination across areas administering the trust business line.
Recommendation 1
The CRA should develop and implement an integrated and horizontal strategy to address gaps in its administration of trusts that would consider the following elements:

Policies that provide for the information gathered on Trusts and their main parties (i.e. settlor, trustee, beneficiaries);
The information technology system requirements and human resource capacity to support all administrative and compliance functions;
The interventions that target various trust types and the related amounts reported by their main parties.

Recommendation 2
The CRA should adopt performance measures which would be jointly held across functions and reflect the related amounts flowed through the various parties of the trust.
Recommendation 3
The CRA should develop and implement a coordinated, cross-program plan to recognize, resource, and further develop the trust knowledge-base and expertise within the areas that administer the business line.
Management response
The CRA agrees with the recommendations in this report. The CRA will create an Income Tax Trust Compliance Task Force, with representatives from all implicated branches by October 1, 2018. This task force will develop a holistic tax compliance strategy by April 1, 2019. This strategy will map out the income tax trust compliance continuum, identifying key players, capabilities and compliance opportunities, and identify specific initiatives for branches to undertake to address the findings and recommendations in the evaluation report and other gaps that may be found.
These initiatives will include: reflecting a coordinated approach to identifying CRA compliance program requirements relating to income tax trust reporting and technology investments, identifying appropriate performance measures and create a renewed and sustained CRA community of interest for income tax trust practitioners.
The action plan provided by the holistic strategy will be reviewed by the Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch and subject to the annual follow-up process.
7. Acknowledgement
In closing, we would like to acknowledge, recognize, and thank the Assessment, Benefit, and Service, Domestic Compliance Programs, Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs, International, Large Business and Investigations, Strategy and Integration, Collections and Verification, Appeals, and Legal Services Branches for the time dedicated and the information provided during the course of this engagement. We would also like to thank the representatives of the Society of Trust and Estate Practitioners for their insights as well as their members who took the time to thoughtfully complete our survey. We also want to recognize the support we received from the Public Affairs Branch for their responsive facilitation of the survey process.


8. Appendices
Appendix A: Evaluation issues and research questions
Issue
Do Canadians know, understand, and comply with their trust related obligations?
Research questions

Are the rules and regulations around creating and managing trusts understood?
Are Canadians meeting their filing, reporting, and payment obligations with respect to T3 returns?

Issue
Does the CRA effectively administer the T3 trust function?
Research questions

Do the T3 trust mechanisms and processes operate in a satisfactory manner?
Is the CRA managing T3 in a coordinated and collaborative fashion?
Are there preliminary indications that recent changes to the T3 trust audit program are achieving the desired outcomes?
Are there any significant barriers to the CRA’s successful administration of T3?

Appendix B: T3 trust stakeholders



Stakeholder
Branch
Responsibility
T3 Trust Returns Assessing Section
Assessment, Benefit, and Service
Provide functional direction for the processing and automated systems used in the assessing and reassessing of T3 returns.
Taxpayer Services Division – Centre of Expertise
Assessment, Benefit, and Service
Respond to trust related telephone enquiries.
Specialty Information Section
Assessment, Benefit, and Service
Provide clients with clear, concise and understandable information published in both paper and electronic format.
Payments Processing Section
Assessment, Benefit, and Service
Provide functional direction, policies and procedures to the field offices to ensure payments are processed in the most efficient manner.
Specialty Services Section
Assessment, Benefit, and Service
Support field operation and systems.
Taxpayer Representative Identification System Section
Assessment, Benefit, and Service
Administers authorizations for trusts.
T1/T3 Returns Accounting Section
Assessment, Benefit, and Service
Advises, monitors, calculates on arrears, installment, and refund interest on T3 Re(assessments) and accounts, subsidiary ledgers, and installment program and is the functional responsibility for Automated Subsidiary Ledger, Automated Assessments Control, On-line Interest calculation system instalment notification system.
Information Returns Program Section
Assessment, Benefit, and Service
Responsible for capturing, displaying, storing, updating data from payments to trusts and beneficiaries.
T3 Quality Evaluation
Assessment, Benefit, and Service
Responsible for quality evaluation of final products of T3 activity in Ottawa Technology Centre and Summerside Tax Centre.
Trust Section, Income Tax Rulings Directorate
Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs
Provide technical interpretations and work with Department of Finance on trust legislation.
T3 dedicated audit, Complex Transactions
Domestic Compliance Programs
The Trust Audit program carries out audits of trusts resident in Canada that file a T3 Trust Income Tax and Information Return.
Provide functional direction to facilitate an efficient, effective and consistent audit program.

Clearance Certificate Audit
Domestic Compliance Programs
Provide an efficient, effective and consistent service to legal representatives requesting a Clearance Certificate.
Compliance Systems Data Review Section
International, Large Business and Investigations
Ensure the accuracy and reliability of the fiscal impact amounts reported in the Annual Report to Parliament, as well as ensuring that Branch planning, monitoring and reporting activities are coordinated in a timely and efficient manner.
Aggressive Tax Planning
International, Large Business and Investigations
Responsible for identifying emerging tax avoidance issues; abusive domestic and international schemes or arrangements; and aggressive tax schemes, arrangements, products, and handling cases requiring a remedy for tax avoidance. It has the mandate to administer the general anti-avoidance rule.
Related Party Initiative
International, Large Business and Investigations
Part of Aggressive Tax Planning, with a focus on High Net Worth Individuals who alone or together with associates, control business activities segregated in several entities with at least $50 million of net worth.
Appeals
Appeals
To provide a fair and impartial process to resolve disputes, service complaints and requests for relief arising from decisions made under the legislation and programs administered, and services provided, by the Canada Revenue Agency.
Business Statistics Division
Strategy and Integration
Responsible for the preparation, review and release of micro data files and statistical tables to clients in federal and provincial / territorial departments or agencies for a variety of statistical, tax, fiscal and socio-economic policy making and forecasting purposes and works to enhance CRA's ability to anticipate their data needs.
Industry Specialty Services
International, Large Business and Investigations Branch
Identify industry-related emerging issues, develop and communicate national assessing positions, and to provide technical assistance (including information and training sessions) to employees and various other stakeholders in support of building and enhancing industry-related knowledge, commercial awareness and other aspects of the CRA’s technical capacity.
T1 Matching
Collections and Verification
Responsible for conducting the Matching Program and the Foreign Source Matching Program. The Matching Program fosters compliance through the use of third-party database information and CRA's information and is an important element of the CRA’s compliance programs that ensure the integrity of Canada's self-assessment tax system.
T3 Non-Filer / Non-Registrant
Collections and Verification
Promotes compliance with the filing requirements of trusts, as outlined in the Income Tax Act and various other legislations.
Tax Service Offices and Tax Centres
Regions
Field operations and front end officials for various CRA programs.
Taxation of Trusts and Estates
Legal Services
Advise on issues and policy relating to trust law, estate law, and income taxation of trusts and estates.
The Investment Fund Institution of Canada
External to CRA
Advocate on behalf of the industry and its investors.
Society of Trust and Estate Practitioners
External to CRA
Aim to raise the public profile of trust and estate work as a profession by providing representation, accreditation, and consultations in policy development related to trust and Estate needs.



Appendix C: Glossary



Term
Definition
Beneficiary
A beneficiary includes the person for whose benefit the trust is created, the person to whom the amount of an insurance policy or annuity is payable, or the unit holder of a mutual fund trust.
Inter vivos trust
Also known as a living trust, this trust has a duration that is determined at the time of the trust's creation and can entail the distribution of assets to the beneficiary during or after the trustee's lifetime.
Mutual Fund Trusts
A unit trust whose activities are limited to (i) to the investment of funds and (ii) acquiring, and improving of real property and must have at least 150 unit holders holding at least $500 worth of units that are marketed to the public.
Settlor
A settlor is generally the person who set up a trust by contributing property to the trust. In the case of a preferred beneficiary election, a settlor is restricted to a person who is otherwise the settlor of the trust and has contributed the majority of property to the trust.
T5008 slip
A statement of securities transactions slip that reports the amount paid or credited to you for securities you disposed of or redeemed during the year.
Testamentary trust
A testamentary trust is a trust or estate that is generally created on and as a result of the death of a person. The terms of the trust are established by the will or by court order in relation to the deceased individual’s estate under provincial or territorial law.
Trustee
A trustee is an individual or trust institution that holds legal title to property in trust for the benefit of the trust beneficiaries. The trustee includes an executor, administrator, assignee, receiver, or liquidator who owns or controls property for some other person.





Footnote 1


					   A trust is a legal relationship between three main parties, a “settlor” who transfers assets to a “trustee”, who then manages the assets on behalf of the “beneficiary”.  
					

Return to footnote1 Referrer


Footnote 2


					   Subsection 132(6) of the Income Tax Act defines mutual fund trusts as unit trusts whose activities are limited to (i) to the investment of funds and (ii) acquiring, improving, leasing and managing of real property and must have at least 150 unit holders holding at least $500 worth of units that are lawfully distributed to the public. 
					

Return to footnote2 Referrer


Footnote 3


					   Not to be confused with Trust Accounts, which include Canada Pension Plan/Employment Insurance and Goods and Services Tax/Harmonized Sales Tax amounts that are withheld and remitted to the CRA.  
					

Return to footnote3 Referrer


Footnote 4


					   Manulife Financial (April 2014). Tax, Retirement & Estate Planning Services; Trusts – “Just the Basics”. Retrieved from https://repsourcepublic.manulife.com/wps/wcm/connect/cadec580433c3104b54bf7319e0f5575/ins_tepg_taxtopictrsts.pdf?MOD=AJPERES&CACHEID=cadec580433c3104b54bf7319e0f5575


Return to footnote4 Referrer


Footnote 5


					   CRA External Website. Types of Trust. Retrieved from https://www.canada.ca/en/revenue-agency/services/tax/trust-administrators/types-trusts.html


Return to footnote5 Referrer


Footnote 6


					   “Amounts” refers to income, capital gains, dividends, allocations, and other categories reported by the trust. 
					

Return to footnote6 Referrer


Footnote 7


					   Subsection 132(6) of the Income Tax Act defines mutual fund trusts as unit trusts whose activities are limited to (i) to the investment of funds and (ii) acquiring, improving, leasing and managing of real property and must have at least 150 unit holders holding at least $500 worth of units that are lawfully distributed to the public. 
					

Return to footnote7 Referrer









Report a problem or mistake on this page












Please select all that apply:

A link, button or video is not working



It has a spelling mistake



Information is missing



Information is outdated or wrong



Login error when trying to access an account




I can't find what I'm looking for



Other issue not in this list



Submit



Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries, contact us.










Date modified:
2018-11-16





Evaluation Study - Canada Revenue Agency’s Administration of the Tax-Free Savings Account


Final report


Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch


April 2016


Table of Contents

Executive Summary
Introduction
Background
Evaluation Methodologies and Approach
Findings from the Evaluation

The administrative aspects of the TFSA program have been designed and implemented as planned
TFSA system is performing as expected
TFSA program is achieving expected compliance outcomes however opportunities to increase the effectiveness of the program have been identified
 
Conclusion
Acknowledgement
Appendix A



Executive Summary
The Tax-Free Savings Account (TFSA) was introduced by the Department of Finance Canada as part of Budget 2008 tabled on February 26, 2008 and was part of Bill C-50 that received royal assent on June 18, 2008. CanadiansFootnote 1 could begin contributing to a TFSA as of January 1, 2009 to allow them to earn tax-free investment income to more easily meet lifetime savings needs. The TFSA complements existing Canadian registered savings plans such as the registered retirement savings plan (RRSP). Unlike an RRSP where tax is deferred until such time as the money is withdrawn, TFSAs are not taxable upon withdrawal. Canadians were initially allowed to contribute $5,000 annually into their TFSA(s) and the contribution limit was increased to $5,500 in 2013 and $10,000 in 2015. In February 2015, the Management Audit and Evaluation Committee of the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) approved the evaluation framework for the CRA’s Administration of the TFSA Evaluation Study. The Department of Finance Canada develops and evaluates federal tax policies and legislation, while the CRA is the agency responsible for the administration of tax laws, including the Income Tax Act  (ITA) of Canada. As such, the scope of this evaluation was limited to CRA’s administration of the provisions of the ITA related to TFSA. This evaluation study attempts to answer the question to what extent have the administrative aspects of the TFSA program been designed and implemented by the CRA to achieve expected outcomes as well as potential alternatives or modifications that could improve CRA’s administration of the TFSA. The CRA’s administration of TFSA cuts across multiple programs. The Assessment, Benefit and Service Branch (ABSB) was the office of primary interest for the design, development and implementation of the TFSA program with the collaboration of other headquarter branches including Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs (LPRAB), Compliance Programs, Collections and Verification, Appeals, Public Affairs (PAB), Information Technology and Strategy and Integration. The CRA took a new approach when designing and implementing TFSA as this was the first program that: 
required transmission of all data to be electronic;
incorporated vigorous upfront validities;
proactively identified non-compliance involving potential tax payable; and
electronically issued pre-populated proposed returns.
 Ultimately the test of effective implementation of the TFSA program is the execution of activities in such a manner as to reasonably achieve expected outcomes. For the CRA this means that program activities are carried out in a manner to ensure compliance with TFSA legislation, rules and regulations. For financial institutionsFootnote 2, they must understand and comply with the requirements for marketing qualified arrangements, educate their clients on TFSAs and file annual information returns and amendments. For Canadians, they must understand and comply with the rules, restrictions and filing requirements of the TFSA. On all fronts, and for the most part, this study revealed that these implementation objectives have been met. Our analysis determined that the TFSA program was well designed, planned and implemented. The CRA has a system in place to accept electronic TFSA transactions from financial institutions, processes are in place to review and approve TFSA arrangements for marketing by financial institutions and effective linkages were made with existing CRA compliance activities. External interviews with the financial institutions revealed that they have a good understanding of the TFSA legislation and regulations. They also acknowledged that the electronic filing process is relatively straightforward with the exception of reconciliation of records which they find, in some circumstances, to be an administrative burden. For Canadians, as of 2013 over 10.7 million individuals have one or more active TFSA and are contributing, for the most part, within annual TFSA limits. We also observed that the CRA and the financial institutions have worked collaboratively and demonstrated a high level of commitment to the design and implementation of CRA’s administration of the TFSA program. This has allowed Canadians to contribute and earn tax-free investment income to more easily meet their lifetime savings needs. Our analysis also identified opportunities to potentially increase the effectiveness of the TFSA program from the perspective of Canadians, financial institutions and the CRA. We recommended that: 
PAB, as part of the TFSA communication review, emphasize messaging related to the responsibility of financial institutions and Canadians to comply with TFSA legislation, rules and regulations.
LPRAB share the TFSA design and implementation experience with the Department of Finance Canada to potentially allow for more advanced notice when proposed legislation requires new systems and processes for both the CRA and external stakeholders.
LPRAB review the application of penalties to financial institutions to ensure fairness in the administration of the ITA.  
ABSB explore and assess the feasibility of system and program enhancements related to filing timelines, reason codes for rejections and multi-year amendments to support TFSA compliance.
ABSB refer repeat non-compliance with the filing of TFSA amendments to LPRAB for review as part of the TFSA audit program of financial institutions to ensure compliance with legislation, rules and regulations.
ABSB explore and assess the feasibility to include enhanced data reporting requirements similar to TFSA, for other deferred income and savings plans, to support predictive analytics and business intelligence.



Introduction
In February 2015, the Management Audit and Evaluation Committee (MAEC) of the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) approved the evaluation framework for the CRA’s Administration of the Tax-Free Savings Account (TFSA) Evaluation Study. The Department of Finance Canada develops and evaluates federal tax policies and legislation, while the CRA is the agency responsible for the administration of tax laws, including the Income Tax Act (ITA) of Canada. As such, the scope of this evaluation was limited to CRA’s administration of the provisions of the ITA related to TFSA. The evaluation framework identified the following two evaluation issues: Issue 1: To what extent have the administrative aspects of the TFSA program been designed and implemented by the CRA to achieve expected outcomes? 
Has the program design of the TFSA been implemented as planned?
Has the system performed as expected?
Has the TFSA program achieved expected outcomes?
 Issue 2: Are there alternatives or modifications to current system and program delivery that could improve CRA’s administration of the TFSA? 
Are there best practices or lessons learned from implementing the TFSA?
What alternative approaches or modifications to system and program delivery could be adopted from strategies or best practices of other tax administrations with a similar program?
 This report summarizes the findings related to these issues and research questions. Findings are to provide CRA senior management with information on the design and implementation of the administrative aspects of the TFSA program to achieve expected outcomes as well as potential alternatives or modifications that could improve CRA’s administration of the TFSA.


Background
The TFSA was introduced by the Department of Finance Canada as part of Budget 2008 tabled on February 26, 2008 and was part of Bill C-50 that received royal assent on June 18, 2008. CanadiansFootnote 3 could begin contributing to a TFSA as of January 1, 2009 to allow them to earn tax-free investment income with the objective to more easily meet lifetime savings needs. For the tax years 2009 to 2013, CRA administered over 273.4 million TFSA transactionsFootnote 4 held by 10.7 million Canadians. The TFSA complements existing Canadian registered savings plans such as the registered retirement savings plan (RRSP). Canadians were initially allowed to contribute $5,000 annually into their TFSA(s). Unlike an RRSP where tax is deferred until such time as the money is withdrawn, TFSAs are not taxable upon withdrawal. In 2013 the annual TFSA contribution limit was increased to $5,500 and in 2015 it was increased to $10,000. The Assessment, Benefit and Service Branch (ABSB) was the office of primary interest for the design, development and implementation of the TFSA program with the collaboration of other headquarter branches including Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs (LPRAB), Compliance Programs (CPB), Collections and Verification (CVB), Appeals, Public Affairs (PAB), Information Technology (ITB) and Strategy and Integration (SIB). The logic model in Appendix A illustrates a holistic view of the main activities, outputs and outcomes related to CRA’s administration of the TFSA program and the inter-relationships with financial institutions (issuers) and Canadians (holders). Financial institutions must applyFootnote 5 to the CRA and receive a TFSA identification number in order to market and administer qualified TFSA arrangements. Once approved, financial institutions are expected to educate and inform their clients of the rules, restrictions and filing requirements of the TFSA product. The CRA also provides information to financial institutions and Canadians through electronic and paper mediaFootnote 6. TFSA legislation and regulations require that financial institutionsFootnote 7 electronically file the transaction details for each TFSA holder to the CRA by the last day of February following the calendar year to which the information return applies. The transaction details include information such as the social insurance number, personal identification information, TFSA number, the closing fair market value of each account, details on each contribution and withdrawal made, and any change in status of the TFSA holder such as death or marital status. In general terms, when a TFSA annual information return is electronically filed to the CRA, a series of upfront system validation checks are performed to confirm that the data was submitted correctly and is for the correct TFSA holder. For those that meet the validation checks, the system will reconcile the contribution and withdrawal information received from the financial institution to calculate the TFSA room and whether there are excess contributions. If an excess situation exists, the TFSA holder will receive a proposed tax returnFootnote 8 to correct the over-contribution. For those that do not meet the validation checks, the CRA requires that the record be corrected and resubmitted by the financial institution for processing to ensure that the information reported is accurate. A downloadable file of rejected records is available to financial institutions in both “My Business Account” and “Represent a Client”. CRA uses the transaction details filed by financial institutions to calculate and advise Canadians of their TFSA contribution room or over-contributions. Complete contribution and withdrawal information is available on “My Account”. CRA is responsible to ensure that all TFSA transactions comply with the ITA by deterring, identifying and addressing non-compliant transactions and identifying emerging non-compliance trends. Accordingly, the CRA uses the annually-reported TFSA summary information to develop compliance audit plans and risk assessment strategies.


Evaluation Methodologies and Approach
For this evaluation study, we used the following methodologies and approach: 
A Working Committee was formed with representatives from ABSB, LPRAB, CPB, CVB, Appeals, SIB, ITB and PAB. This committee supported the gathering of branch specific information and the review of preliminary findings and recommendations.
Internal interviews were conducted with 52 CRA managers and staff. Participants were selected from ABSB, LPRAB, CPB, CVB, Appeals, SIB, ITB and PAB and the TFSA Processing Unit in the Ontario Region.
Examination and validation of our understanding of CRA policies, procedures, business rules and systems with responsible branches.
External interviews were conducted with representatives from the Canadian Bankers Association, the Investment Industry Association of Canada and the Investment Fund Institute of Canada.
A series of analyses on the outputs and outcomes of CRA’s administration of the TFSA, for the period 2009 to 2013 was undertaken. Analysis included a review of completed TFSA audits as they moved through the various program areas of the CRA. These taxpayer accounts were selected from the Platinum Reporting Facility (PRF) and reviewed against the Audit Information Management System (AIMS), Automated Collections and Source Deductions Enforcement System (ACSES), Random Access Personal Information Data (RAPID) and Case Appeals. This review occurred from December 17, 2014 to March 10, 2015.
A review of the United States’ Roth-Individual Retirement Arrangements and the United Kingdom’s New Individual Savings Account was undertaken. The limited available administrative data, by program activity, did not support comparisons against the TFSA.



Findings from the Evaluation
Ultimately the test of effective implementation of the TFSA program is the execution of activities in such a manner as to reasonably achieve expected outcomes. For the CRA this means that program activities are carried out in a manner to ensure compliance with TFSA legislation, rules and regulations. For financial institutions, they must understand and comply with the requirements for marketing qualified arrangements, educate their clients on TFSAs and file annual information returns and amendments. For Canadians they must understand and comply with the rules, restrictions and filing requirements of the TFSA. On all fronts, and for the most part, these implementation objectives have been met. Our analysis revealed that the CRA has a system in place to accept electronic TFSA transactions from financial institutions, processes are in place to review and approve TFSA arrangements for marketing by financial institutions and effective linkages were made with existing CRA compliance activities. External interviews with the financial institutions revealed that they have a good understanding of the TFSA legislation and regulations. They also acknowledged that the electronic filing process is relatively straightforward with the exception of reconciliation of records which they find, in some circumstances, to be an administrative burden. For Canadians, as of 2013, over 10.7 million individuals have one or more active TFSA and are contributing, for the most part, within annual TFSA limits. The next section of the report outlines the results of our analysis on the extent to which the administrative aspects of the TFSA program have been designed and implemented by the CRA to achieve expected outcomes. It also identified best practices and opportunities for improvement that could potentially increase the effectiveness of the program from the perspective of financial institutions, Canadians and the CRA.


The administrative aspects of the TFSA program have been designed and implemented as planned
The TFSA implementation plan incorporated the necessary elements and linkages that were needed for an effective program; and was successfully operationalized as planned. This assessment is based on the evaluation findings as outlined in the following sections: 
Financial Resources
Design and Implementation
Communication
 Financial Resources CRA built a system for mandatory electronic reporting and to develop processes for program management, business intelligence, communication, and compliance activities. The logic model in Appendix A illustrates the main activities, outputs and outcomes related to CRA’s administration of the TFSA program. From 2008-2009 to 2012-2013 expenditures were $72.6 million which included $15.5 million for the annual program and maintenance costs. TFSA project costs are outlined in Table 1.




Table 1 – TFSA Project Costs (including indirect costs) 2008-2009 to 2012-2013 (million) 



Component
Expenditures


Business
$44.9


Information Technology (IT)
$27.7


Total Business and IT
$72.6





Source: Project Charter: Project Close-out Report for the TFSA, June 2013 Design and Implementation As the TFSA was a major project investment, oversight of the design and implementation of the TFSA program was undertaken by the CRA Finance Committee. This committee is chaired by the CRA Chief Financial Officer with a senior management representative from each branch and region. This allowed for senior management oversight of financial and control risks as well as the management and progress of the TFSA project to achieve deliverables. CRA stakeholders interviewed identified this as a best practice as it supported transparent accountability, from a horizontal perspective, from the start to the end of the project. A project charter was established at the onset of the TFSA project which was intended to provide the vision and mandate to the TFSA project team. This charter included clearly defined governance and oversight structuresFootnote 9, goals, objectives, scope, timelines, cost estimates, risks, assumptions and constraints. This supported the creation of all key components of the TFSA program including risk assessments, business requirements, communication activities, policies, procedures, forms and other work instruments including internal training. The integrated and co-located project team, with both business and IT experts, was identified as a best practice by CRA stakeholders interviewed. This promoted open and transparent two-way communication and allowed for clarification of business and system issues to be addressed in a timely manner. The CRA has put in place a process to monitor and report on TFSA data (i.e. TFSA take-up rates and characteristics of holders). SIB provides the Department of Finance Canada with TFSA data twice a year, as a preliminary file in July and a final file the following year in February. This provides the Department of Finance Canada with relevant information to support informed tax policy decisions on the TFSA. The CRA uses this information for monitoring and planning of the administration of the TFSA program. Our review of the 2009 to 2013 reports and interviews with SIB revealed that the methodology and system scripts developed to extract the information from CRA systems are appropriate, with a high degree of quality assurance built into the process. Beyond reporting to the Department of Finance Canada, we confirmed that program areas have monitoring and reporting processes in place to support the horizontal nature of the work required in CRA’s administration of the TFSA. For the TFSA system, the CRA took a new approach by building and implementing a system independent from the current T1 system. This reduced the potential for added complexity or unintended negative impacts to the existing T1 tax program. For the CRA this was the first program that: 
required transmission of all data to be electronic;
incorporated vigorous upfront validities;
proactively identified non-compliance involving potential tax payable; and
electronically issued pre-populated proposed returns.
 Based on best practices outlined in the Application, Data and Technology Framework, ITB completed a threat and risk assessment and a statement of sensitivity for the TFSA systemFootnote 10. This resulted in the decision that the TFSA data be posted on the CRA’s Information Declaration System (INFODEC), where third party information provided by employers, financial institutions and government agencies is securely captured and validated. This also allowed integration to other existing applications to meet TFSA requirements, i.e. T1 accounting, Financial Input Processing, Revenue Ledger, etc. The CRA took a phased in approach in the development of the TFSA system to ensure needs vs. wants were defined and implemented as it was recognized that the timing for system development was relatively short at 10 months. The major components of the TFSA system were implemented as planned with the exception of: PROTECTED The CRA made the decision that these five remaining enhancements would be re-examined and re-prioritized when the program had matured as the timeline for system development was relatively short at 10 months. Given the short system development timeline, the CRA was in constant competition for resources with other CRA system initiatives. This resulted in the majority of the TFSA system development being performed by private IT consultants due to the limited availability of ITB staff. ITB advised that this resulted in increased human resources costs to the project as the use of consultants is, on average, 30% higher than when CRA personnel are used. For financial institutions the short timeframe resulted in additional human and financial pressures on their organizations especially for the smaller financial institutions. Interviews with CRA stakeholders and financial institutions revealed no significant issues with the program design and implementation of TFSA with the exception of the pressures related to the timeframe for system development. An opportunity exists for the CRA to share the TFSA design and implementation experience with the Department of Finance Canada to potentially allow for more advanced notice when proposed legislation requires new systems and processes for both the CRA and external stakeholders. Communication Consultation and communication occurred during the TFSA design and implementation phase and, for the most part, was considered successful by both CRA stakeholders and the financial institutions interviewed. Outreach sessions with financial institutions were held in Toronto, Montreal and Vancouver in 2008. These sessions provided the CRA with an opportunity to share information with the financial institutions on topics such as the application, filing and amendment processes for the new TFSA program. Subsequent outreach sessions were held in 2009 and 2010 and two webinars were held in 2011. Regular meetings were and continue to be held by the CRA with the Canadian Bankers Association, the Investment Fund Institute of Canada, the Investment Industry Association of Canada, Central1 and Concentra Financial on TFSA related issues. For Canadians, financial institutions are responsible for marketing and administering qualified TFSA arrangements approved by the CRA as well as to educate and inform their clients on the details and restrictions of the TFSA. To support financial institutions and Canadians, the CRA website provides tax guidesFootnote 11 and information products on the TFSA. Our review of TFSA website data revealed that there have been over 1.8 million hits to the CRA TFSA web pages from 2009 to 2013 as outlined in Table 2.




Table 2 –TFSA website hits – Annual 2009 to 2013



Website
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013


English website
320,493
344,546
262,189
308,599
369,286


French website
43,969
47,688
41,067
53,619
57,320


Total website hits
364,462
392,234
303,256
362,218
426,606





Source: CRA website metrics A telephone enquiries service also exists to support financial institutions and Canadians. Our review of TFSA call volume reports revealed that the CRA has responded to 613,926 TFSA related calls for fiscal years 2012-2013 to 2014-2015. Our analysis of the TFSA call types revealed that over 70% of the enquiries, for all years, are related to contribution room and excess contributions in each year. This makes sense as determining the true contribution room at any time requires a consolidation of information maintained by the CRA for the previous tax year(s) and the current contributions or withdrawals which are maintained by financial institutions. Interviews with financial institutions revealed that there are also situations when Canadians may have multiple TFSAs at more than one financial institution or there may be unresolved TFSA transfers that have not been completed which may further complicate the Canadian’s ability to reconcile their TFSA transactions. The result of this ambiguity can create situations where Canadians have excess contributions or may be holding unqualified investments. Table 3 provides details on TFSA call volumes by type for fiscal year end (FYE) 2012-2013 to 2014-2015.




Table 3 –TFSA Call Volume by Type – FYE 2012-2013 to 2014-2015



Type
2012-2013 Number
2012-2013 %
2013-2014 Number
2013-2014 %
2014-2015 Number
2014-2015 %
Total Number
Total %


Total TFSA calls 
222,801
100%
166,030
100%
225,095
100%
613,926
100%


Contribution room
57,483
25.80%
65,775
39.62%
101,909
45.27%
225,167
36.68%


Excess contributions
87,236
39.16%
58,053
34.96%
70,211
31.19%
215,500
35.10%


TFSA proposed returns
31,935
14.33%
13,142
7.92%
14,265
6.34%
59,342
9.66%


OtherFootnote 12
46,147
20.71%
29,060
17.50%
38,710
17.20%
113,917
18.56%





Source: Individual Income Tax Enquiries 2012-2013 to 2014-2015 Fiscal Report The CRA also developed a monitoring tool, via “My Account”, to support Canadians to better track their TFSA contributions, withdrawals, and transfers that are electronically transmitted by financial institutions to the CRA. Opportunities for improvement related to the TFSA communication products have been recognized by the CRA and some improvements have been made. For example, a message was included on “My Account” in January 2012 to advise Canadians that there is a possibility that CRA may not have received or processed the information about previous year transactions. As a result, they are asked to compare the TFSA transaction information on “My Account” with their own records to ensure that it is up to date. Further review of TFSA communication products is currently being undertaken by PAB as part of Phase 2 of the CRA external administrative correspondence review, which is scheduled for the winter 2015/spring 2016. Beyond the design and implementation of TFSA, financial institutions interviewed are seeking clarification on the issue of what constitutes “carrying on of a business” within the context of a TFSAFootnote 13. Interviews with CRA stakeholders revealed that it would be difficult for the CRA to provide more specific guidance than what currently exists due to the vast number of multi-faceted investments and arrangements available. Currently, the CRA reviews each particular case based on its own merit before making a determination. This approach is taken to ensure fairness in the application of the ITA. When there is uncertainty, Canadians may request an advanced income tax ruling from the CRA to clarify the tax implications of a financial decision they are considering. Our analysis revealed that the CRA is exercising due diligence and has processes in place to ensure fairness in the administration of the ITA by reviewing each particular case based on its own merit. Communication is a powerful tool when it is written in a manner that is clear, well-organized and easy to understand. The experience of the CRA is consistent with the United Kingdom when they introduced their Individual Savings Account in 1999 as they had to modify their communications products several times to make them easier to understand. Continued efforts to improve the content of TFSA guides and website have the potential to reduce the volume of TFSA telephone enquiries and could decrease the number of Canadians having excess contributions as they are better able to calculate their contribution room.


TFSA system is performing as expected
A review of TFSA system reports and interviews with financial institutions revealed that the system is performing as expected and there are no issues with capacity, reliability or accessibility. The TFSA system has administered over 273.4 million transactions that were electronically submitted by financial institutions to the CRA for tax years 2009 to 2013.  Of the 273.4 million transactions, 87% represent contributions made by the 10.7 million Canadians who held a TFSA as of December 31, 2013. The total contributions were $40.2 billion with a reported fair market value of over $118.3 billion. Table 4 provides an annual and cumulative summary of TFSA information by tax year.




Table 4 – TFSA Summary Information – Annual and Cumulative 2009 to 2013



Indicators
Type of reporting
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013


Number of TFSA transactions administered (contributions)
annual
17,503,900
35,953,890
48,295,940
62,421,690
74,262,220


cumulative
17,503,900
53,457,790
101,753,730
164,175,420
238,437,640


Number of TFSA transactions administered (withdrawals)
annual
1,931,060
4,681,250
6,802,950
9,632,340
11,958,000


cumulative
1,931,060
6,612,310
13,415,260
23,047,600
35,005,600


Number of Canadians (Holders) with a TFSA
annual
4,839,870
2,022,030
1,504,200
1,230,730
1,117,790


cumulative
4,839,870
6,861,900
8,366,100
9,596,830
10,714,620


Total dollar value of TFSA contributions
annual
$18,963,461,000
$25,398,608,000
$31,105,422,000
$33,503,195,000
$40,163,568,000


cumulative
$18,963,461,000
$44,362,069,000
$75,467,491,000
$108,970,686,000
$149,134,254,000


Total dollar value of TFSA withdrawals
annual
$1,936,540,000
$4,911,624,000
$8,129,476,000
$11,175,492,000
$14,603,331,000


cumulative
$1,936,540,000
$6,848,164,000
$14,977,640,000
$26,153,132,000
$40,756,463,000


Total TFSA Fair Market Value
cumulative
$18,155,746,000
$40,701,051,000
$62,584,189,000
$87,502,763,000
$118,258,675,000





Source: Tax-Free Savings Account 2011-2015 Statistics (2009-2013 contribution years) Footnote 14


TFSA program is achieving expected compliance outcomes however opportunities to increase the effectiveness of the program have been identified
Analysis of the TFSA program, for the purpose of determining the achievement of compliance outcomes, was based on the logic model (Appendix A). We focused on business intelligence and compliance activities as findings related to program management and communication were, for the most part, discussed above. We analyzed TFSA information related to: 
arrangements approved for marketing by financial institutions;
reconciled records, summaries and amendments;
audits completed and assessments issued;
outstanding balances resolved; and
decisions made on notices of objection and appeals to the Tax Court of Canada.
 TFSA arrangements approved for marketing by financial institutions The first step in our analysis related to the marketing of TFSAs in order to ensure, as with all CRA programs, that compliance with legislation remains as the cornerstone of the integrity of the tax system and ensures fairness to all Canadians. The compliance activities for financial institutions begin at the TFSA application stage. Financial institutions must applyFootnote 15  to the CRA, have their TFSA specimen planFootnote 16 approved and receive a TFSA identification number in order to market and administer qualified TFSA arrangements to Canadians. Upon receipt of an application from a financial institution, LPRAB will review to make sure it contains all relevant and prescribed information and is in compliance with the ITA. Those that are complete and meet requirements are approved and financial institutions can market them to their clients. Those that do not meet CRA requirements are returned to the financial institution with the reason for rejection. Review of LPRAB data revealed that the CRA had approved 732 TFSA specimen plans as of November 19, 2014. This has allowed 10.7 million Canadians to have a TFSA. External interviews with the financial institutions revealed no issues with the application process with the CRA for the marketing of TFSAs. Table 5 provides details of the breakdown of TFSA holders by province from 2009 to 2013.




Table 5 – TFSA Holders by Province – Cumulative 2009 to 2013



Province
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013 Holders
2013 %


Ontario
2,026,370
2,852,690
3,450,720
3,952,160
4,389,180
40.96%


Quebec
972,140
1,409,580
1,745,160
2,013,560
2,254,490
21.04%


British Columbia
768,740
1,059,190
1,270,740
1,430,360
1,569,110
14.64%


Alberta
546,500
778,370
954,760
1,103,490
1,250,530
11.67%


Manitoba
165,160
230,140
280,100
322,690
360,550
3.37%


Saskatchewan
137,120
194,640
238,510
273,440
305,880
2.85%


Nova Scotia
97,130
143,060
177,700
206,010
230,290
2.15%


New Brunswick
65,910
97,850
122,270
142,570
161,440
1.51%


Newfoundland & Labrador
37,130
57,940
76,300
91,860
105,480
0.98%


Prince Edward Island
12,440
18,520
23,170
27,130
30,690
0.29%


Non-residentsFootnote 17
2,280
5,830
8,510
11,640
30,590
0.29%


North West Territories
3,990
6,230
8,060
9,830
11,700
0.11%


Yukon
3,860
5,930
7,560
8,890
10,250
0.10%


Nunavut
1,110
1,930
2,560
3,190
4,460
0.04%





Source: Tax-Free Savings Account 2011-2015 Statistics (2009-2013 contribution years)Footnote 18 Reconciled records, summaries and amendments Once registered, TFSA legislation and regulations require that financial institutions electronically file the transaction details for each TFSA holder to the CRA by the last day of February following the calendar year to which the information return applies. The transaction details include information such as the social insurance number, identification information, TFSA number, the closing fair market value of each account, details on each contribution and withdrawal, and any change in status of the TFSA holder such as death or marital status. To ensure the accuracy of information, the CRA has a reconciliation process in place to correct discrepancies identified on TFSA records submitted by financial institutions. This ensures accuracy of the data posted to the TFSA database and information provided to Canadians via “My Account”. The CRA will advise the financial institution by email if a TFSA record has been rejected and that a downloadable file is available either in “My Business Account” or in “Represent a Client”. Financial institutions are to correct the data and resubmit within 30 days. Failure to resubmit an amended TFSA may result in the account not being registered as a TFSA and that their client may be subject to tax on the investment earnings or it can affect the calculation of contribution room. From 2009 to 2013 there were a total of 2.4 million amendments to TFSA records as outlined in table 6.




Table 6 – Amendments to TFSA records – Annual 2009 to 2013
Footnote 19



 
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
Total


Number of Amendments
899,687
692,517
445,141
167,066
150,100
2,354,511





Source: TFSA INFODEC production statistics Once TFSA data from the financial institutions has been reconciled, CRA sends proposed returnsFootnote 20 to Canadians that have made excess TFSA contributions. CRA uses a proposed return to calculate estimated tax liabilities on these excess contributions. When Canadians over contribute to their TFSA, they are required to file a TFSA returnFootnote 21 and pay the excess tax the following year. Our data analysis revealed that from 2009 to 2013, the CRA had issued 419,532 proposed tax returns to Canadians that had excess TFSA contributions. To better understand the level of effort related to the volume of proposed return workload, we analysed the number of proposed returns issued against the number of Canadians who contributed to a TFSA by year from 2009 to 2013. This analysis revealed that the number of proposed returns workload has decreased from 1.7% to 1% while the number of Canadians who contributed to a TFSA had increased by 49% from 2009 to 2013. Table 7 provides details on the number of Canadians who have contributed and the TFSA proposed tax returns issued by year from 2009 to 2013.




Table 7 – N
umber of Canadians who contributed to a TFSA and proposed tax returns issued by year – 2009 to 2013



 
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013


Number of Canadians (Holders) who contributed to a TFSAFootnote 22
4,520,700
5,088,920
5,804,110
6,174,590
6,763,630


Number of proposed returns sent
75,045
108,704
84,746
81,765
69,272


% of Canadians who over contributed
1.7%
2.1%
1.5%
1.3%
1.0%





Source: Tax-Free Savings Account 2011-2015 Statistics (2009-2013 contribution years) and DataMart, IT data and TFSA Processing Unit workload plan The downstream impact of the proposed returns revealed that a significant number of administrative reliefFootnote 23 requests must be processed by the TFSA Processing Unit. In 2009 the Minister of National Revenue encouraged Canadians who over-contributed to a TFSA to explain the circumstances of that over-contribution. In cases of genuine misunderstanding of the rules, the Minister indicated that the tax resulting from that over-contribution could be waived. This is a commitment to the fair treatment of Canadians who inadvertently over-contributed to a TFSA, which is consistent with Article 5 of the Taxpayer Bill of RightsFootnote 24. Our analysis revealed that over 25% of the proposed returns sent from 2009 to 2013 resulted in administrative relief requests. In total the TFSA Processing Unit processed 124,058 administrative relief requests from 2009 to 2013 of which over 97% were granted. Table 8 provides details on the number of Canadians who received a proposed return compared to the administrative relief requests received by the TFSA Processing Unit from 2009 to 2013.




Table 8 – Number of Canadians who received a proposed return and requested administrative reliefFootnote 25 – Annual 2009 to 2013



 
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013


Number of proposed returns sent
75,045
108,704
84,746
81,765
69,272


Number of administrative relief requests received
26,251
26,815
26,054
23,598
21,340


% of administrative relief requests to number of proposed returns
35.0%
 24.7%
30.7%
28.9%
30.8%


% of administrative relief granted
97.9%
96.6%
97.0%
97.0%
96.8%





Source: DataMart, IT data and TFSA Processing Unit working plan In an effort to reduce the proposed return workload and impacts on other CRA administrative processesFootnote 26 including administrative relief requests, ABSB initiated a TFSA nudge intervention project with the intention of supporting Canadians in understanding their TFSA situation. Nudge interventions aim to impact economic decision-making by adding, changing or re-arranging information individuals use to make financial decisions in an attempt to improve compliance. As part of the TFSA nudge intervention project, three letters (two nudge and one traditional compliance), replaced the proposed return for a randomly selected group of CanadiansFootnote 27 who had excess TFSA contributions in 2013. The letters developed for this project were expected to simplify the contribution limit rules, increase compliance and reduce excess contributions in future years. A review of the preliminary resultsFootnote 28 revealed that 69% of the random selected group did not over-contribute to their TFSAs in 2014 despite doing so in 2013. This was deemed positive and recognized the importance of how clear messaging can have a positive impact on compliance behavior. This project is still underway with a phase two planned which will assess future compliance with TFSA contribution limit rules in 2015 including impacts on other CRA administrative processes. As previously noted clear communication is a powerful tool and continued efforts to improve Canadians’ understanding of the TFSA rules and restrictions has the potential to further improve overall compliance and reduce the number of TFSA proposed returns issued by the CRA. Interviews with financial institutions also identified several constraints with the reconciliation of TFSA records, summaries and amendments activities that they would like the CRA to explore. This included: 
filing timelines;
reason codes for rejections;
system logic for acceptance of TFSA data;
multi-year amendments; and
TFSA transfers between financial institutions.
 Interviews with financial institutions revealed that although some financial institutions prefer the annual filing requirements others would prefer the option to file on a semi-annual or quarterly basis as this would assist them in maximizing their own human and financial resource capabilities to meet the TFSA filing obligations. ABSB interviews revealed that varied filing options were discussed with the financial institutions as part of the original design however the decision to implement annual filing was mutually agreed upon at the time. The option for varied filing timelines currently exists in other CRA programsFootnote 29 and as the TFSA program has matured, an opportunity exists to explore and assess the feasibility of varied filing options as a potential TFSA business and system enhancement to reduce the administration burden on financial institutions. When TFSA transaction details received from financial institutions do not match or are incomplete, the CRA will return the record to the financial institution as a reject. The reason codes for rejections, in some circumstances, do not provide a sufficient level of detail to properly correct an error. For example they identified that the rejection notification for SIN does not indicate if it is as a result of an invalid SIN or missing SIN which requires additional efforts from their perspective to resolve. A review of the messaging of TFSA rejection codes could improve the timeliness of corrections by financial institutions. The system logic for acceptance of TFSA data related to date of birth or death not matching existing CRA records was also identified as a challenge by the financial institutions. This was acknowledged by ABSB and new system logic was established in January 2015. Our review of ABSB data revealed that the rejections related to date of birth had reduced from 61,870 in tax year 2013 to 30,864 in tax year 2014, or a 50% decrease. No data was available for the date of death rejections. As this system change occurred in January 2015, the financial institutions may not have yet seen the benefits of this system change. ABSB should continue to monitor the rejections related to date of birth and death and communicate results to the financial institutions. Currently financial institutions must amend a TFSA record on an individual basis and can only include changes for a maximum of one taxation year. Each amendment must be processed by the CRA before the financial institutions can make a change to a subsequent year(s). In circumstances where correctionsFootnote 30 are required for more than one year, this process can be quite time consuming and was deemed as an administrative burden by the financial institutions. ABSB interviews revealed that the TFSA system was not designed to accept multi-year amendments. The ability to include multi-year amendments, in a single electronic transmission, has the potential to reduce the administrative burden for the financial institutions in situations where they are unable to correct TFSA records within established timeframes. In circumstances where ABSB identifies repeat non-compliance with the filing of TFSA amendments, they should refer these to LPRAB for review as part of the TFSA audit program of financial institutions. Financial institutions are responsible to resolve issues with records they create, regardless of whether their client maintains the TFSA with their institution or transfers to another institution. Failure to submit an amended record in the case of a TFSA opened in the reporting year may result in the account not being registered as a TFSA and the TFSA holder being subject to tax on the investment earnings, including penalty and interest. Financial institutions advised that although efforts are undertaken to correct the TFSA record, Canadians often do not respond to their letters or telephone calls as they no longer deal with them. Although we recognize this as a concern for the financial institutions, it is the responsibility of Canadians to ensure that all contributions and withdrawals are accurately reported to the CRA no matter what financial institution the TFSA was initially opened with. An opportunity exists to educate Canadians on the impacts of not providing financial institutions with requested information. Overall, the reconciliation of TFSA records, summaries and amendments are being administered as planned; however the program has matured since 2009 and opportunities for potential improvement exist. This includes the need to explore and assess the feasibility of system and program enhancements related to filing timelines, reason codes for rejections, and multi-year amendments. ABSB should also refer repeat non-compliance with the filing of TFSA amendments to LPRAB for review as part of the TFSA audit program of financial institutions to ensure compliance with legislation, rules and regulations. Audits completed and assessments issued As with other CRA programs, a national audit program is in place to ensure compliance with legislation, rules and regulations. Tax compliance research clearly demonstrates that the potential for non-compliance increases over time if Canadians believe the tax administration has a limited capability to detect non-compliance. The TFSA national audit program has two components – LPRAB conducts reviews on financial institutions and CPB conducts reviews on individual Canadians. The TFSA national audit program is relatively new with business intelligence and predictive analytics still being developed and refined to ensure that files with the highest risk are identified, for both financial institutions and Canadians. This is important as the CRA has limited resources and does not have the capacity to audit all Canadians.   For audits of financial institutions, LPRAB undertakes reviews to ensure that financial institutions are marketing qualified investments, reporting properly, ensuring due diligence, correcting rejects and that they are maintaining all supporting documents concerning private investments. LPRAB developed eight (8) initial criteria to identify potential non-compliance and emerging trends: PROTECTED Our analysis revealed that as of March 31, 2014, LPRAB completed fifteen (15) audits of financial institutions which included forty (40) TFSA specimen plansFootnote 31 which included 6,464 Canadians. These audits also resulted in 2,266 referrals to CPB for additional review. LPRAB recognized that the initial audits would be used to ensure compliance with the TFSA tax legislation reporting requirements while also recognizing the need to incorporate an education component. LPRAB worked with the financial institutions to correct accidental or unintentional errors such as improper specimen number for the TFSA holder or the specimen not belonging to the correct financial institution. LPRAB also reviewed how financial institutions monitor their TFSA plan. For example: 
What is the process to inform a holder of a non-qualified investment?
Are they making the necessary effort to correct their rejects?
Are supporting documents for private investments available?
Are they doing their due diligence and adhering to the rules, restrictions and filing requirements?
 Recognizing that TFSA was a new program, LPRAB had not applied penaltiesFootnote 32 to financial institutions on audit reviews completed as of October 2015. Since the TFSA was implemented in 2009 and considering the high degree of interaction between LPRAB and the financial institutions, the application of penalties should be reviewed to ensure fairness in the administration of the ITA. For audits of Canadians, CPB aims to identify the most serious cases of non-compliance, take appropriate corrective measures, and generally deter non-compliance. The starting point for our analysis of the audits on Canadians was to review the 94 audits completed from the 2,179 referrals made from the LPRAB audits of financial institutions up to December 31, 2013. The end date of December 31, 2013 was chosen as we determined this date would provide a reasonable period of time, after the audit had been concluded, for Canadians to remit any outstanding balance or resolve any  notices of objection or appeals to the Tax Court of Canada. A comparison analysis of the 94 completed audits against the LPRAB risk criteria was undertaken. PROTECTED. The initial focus on these three criteria makes sense as contribution limits are capped on the amount that can be contributed to a TFSA within any given year. This reduces the tax risk that the spirit and intent of the TFSA legislation is not providing unqualified gains to a specific Canadian. Based on our analysis of the results of the 94 completed audits, we determined that 34 audits or 36.2% resulted in assessments being raised. The total value of those assessments was $23.4 million of which $2.3 million was penalties and $1.6 million represented interest. These audits support CRA’s efforts to deter unqualified gains (36.2%) while also providing insight into the degree (63.8%) to which Canadians are contributing to a TFSA within the spirit and intent of the legislation. This is especially important at the introduction of a new tax program such as the TFSA. Beyond our analysis of the audit results, we also determined that CPB and LPRAB were able to uncover abusive TFSA tax avoidance schemes that were developed and in use to defeat the tax policy objectives of the TFSA, resulting in potential loss of revenue to the Government of Canada. The identified tax avoidance schemes: 
created unintended permanent increases in TFSA savings and contribution room;
sheltered large pools of assets and otherwise taxable capital gains inside TFSA; and
transferred taxable or tax-deferred funds into TFSA without paying tax.
 When these schemes were brought to the attention of the Department of Finance Canada, amendments were made to the TFSA legislation which came into force on October 17, 2009. The amended legislation included a ban on trading activities between a TFSA and the taxpayer’s registered or non-registered accounts (referred to as a swap transaction) and a 100% tax on any income earned on deliberate TFSA over-contributions or prohibited investments. CRA stakeholders interviewed positively remarked on the timeliness of the Department of Finance Canada to address the identified abusive transactions within the first year of the program to ensure fairness of the tax law to all Canadians. Our analysis also revealed a best practice to support audit risk assessments for other programs. The TFSA enhanced data reporting requirements includes fair market value of the investment and the withdrawals made. These data elements are valuable to support predictive analytics and business intelligence which could also benefit other deferred income and savings plans. Although the administration of the national audit program for TFSA is relatively new with business intelligence and predictive analytics still being developed, our analysis revealed that it is being administered in a manner supportive of its objective to detect and address non-compliance. The practice of the application of penalties for audits of financial institutions should be reviewed to ensure fairness in the administration of the ITA. Outstanding balances resolved Upon receipt of a tax assessment or reassessment Canadians can voluntarily pay the amount outstanding or contest the assessment. Voluntary compliance contributes to the integrity of the tax system and ensures that Canada receives its fair amount of tax. In circumstances where amounts are unpaid, the CVB collects outstanding debts owed to the Crown through progressive and targeted enforcement approaches. From the 94 completed audits undertaken by CPB, 34 assessments were issued to Canadians with a combined total assessed value of $23.4 million. Our review revealed that CVB was able to collect $15.0 million against those assessments of which $9.8 million was voluntarily paid, while waiting for the notices of objection to be resolved. Of the $8.2 million outstanding, 99.8% remain in appeal status and are not subject to collection activity. CVB advised that normal collection strategies will be utilized to recover any remaining balance owing once the notices of objections have been resolved. Table 9 provides details on the collections status of CPB completed audits reviewed.




Table 9 – Collection status of CPB completed audits reviewed



Numbers and dollar value
Appealed
Not Appealed
Totals


Total number of audit assessments / $ value
20 $18,211,673
14 $5,181,865
34 $23,393,538


Number of audit assessments / $ value collected 
5 ($9,808,496)
11 ($5,166,351)
16 ($14,974,847)


Number of resolved audit assessments / $ value collected 
1 ($215,491)
N/A
1 ($215,491)


Number of outstanding audit assessments / $ value outstanding 
14 $8,187,686
3 $15,514
17 $8,203,200





Source: AIMS, ACSES and RAPID Interviews with CRA stakeholders revealed that CVB works closely with the Appeals Branch to address notices of objections and with CPB and LPRAB to address TFSA schemes where Canadians are using the TFSA to shelter taxable growth in a manner contradictory to the intention of the ITA. These collaborative working relationships support the identification and timely collection of TFSA related debts. Our review revealed that the TFSA collection workload is being administered as planned and is recovering outstanding balances to ensure Canadians respect their tax obligations.   Decisions made on notices of objection and appeals to the Tax Court of Canada The CRA has recourse mechanisms in place to provide a fair and impartial process to resolve disputes arising from decisions made under the TFSA tax legislation. These processes include notices of objection or an appeal to the Tax Court of Canada. For this study we completed two reviews. Our first review included only the notices of objection filed as a result of the 94 closed audits as of December 31, 2013. This analysis revealed that of 94 audits completed by CPB, 34 resulted in assessments being issued to Canadians of which 20 or 58.9% resulted in a notice of objection being filed. At the time of our review, the Appeals Branch had resolved one notice of objection, which was allowed in full while the remaining notices of objection are still under review. Our second review was related to the use of notices of objection and appeals to the Tax Court of Canada for all Canadians holding a TFSA from the start of the program in 2009 up to May 18, 2015.  This is an indicator to identify issues with the design and administration of the TFSA program.  Our review of Appeals Branch data revealed that there were a total of 1,176 notices of objections filed of which 91.3% (1,074) have been resolved. Of the resolved notices of objection, 39% confirmed CRA’s decision and 37% were considered invalidFootnote 33. For the 4 appeals to the Tax Court of Canada, 3 have been resolved of which 2 were allowed in full and one confirmed CRA’s decision. None of the resolved appeals to the Tax Court of Canada resulted in an actual hearing before a judge. Table 10 provides details on the decisions made on notices of objections.




Table 10 - Decisions made on notices of objections 



Results
2010-2011
2011-2012
2012-2013
2013-2014
Total
%


CRA proposal confirmed
0
47
139
230
416
39%


Invalid
197
75
84
42
398
37%


Allowed in full and in part
0
27
39
79
145
14%


Other
0
16
17
34
67
6%


Late filed objections
1
13
8
26
48
4%


Total
198
178
287
411
1,074
100%





Source: Case Appeals – TFSA Intake workload and disposal plan Overall the use of notices of objection and appeals to the Tax Court of Canada for TFSA are very low at 0.01% when compared to the total number of Canadians with a TFSA. This suggests that the TFSA program, including recourse mechanisms, are well designed and administered as Canadians are not raising significant issues of disputes related to TFSAs.


Conclusion
Our analysis has revealed that the CRA has designed and implemented the administrative aspects of the TFSA program as intended to achieve the expected outcomes. Communication activities are currently underway by the CRA which may improve financial institutions and Canadians understanding of TFSA rules and restrictions and have the potential to improve overall compliance. Opportunities for improvement have been identified to potentially increase the effectiveness of the TFSA program from the perspective of Canadians, financial institutions and the CRA. We recommend that: Recommendation 1 PAB, as part of the TFSA communication review, emphasize messaging related to the responsibility of financial institutions and individuals to comply with TFSA legislation, rules and regulations. Management Response We concur with this recommendation. PAB will continue to implement communications efforts to use plain language and cross promote TFSA messaging where appropriate. In addition, PAB will build on existing messaging related to the compliance of the TFSA legislation, rules, and regulations to individuals, and will support the program branches in their communication to financial institutions.  PAB will review and update the existing TFSA communications strategy in the winter of 2016 in collaboration with the relevant program branches, and will take into consideration the external communications recommendations in this report as well as those specific to TFSA in Phase II of the External Administrative Correspondence review.  The revised communications strategy will roll-out in the spring of 2016, and will target both financial institutions and individuals.  Recommendation 2 LPRAB share the TFSA design and implementation experience with the Department of Finance Canada to potentially allow for more advanced notice when proposed legislation requires new systems and processes for both the CRA and external stakeholders. Management Response We concur with this recommendation.  We recognize that the short-time line to implement TFSA resulted in additional human and financial pressures for financial institutions.  LPRAB will share the TFSA design and implementation experience with the Department of Finance by the end of this fiscal to advise them that more advanced notice would support both external stakeholders and the CRA when proposed legislation requires new systems and processes.    Recommendation 3 LPRAB review the application of penalties to financial institutions to ensure fairness in the administration of the ITA. Management Response We concur with this recommendation. We agree that the application of penalties needs to be consistent and that penalties act as a deterrent to non-compliance. In 2016-2017, LPRAB will review and disseminate procedures for their staff with respect to applying penalties to financial institutions related to the late filing of TFSA annual information returns and failure to provide information on a TFSA return. Recommendation 4 ABSB explore and assess the feasibility of system and program enhancements related to filing timelines, reason codes for rejections and multi-year amendments to support TFSA compliance. Management Response We concur with this recommendation.  We recognize that the TFSA program has matured and opportunities for potential system and program enhancements may exist to support TFSA compliance.  ABSB will explore and assess the feasibility of varied timelines, reason codes for rejection and multi-year amendments for the TFSA program. ABSB has already started a review of the reason codes for rejections and is currently working on a help document for financial institutions. Implementation to occur in Q3. As the program enhancements related to filing timelines and multi-year amendments will involve multiple stakeholders such as INFODEC, ITB and the financial institutions, ABSB will undertake a review in 2016/2017. Implementation in 2017-2018. Recommendation 5 ABSB refer repeat non-compliance with the filing of TFSA amendments to LPRAB for review as part of the TFSA audit program of financial institutions to ensure compliance with legislation, rules and regulations. Management Response We concur with this recommendation.  We recognize the importance of ensuring that TFSA transactions details are reported correctly to the CRA as this information is used by Canadians to manage their TFSA. ABSB will review and refer repeat non-compliance with the filing of TFSA amendments to LPRAB for review as part of the TFSA audit program to ensure compliance with legislation, rules and regulations. ABSB will start referring repeat non-compliance with the filing of TFSA amendments to LPRAB. Implementation April 2016. Recommendation 6 ABSB explore and assess the feasibility to include enhanced data reporting requirements similar to TFSA, for other deferred income and savings plans, to support predictive analytics and business intelligence. Management Response We concur with this recommendation. We recognize the importance of predictive analytics and business intelligence to support CRA tax compliance activities.  ABSB will explore and assess the feasibility to include the TFSA enhanced data report requirements for other deferred income and savings plans. This review will be undertaken in 2016/2017. Recommendations originating from the review are to be implemented in Q4.


Acknowledgement
We would like to acknowledge and thank all CRA stakeholders and the financial institutions interviewed for their support. We observed that the CRA and the financial institutions have worked collaboratively and demonstrated a high level of commitment to the design and implementation of CRA’s administration of the TFSA program. This has allowed Canadians to contribute and earn tax-free investment income to more easily meet their lifetime savings needs.


Appendix A








Tax Free Savings Account (TFSA) Logic Model

The TFSA program is delivered to Canadians as holders:

Understand the rules, restrictions and filing requirements of the TFSA
Open a TFSA account with Financial Institutions
Contribute to TFSA in accordance with the annual limit 
Comply with all rules, restrictions and filing requirements of the TFSA

 The Financial institutions are the issuers of the TFSA:

Market and administer qualified TFSA arrangements approved by the CRA
Educate and inform clients on the details and restrictions of the TFSA
Electronically submit TFSA accounts for registration
Electronically file TFSA annual information returns and amendments

The logic model of the TFSA program is represented by three major actitivies that will lead to sub activities, outputs, immediate outcomes, intermediate outcomes and final outcomes.
The first major activity is Program management and business intelligence. This major activity is linked to a list of sub activities:  

Legislative review, policy and procedures development
CRA stakeholder collaboration
Resource and workload planning
Functional direction, technical advice and training
Performance monitoring and reporting
System development and maintenance
Risk assessment and strategy development

These sub actitivities are now linked to outputs:

Legislation, policy and procedures
Resource and workload allocation
Sharing of  information, advice and guidance with CRA stakeholders
Guidance, manuals, training courses and tools
System and performance monitoring reports
System and program delivery changes

These outputs are linked to immediate outcomes:

Effective legislative tax framework
Improved use of CRA business intelligence
Knowledgeable and trained personnel
Consistent application of policies and procedures
Improved ability to identify risks and implement strategies to address non-compliance
Improved system and program delivery

These immediate outcomes are linked to intermediates outcomes:

Improved effectiveness of the TFSA program to detect and address non-compliance
Optimize resource utilization

These intermediates outcomes are linked to final outcomes:

Efficient and effective program management and delivery
Financial institutions and Canadians comply with Canada’s tax legislation related to TFSA
Canadians have a registered general purpose savings vehicle to earn tax-free investment income to more easily meet lifetime savings needs

The second major activity is Communication. This major activity is linked to a list of sub activities: 

Telephone and written enquiry services
Forms and publication development
Outreach
Website development
Ministerial and media enquiry services

These sub actitivities are now linked to outputs:

Information, advice and guidance provided to financial institutions and Canadians
Electronic based information and publications
Outreach presentations
Responses to ministerial and media enquiries

These outputs are linked to immediate outcomes:

Increased level of understanding by financial institutions and Canadians on tax legislation governing TFSA
Increased confidence in CRA’s ability to administer the TFSA program

These immediate outcomes are linked to intermediates outcomes:

Increased marketing of TFSA by financial institutions
Increased confidence of Canadians to use TFSA

These intermediates outcomes are linked to final outcomes:

Efficient and effective program management and delivery
Financial institutions and Canadians comply with Canada’s tax legislation related to TFSA
Canadians have a registered general purpose savings vehicle to earn tax-free investment income to more easily meet lifetime savings needs

From CRA, Compliance is a major activity. This major activity is linked to a list of sub activities: 

Review TFSA arrangements for marketing by financial institutions
Review TFSA records, summaries and amendments from financial institutions
Administer the national audit program
Review taxpayer objections and taxpayer relief requests
Resolve outstanding balances

These sub actitivities are now linked to outputs:

Approved TFSA arrangements for marketing by financial institutions
Reconciled TFSA records, summaries and amendments
Audits completed and assessments issued
Decisions made on notices of objection, appeals to the Tax Court and relief requests
Outstanding balances resolved

These outputs are linked to immediate outcomes:

Acceptable TFSA arrangements available to Canadians
Increased accuracy of TFSA records, summaries and amendments filed by financial institutions
Increased compliance with TFSA contribution limits by Canadians
Increased compliance with investment rules by financial institutions and Canadians
Increased detection of other TFSA non-compliance

These immediate outcomes are linked to intermediates outcomes:

Improved compliance with TFSA rules, restrictions and filing requirements by financial institutions and Canadians

These intermediates outcomes are linked to final outcomes:

Efficient and effective program management and delivery
Financial institutions and Canadians comply with Canada’s tax legislation related to TFSA
Canadians have a registered general purpose savings vehicle to earn tax-free investment income to more easily meet lifetime savings needs






Footnotes

Footnote 1

For TFSA, Canadians are defined as individuals who are 18 years or older with a valid social insurance number and includes both Canadian citizens and permanent residents of Canada.

Return to footnote1 Referrer


Footnote 2

Financial institutions are defined as a bank, trust company, a licensed annuities provider, a person who is, or is eligible to become, a member of the Canadian Payments Association or a credit union with which an individual has a qualifying arrangement.

Return to footnote2 Referrer


Footnote 3

For TFSA, Canadians are defined as individuals who are 18 years or older with a valid social insurance number and includes both Canadian citizens and permanent residents of Canada.

Return to footnote3 Referrer


Footnote 4

Tax Free Savings Account publication tables for statistics ( 2013 tax year)

Return to footnote4 Referrer


Footnote 5

RC236 Application for a TFSA (Tax-Free Savings Account) Identification Number

Return to footnote5 Referrer


Footnote 6

RC4466 Tax-Free Savings Account (TFSA), Guide for Individuals and RC4477 Tax-Free Savings Account (TFSA) Guide for Issuers

Return to footnote6 Referrer


Footnote 7

Financial institutions are defined as a bank, trust company, a licensed annuities provider, a person who is, or is eligible to become, a member of the Canadian Payments Association or a credit union with which an individual has a qualifying arrangement.

Return to footnote7 Referrer


Footnote 8

The proposed TFSA return is not a formal assessment of tax

Return to footnote8 Referrer


Footnote 9

Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat – The Enhanced Management Framework (EMF) and CRA - A Governance Framework for Solutions Projects, November, 2007

Return to footnote9 Referrer


Footnote 10

IT Security Evaluation: Threat and Risk Assessment and Statement of Sensitivity for TFSA, December 2009

Return to footnote10 Referrer


Footnote 11

RC4466 Tax-Free Savings Account (TFSA), Guide for Individuals and RC4477 Tax-Free Savings Account (TFSA) Guide for Issuers

Return to footnote11 Referrer


Footnote 12

Other includes: Eligibility, Financial Institution Referral, TFSA NOA/NOR Request for transaction summary, Withdrawals, What is the TFSA, Spousal enquiries and other

Return to footnote12 Referrer


Footnote 13

T4013 T3 – Trust Guide 2014 - A trust governed by a TFSA is generally non-taxable however when the funds in the TFSA trust are used in the carrying on of a business or used to acquire non-qualified investments, the trust will be taxable to the extent of the income earned from that business or those investments.

Return to footnote13 Referrer


Footnote 14

All data (components and totals) are rounded as per the CRA’s guidelines on Aggregate Data Confidentiality Standards.

Return to footnote14 Referrer


Footnote 15

RC236 Application for a TFSA (Tax-Free Savings Account Identification) Identification Number

Return to footnote15 Referrer


Footnote 16

A TFSA specimen includes the following: For a trust:  The holder application form, and the declaration of trust that sets out the terms and conditions of the qualifying arrangement. For an insurer: The holder application form, the policy (including all riders and schedules), and the TFSA endorsement that sets out the terms and conditions of the qualifying arrangement.  For a depositary: The holder application form, and the terms and conditions of the qualifying arrangement.

Return to footnote16 Referrer


Footnote 17

Canadians residing outside Canada

Return to footnote17 Referrer


Footnote 18

All data (components and totals) are rounded as per the CRA’s guidelines on Aggregate Data Confidentiality Standards.

Return to footnote18 Referrer


Footnote 19

2012 and 2013 rejected records are still pending correction thus the amendment records are subject to change

Return to footnote19 Referrer


Footnote 20

The proposed TFSA return is not a formal assessment of tax

Return to footnote20 Referrer


Footnote 21

Form RC243-P

Return to footnote21 Referrer


Footnote 22

All micro data (components and totals) are rounded as per the CRA’s guidelines on Aggregate Data Confidentiality Standards.

Return to footnote22 Referrer


Footnote 23

An administrative relief is relief granted pursuant to section 207.06 of the ITA.

Return to footnote23 Referrer


Footnote 24

Knowing the Rules – Confusion about the rules governing the Tax-Free Savings Account - Taxpayers Ombudsman Special Report, June 2011

Return to footnote24 Referrer


Footnote 25

Section 207.06 of the ITA.

Return to footnote25 Referrer


Footnote 26

Phone call to the CRA call centre, response letter mailed to the CRA. TFSA returns filed and/or payment received for tax liabilities on excess.

Return to footnote26 Referrer


Footnote 27

PROTECTED

Return to footnote27 Referrer


Footnote 28

Tax-Free Savings Account Nudge Project: Phase 1, August 2015

Return to footnote28 Referrer


Footnote 29

GST/HST Program

Return to footnote29 Referrer


Footnote 30

Errors and rejections

Return to footnote30 Referrer


Footnote 31

732 specimen plans were in place as of November 19, 2014

Return to footnote31 Referrer


Footnote 32

Late filing the TFSA annual information return - $100 to $7,500 and failure to provide information on a return - $100 for each offense

Return to footnote32 Referrer


Footnote 33

Invalid cases are notices of objections received by the CRA that do not meet legislative requirements. For example: filed late, incomplete or intended for another CRA program, i.e. taxpayer relief.

Return to footnote33 Referrer









Report a problem or mistake on this page












Please select all that apply:

A link, button or video is not working



It has a spelling mistake



Information is missing



Information is outdated or wrong



Login error when trying to access an account




I can't find what I'm looking for



Other issue not in this list



Submit



Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries, contact us.










Date modified:
2016-07-07





Evaluation Study - Canada Revenue Agency’s Administration of the Employee Assistance Program (EAP)


Final Report


Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch


November 2016


Table of Contents

Executive Summary
Introduction
Background
Evaluation Methodologies and Approach
Study Limitations and Constraints
Overall Finding
Findings from the Evaluation

The EAP is being delivered in a manner supportive of its objectives, however opportunities for improvement have been identified
The Referral Agent role is viewed as no longer addressing a need to foster employee and organizational well-being
Potential benefits with a national External Service Provider
EAP training is experiencing a shift
 
Going Forward
Recommendations
Acknowledgement
Appendix A



Executive Summary
The Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) has a varied and diverse workforce of over 41,000 employeesFootnote 1 that are the cornerstone of Canada’s tax administration. Maintaining the well-being of all employees is a commitment the CRA takes seriously. The objective of the CRA's Employee Assistance Program (EAP) is to support employees who may be experiencing personal, health or work-related concerns, by making available to them and their family membersFootnote 2, a program that is voluntary, accessible, neutral and most importantly, confidential. The program is designed to help them acquire the skills and knowledge to address personal, health or work-related concerns, and contribute to employee well-being in the workplace. Promoting and preserving organizational well-being, including mental health, is also a priority of the Government of Canada (GoC). The Clerk of the Privy Council emphasized in the Twenty-Third Annual Report to the Prime Minister on the Public Service of Canada that public servants need to work in a healthy environment. This environment is characterized by respect that embraces differences and diversity and supports, with compassion, individuals struggling with mental health challengesFootnote 3. To address this priority, in April 2016, a CRA Agency Level Champion was appointed to support a CRA respectful workplace and well-being initiative. The Champion, with the Human Resources Branch (HRB), will plan and implement innovative ways to promote and advance this priority across the CRA through strong leadership, innovation and collaboration with employees. This includes the CRA Respectful Workplace and Well-being StrategyFootnote 4, of which the EAP is one component. In April 2016, the CRA Management Audit and Evaluation Committee approved the evaluation framework for the CRA’s administration of the EAP evaluation study. This evaluation study attempts to answer the question on the effectiveness of the CRA’s administration of the EAP with a focus on the delivery model as well as potential alternatives or modifications that could improve the EAP. This evaluation study revealed that the EAP is being delivered in accordance with the Treasury Board Secretariat Policy on EAP. The EAP is meeting its objectives as it is being used by employees and their families. However, opportunities for improvement exist as today’s society and work culture have evolved over time. These opportunities relate to the relevance of the Referral Agent role, potential benefits of a national CRA External Service Provider and the impact on training with the renewed mandate of the Canada School of Public Service (CSPS) to deliver enterprise-wide learning within the federal public service. The introduction of the CRA’s Respectful Workplace and Well-being Strategy may also result in repositioning the EAP delivery model to its essential function of counselling, critical incident response, and guidance with trained mental health professionals. This evaluation study resulted in the following recommendations: 
The Human Resources Branch should identify their information needs and gaps in the current monitoring and reporting of the EAP delivery model to allow for the development of analytics that support measurement and accountability.
The Human Resources Branch should reassess the relevance of the Referral Agent role within the EAP delivery model.
The Finance and Administration Branch should undertake a comparative analysis of the existing supply base model for EAP and the one offered by Health Canada to determine what makes the best business sense for the CRA, taking into consideration the need for a consistent level of service, value for money, and the shift in the EAP training.
The Human Resources Branch should continue to work with CSPS as well as develop analytics to assess the multiple training avenues to determine an effective and efficient learning delivery model with the shift in EAP training and the introduction of the CRA Respectful Workplace and Well-being Strategy.



Introduction
In April 2016, the Management Audit and Evaluation Committee (MAEC) of the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) approved the evaluation framework for the CRA’s Employee Assistance Program (EAP) Evaluation Study. This evaluation study examined the effectiveness of the CRA’s administration of the EAP to meet its objectives with a focus on the delivery model. The evaluation framework identified the following two evaluation issues: Issue 1: How effective is the CRA’s administration of the Employee Assistance Program to meet its objectives? 
Is the delivery model designed to achieve objectives?
Are there any gaps or weaknesses in how the program is administered?
 Issue 2: Are there alternatives or modifications to improve the CRA’s administration of the Employee Assistance Program? 
Are there best practices or lessons learned from the different CRA regional EAP offices?
Are there alternative approaches to delivery that could be adopted from other federal government departments?
 This report summarizes the findings related to these issues and research questions. Findings are to provide the CRA senior management with information on the effectiveness of the CRA’s administration of the EAP to achieve expected outcomes with a particular focus on the delivery model. The study also identified potential alternatives or modifications that could improve the CRA’s administration of the EAP.


Background
The CRA has a varied and diverse workforce of over 41,000 employeesFootnote 5 that are the cornerstone of Canada’s tax administration. Maintaining the well-being of all employees is a commitment the Government of Canada (GoC) and the CRA takes seriously. Promoting and preserving organizational well-being, including mental health, is a priority of the GoC. The Clerk of the Privy Council emphasized in the Twenty-Third Annual Report to the Prime Minister on the Public Service of Canada that public servants need to work in a healthy environment that is characterized by respect, that embraces differences and diversity, and that supports, with compassion, individuals struggling with mental health challengesFootnote 6.  To address the GoC priority, in April 2016, a CRA Agency Level Champion was appointed to support a CRA respectful workplace and well-being initiative. The Champion will lead efforts, with the Human Resources Branch (HRB), to plan and implement innovative ways to promote and advance this priority across the CRA through strong leadership, innovation and collaboration with employees. This included the development of a CRA Respectful Workplace and Well-being Strategy, which was launched in October 2016. For the CRA, the objective of the CRA EAP is to support employees who may be experiencing personal, health or work-related concerns, by making available to them and their family membersFootnote 7, a program that is voluntary, accessible, neutral and most importantly, confidential. As outlined in the logic model (Appendix A), the major EAP activities include education, awareness and confidential assistance to CRA employees, at all levels, to help them acquire the skills and knowledge to address personal, health or work-related concerns. These efforts contribute to employee well-being in the workplace. The EAP has three access points for employees and their family membersFootnote 8 to contact: 
The CRA Referral Agents (RA), via their direct work phone number or by email, are employees of the CRA who have volunteered and have been trained as a listening ear to employees to facilitate their access to EAP professional counsellors, and to provide information on resources available within the CRA and in the community; or
The CRA Coordinator-Counsellors (CC), via their direct work phone number or by email, are employees of the CRA who are trained mental health professionals, and have an appropriate provincial or territorial licensure. They provide professional counselling, support following critical incident events, and advisory services; or
External Service Provider Counsellors (ESP), via a regional or provincial 1-800 number, are contracted by the CRA, are trained mental health professionals, and have an appropriate provincial or territorial licensure. They provide professional counselling, support following critical incident events, and advisory services.
 The National Employee Assistance Program Office (NEAPO) of the HRB is the functional authority, and is responsible for ensuring that a consistent level of EAP services is offered to all CRA employees and their family members. The NEAPO works in consultation with management and the unions through the EAP National Advisory Committee, and with the Assistant Director of Workplace relations and CCs who administer the EAP in their area of responsibility. Other components of the EAP include Local EAP Advisory CommitteesFootnote 9, RAs and ESPs. These collaborative relationships support the NEAPO to: 
monitor, identify and implement the EAP strategies;
develop and deliver educational and awareness activities; and
ensure professional standards of performance for both in-house and external counselling services are met.
 The EAP budget, reported by NEAPO, for fiscal year 2014-2015 was $3.6 millionFootnote 10 of which $1.5 million was allocated to contracts for ESPs. This budget did not take into consideration the costs associated with the RAs which are absorbed by the employees’ branch or region. Through the use of Corporate Administrative System (CAS) data, the RA salary and training costs for 2014-2015 was estimated at $195,185Footnote 11 and 2.65 full time equivalents (FTE). Table 1 provides an overview of the 2014-2015 EAP resourcesFootnote 12 in the CRA.




Table 1: EAP Resources by Headquarters and Regions – 2014-2015



Region
CRA Referral Agents (RA)
CRA Coordinator-Counsellors (CC)
Number of External Service Provider OrganizationsFootnote 13 (ESP)


Atlantic
28
2
1


Québec
27
3
1


Headquarters
5
1
1


Ontario
55
4
1


Prairies
18
3
3


Pacific
17
2
1


Total
150
15
8





Source: RA and CC resources: CRA EAP website, February 2016 and External Service Provider information: NEAPO (contract information)


Evaluation Methodologies and Approach
For the evaluation study, the following methodologies and approach were used: 
Internal interviews were carried out with employees from all branches and regions within the CRA. This included those involved with the EAP program including representatives from the EAP National Advisory Committee as well as executives, managers, employees, CRA union representative from the Professional Institute of the Public Service of Canada (PIPSC), and the Agency Champion for Respectful Workplace and Well-being. Interviews were also held with representatives from the CRA national Management Group (MGN) and Young Professional (YPN) networks;
External interviews were conducted with representatives from the Canada School of Public Service (CSPS) and Health Canada Employee Assistance Services;
Examination of EAP policies, procedures, training documentation, budgets, and contracts with the ESPs was undertaken;
Literature research on EAP was undertaken;
Observation of a mental health training session provided by the CSPS; and
A series of analyses on the outputs and outcomes of the CRA’s administration of the EAP for the period 2010-2011 to 2015-2016.



Study Limitations and Constraints
Our capacity to assess the EAP delivery model was limited due to confidentiality provisions and gaps in the monitoring and reporting of the EAP. Collective agreement negotiations were also underway between the CRA and the Public Service Alliance of Canada/Union of Taxation Employees (PSAC/UTE) during the examination phase thus our request for an interview with the CRA union representative was declined and a survey methodology was determined inappropriate. To offset this, interviews were held with the CRA National Management Group (MGN) and Young Professionals (YPN) networks that represent their branches and regions and have the pulse of their respective organizations. Therefore, data and observations made in this report are based on the best information available.


Overall Finding
The evaluation study revealed that the EAP is being delivered in accordance with the Treasury Board Secretariat (TBS) Policy on Employee Assistance Programs (Policy). The EAP is meeting its objectives as it is being used by employees and their families. However opportunities for improvement exist as today’s society and work culture has evolved over time. These opportunities relate to the relevance of the RA role, potential benefits of a national CRA ESP, and the impact on EAP training with the renewed mandate of the CSPS to deliver enterprise-wide learning within the federal public service. The introduction of the CRA’s Respectful Workplace and Well-being Strategy, which was launched in October 2016, may also result in the repositioning of the EAP delivery model to its essential function of counselling, critical incident response and guidance with trained mental health professionals.


Findings from the Evaluation


The EAP is being delivered in a manner supportive of its objectives, however opportunities for improvement have been identified
The TBS Policy has a requirement that federal organizations make available to their employees and their families a confidential and voluntary EAP without prejudice to job security or career progression. This review revealed that the EAP is being delivered in accordance with the TBS Policy and provides employees and their families with accessible, neutral and confidential services. A review of NEAPO reported data of new ESPFootnote 14 cases revealed that employees and their families are using the EAP. It was also noted that national complaintsFootnote 15 were minimal at 0.95% in 2012-2013, 1.09% in 2013-2014, and 0.73% in 2014-2015 as outlined in Table 2. This suggests that the service provided by ESPs, which is the main component for confidential counsellingFootnote 16, has met the needs of employees and their families.




Table 2: External Service Providers New Cases and National Complaints by Region – 2012-2013 to 2014-2015















 
2012-2013
2013-2014
2014-2015


Region
 New Cases (#) 
Complaints (#)
Complaints (%)
New Cases (#)
Complaints (#)
Complaints (%)
New Cases (#)
Complaints (#)
Complaints (%)


Atlantic
446
3
0.67%
542
9
1.66%
430
5
1.16%


Québec
698
12
1.72%
818
9
1.10%
715
8
1.12%


Headquarters
546
1Footnote 17
0.18%
639
2
0.31%
658
2
0.30%


Ontario
1,179
3
0.25%
1,362
16
1.17%
1,192
5Footnote 18
0.42%


Prairies
733
20
2.73%
654
10Footnote 19
1.53%
549
5Footnote 20
0.91%


Pacific
603
1
0.17%
643
5
0.78%
703
6
0.85%


National Total 
4,205
40
0.95%
4,658
51
1.09%
4,247
31
0.73%





Source:  New Cases: External Service Provider data reports, NEAPO and Complaints: Quality Assurance data, Complaints National, NEAPO The EAP delivery model supported CRA employees and their families in dealing with 6,344Footnote 21 types of issues-counselling in 2014-2015 (Table 3). As reported by the NEAPO, the RAs dealt with 18%, the CCs with 12%, and the ESPs with 70%. The main reasons for issues-counselling were reported as family at 39.8%, emotional and mental health at 31.98%, and work at 12.47%.




Table 3 – Types of Issues-Counselling – 2014-2015



Type
Referral Agent (RA)
Coordinator- Counsellor (CC)
External Service Provider (ESP)
Total #
Total %


Family
466
255
1,804
2,525
39.80%


Health – Emotional/Mental
149
202
1,678
2,029
31.98%


Work
260
151
380
791
12.47%


Grief
58
46
185
289
4.56%


Health - Physical
56
40
98
194
3.06%


Addiction
25
13
69
107
1.69% 


Relationship - Others
16
16
48
80
1.26% 


Trauma
6
10
56
72
1.14%


Work/Life Balance
41
7
23
71
1.12%


Financial
34
9
6
49
0.77%


Suicide
14
7
23
44
0.69%


Legal
18
8
3
29
0.46%


Harassment
10
8
5
23
0.36%


Abuse, Threats, Stalking
5
4
12
21
0.33%


Handling of Suicidal Calls
9
4
3
16
0.25%


Other
2
2
0
4
0.06%


Total Issues-Counselling
1,169
782
4,393
6,344
100% 





Source:  EAP Annual Overview 2014-2015 – Types of Issues – Counselling Although the EAP is meeting its objectives, opportunities for potential improvements to the delivery model have been identified. These relate to the relevance of the RA role, potential benefits of a national CRA ESP, and the impact on EAP training with the renewed mandate of the CSPS to deliver enterprise-wide learning within the federal public service.


The Referral Agent role is viewed as no longer addressing a need to foster employee and organizational well-being
The CRA employees interviewed indicated that today’s society and work culture has evolved which makes employees more supportive of their colleagues struggling with mental health and/or other difficult challenges at work or home. They respect differences and diversity and strongly believe that the level of awareness on employee and organizational well-being, which includes mental health, has increased. They have achieved this through education, open and frank discussions, information readily available on social media and internet, and life experiences which have supported the development of resiliency skills to deal with life events as they occur. RAs are employees, who have volunteered and have been trained as a listening ear to facilitate access to EAP professional counsellors, and to provide information on resources available within their organization or community. The CRA RA role was introduced in November 1999 when the Department of National Revenue merged with Canada Customs as they had employees in remote areas and ports. When the Department of National Revenue separated from Canada Customs in December 2003, the CRA kept the RA role in place. With respect to the EAP delivery model, the majority of employees interviewed are supportive of the mandate of the EAP and the value of the trained mental health professionals for counselling and critical incident response; however they viewed the RA role as not addressing a need to foster employee and organizational well-being. It was also recognized that the RA title is misleading and suggests that employees have to go to a RA prior to making contact with a trained mental health professional, when this is not the case. The RAs interviewed revealed that this is the most common question they receive and this information is not captured in EAP statistics. There are two schools of thought on the RA role. While literature research supports the positive impact of a peer network in certain workplaces, others suggest limited value as access to EAP services is readily available with trained mental health professionals. The RA role is more commonly used by fire and police as they have employees in remote areas and ports. Interviews with Health Canada revealed that most federal organizations do not have a RA role. The majority of employees interviewed indicated that they prefer to deal with their own doctor rather than use the EAP. However, those who have used or would use the EAP would not reach out to a RA and would prefer to have first contact with trained mental health professionals, CCs or ESPs, to maintain confidentiality and ensure no prejudice to their job security or career progression. Review of the ESP data, from the EAP delivery model lens, revealed that in 2014-2015, the majority of employees (53.19%) referred themselves for external counselling services while employee referrals from the RAs and CCs were significantly less at 0.40% and 0.35% respectively (Table 4).




Table 4:  External Service Providers referrals by source for new users – 2014-2015



New users referred by
Number of Referrals
Percentage %


Self
2,259
53.19%


UnknownFootnote 22
719
16.93%


OtherFootnote 23
689
16.22%


Human Resources
203
4.78%


Colleague
194
4.57%


Supervisor
130
3.06%


Union
21
0.50%


Referral Agent
17
0.40%


Coordinator-counsellor
15
0.35%


Total
4,247
100%





Source: External Service Provider data, 2014-2015 NEAPO advised that both CCs and RAs make referrals to the ESPs however it is unknown who will choose to contact an ESP or not. They also advised that an individual may not want to disclose the referral source (Unknown category) due to confidentiality or may combine CC and RA referrals under Human Resources (HR) since they exist within the HR function. In addition, the management of the RAs was assessed as concerns were raised that the CRA may be open to legal liabilities. These concerns related to the RAs: 
not being trained mental health professionals;
capacity to act and to work within the parameters of their role; and
capacity to assume and deal with the potential stress associated with this role.
 Discussions with the CRA Legal Services revealed that the potential for legal liability is a reality for any organization, large or small. However, it is offset through the use of management practices which include clearly defined accountabilities with monitoring and control processes in place. This opinion was consistent with subject matter experts responsible for performance management in the CRA. Although there have been no instances of legal liability related to the CRA EAP program to date, this should not be interpreted to mean that the potential is diminished in any way. The analysis of management practices related to RAs revealed that it is insufficient: 
A review of the 2014-2015 RA performance management reports revealed that 97% of the RAs did not have documented EAP expectations to guide them in their role. This also suggests that the value of their role was not always recognized by the RAs or their managers who are jointly responsible for this report.
A review of the NEAPO statistics for 2014-2015 revealed that the RAs dealt with 18% or 1,169 types of issues-counselling (Table 3). Other data on RAs revealed that they referred 54% or 540 casesFootnote 24 to ESPs; however ESP statistics revealed only 0.4% or 17 cases (Table 4) were reported by ESPs as being referred by a RA. Considering the volume and types of issues-counselling this raises questions on the level of support being provided to employees by the RA. No data exists on how each type of RA issues-counselling was dealt with and whether or not it was appropriate based on the specific case. This limited the ability to assess the outcome of the RAs in their intervention with an employee.
A review of policies and procedures revealed there are no boundaries on the time allowed for the RAs to spend on EAP. NEAPO advised that a guideline exists for managers with RAs on their team, however it was not known by the CCs, RAs, or managers with RAs interviewed nor available on the CRA EAP website.
 A discussion with NEAPO on EAP statistics revealed that they recognize the way in which information is tracked in the current EAP monitoring and reporting framework can lead to misinterpretation of information, create cause and effect relationships and other possible relationships that may or may not exist. Interviews with management also provided unconfirmed examples of RAs working outside their role as a listening ear. To test this, as part of the interviews with the RAs, various scenarios were provided to determine what actions, if any, they would take. This revealed that some RAs find it difficult to maintain the line between being a listening ear and providing advice. Their desire to assist, in some cases, may have impacted their ability to abide by the parameters of their role. This leads to potential negative unintended impacts for both the RAs and the employees they deal with. For example, for the RAs, there are security risks when they make themselves available to employees outside the workplace or hours of work; and for employees, a breach of information by an RA can cause embarrassment and potentially accelerate a situation. A review of the CRA Respectful Workplace and Well-being Strategy revealed that the role provided by the RA could potentially be replaced by initiatives planned for the HRB’s Well-being website. This website is to include information such as self-assessment tools for mental health, information on social support, health benefits and coverage, and links to EAP contact information for the CCs and ESPs. Based on the analysis undertaken, the HRB needs to reassess the relevance of the RA role within the EAP delivery model. As access to EAP services is readily available with trained mental health professionals, via CCs and ESPs, and considering the initiatives planned as part of the CRA Respectful Workplace and Well-being Strategy, discontinuing the RA role could potentially better meet the needs of employees by connecting them more directly to trained mental health professionals by removing the RA layer in the delivery model. This would also offset the potential for the negative unintended impacts identified.


Potential benefits with a national External Service Provider
The review of the ESPs in the delivery model revealed potential benefits with a national provider as this could reduce duplication of effort to hire the ESP and improve the monitoring of the contracts. In 2014-2015, as reported by NEAPO, there were 8 ESP contractsFootnote 25 in place to provide employee assistance services to CRA employees and their families at a contract cost of $1.5 million (Table 5). It is recognized that the contract costs associated with Ontario and Pacific regions are higher due to the rates associated with counselling services within these regions.




Table 5 – External Service Providers Contracts – 2014-2015



Region
Working PopulationFootnote 26
Contract Cost 2014-2015


Atlantic
3,566
$146,944


Québec
5,047
$190,390


Headquarters
10,221
$176,778


Ontario
12,761
$450,416


PrairieFootnote 27
5,797
$228,094


Pacific
4,471
$351,667


Total
41,863
$1,544,289





Source:  NEAPO: Individual External Service Provider Contracts – 2014-2015 The work involved in sourcing a new ESP and monitoring the contracts is the responsibility of the CCs. Interviews with the CCs revealed that the majority are not comfortable with this task. Many CCs stated that they felt that the hiring and monitoring of the ESPs was difficult, time consuming, and took away from counselling, providing guidance, and training to employees. The time associated with assessing, hiring, and monitoring the ESPs is not tracked so it limited the ability to assess the level of effort involved with this task. In 2015, the Pacific Region recognized this as a challenge and changed the process for the hiring of their ESP by using auditors with expertise in business and contract auditing. This provided management with a greater level of comfort in the hiring of the new ESP for the Pacific Region. A review of the mandatory reporting of statistics in the ESP contracts revealed that the statistical reports, for the most part, were inconsistent or incomplete which impeded the ability to assess the ESP service with any certainty. Discussions with the NEAPO recognized that the EAP statistics do not provide a complete picture of the program. With the reorganization that occurred in April 2016 with HR resourcesFootnote 28, from all branches and regions, reporting directly to the HRB, the centralization of contract monitoring and financial reporting may be better positioned as part of the responsibility of the NEAPO or through other means such as centralized contracting within HRB. This could provide CCs with more time for counselling, guidance and training. While the CRA can choose the ESP of its choiceFootnote 29, and no issues were identified with the current ESPs, many interviewed were of the opinion that the CRA was not supporting the GoC’s mandate to modernize and centralize services. It is their belief that Health Canada would be the natural ESP for all federal government employees. This would support a consistent level of service for employees across the GoC. Another benefit identified was that this would allow for the use of one ESP phone number which could simplify access to the ESP services as well as facilitate promotion of the program as it could be included on the back of ID passes. Regardless, many interviewed advised that making the EAP phone number readily available outside the workplace and working hours – such as on an ID pass – would be valuable. Interviews with Health Canada revealed that they provide employee assistance services to 140 federal organizations, including the CRA in the Atlantic and Pacific Regions; and that they have the capacity to support a CRA national contract. Health Canada is also in an ideal position to coordinate with the CSPS for training needs at the GoC level. A review of Pacific Region ESP analysis, with their migration to Health Canada, revealed savings of $166,835Footnote 30 in 2015-2016. The Pacific Region also confirmed that they were satisfied with the service provided by Health Canada. This is consistent with the interviews held with the Atlantic Region who have had Health Canada as their ESP for many years. In discussions with the Finance and Administration Branch’s (FAB) contracting experts, they recommended that an independent comparative analysis of the existing supply base model for EAP and the one offered by Health Canada be undertaken. This would provide current information on what makes the best business sense for the CRA going forward. This analysis should include a financial reconciliation of the ESP expenditures as well as the implications with the shift in the EAP training which is outlined in the next section of the report. This recommended approach is appropriate and will provide expert information to support senior management decision-making moving forward.


EAP training is experiencing a shift
The EAP related training is currently provided through multiple avenues to CRA employees. The RAs provide and assist in orientation, awareness, and wellness fairs; CCs provide training with approved national EAP learning products; and the ESPs provide training on request with additional costs. Although not officially part of the EAP training model, management and unions also play a critical role in EAP training and awareness. Based on our interviews they are aware of the program, contact information, and educate and guide employees who may be experiencing difficulties to either the CCs or the ESPs. This is consistent with the information obtained from the MGN. As of April 1, 2016, the Canada School of Public Service (CSPS) was given the renewed mandate and funds to deliver enterprise-wide learning within the federal public service. At this time, the HRB is maintaining the status quo during the transition period with the CSPS. This makes sense as, based on the NEAPO analysisFootnote 31, the CSPS does not yet have the capacity to respond to CRA specific training such as training for employees on how to manage suicidal threats by taxpayers. Through discussions with the CSPS, their mandate at this time is to focus on web-based training related to resiliency skills. It is intended to support employees in all federal organizations to deal with challenges that occur - whether it relates to not being successful on a competitive process, dealing with conflict at work, the loss of a loved one or aging parents. The NEAPO was also developing a CRA national course on resiliency skills, prior to the transition to CSPS, and needs to continue to work with the CSPS to share information and ensure no duplication of effort. It was also recognized by everyone interviewed that the delivery of certain EAP training needs to be undertaken with in-person trained mental health professionals. This supports the conversations that can occur before, during, or after a training session when employees may reach out. This is the norm for the CRA and the CSPS. During this period of transition, the CSPS has reached out to trained mental health professionals in federal organizations to support training. As part of the analysis, observations of a CSPS mental health and wellness learning day was undertaken and deemed appropriate and was provided by a trained mental health professional. The HRB has to ensure that employees are receiving EAP training in a way that is appropriate, cost-effective, and responding to a need. At the time of this study, there were many unknowns with regards to the future direction of the delivery of the EAP training products with the new CSPS mandate. Reporting statistics, excluding associated costs, were only available for the training given by the CRA which limited the ability to assess the complete picture of EAP related training. The ESPs offer training for an additional cost; however, statistics and associated costs with this training were not readily available for review. The registration of the CSPS training is not linked or tracked to the EAP program which impeded our ability to assess this training avenue. The coordinating and monitoring of training products has to be clearly identified between the multiple avenues as well as the new initiatives introduced, such as the new CRA on-boarding for employee orientation which includes links to EAP. This will require the development of analytics that support measurement and accountability including the costs associated with each training avenue. Based on analysis, the HRB should continue to work with CSPS as well as develop analytics to assess the multiple training avenues to determine an effective and efficient learning delivery model with the shift in EAP training and the introduction of the CRA Respectful Workplace and Well-being Strategy. This should include the costs associated with each training avenue.


Going Forward
The CRA Agency Level Champion is committed to collaborate with employees so they have a voice in the direction that will be taken to promote and advance a respectful workplace that supports employee well-being across the CRA. With the introduction of the CRA’s Respectful Workplace and Well-being Strategy, which includes the EAP along with other HR programs, this may reposition the EAP delivery model to its essential function to provide counselling, critical incident support and guidance. The centralization of the EAP and other HR program information will be accessible through the HRB’s Well-being website, which may rationalize how services are offered to employees, remove duplication, if any, and increase the quality of service of the EAP and other HR program information. This analysis revealed that the RA role and certain EAP training could be replaced by the CSPS and the HRB’s Well-being website such as self-assessment tools for mental health and information on social support, health benefits and coverage information, as well as education on mental illness.


Recommendations
This evaluation study resulted in the following recommendations: 1. The Human Resources Branch should identify their information needs and gaps in the current monitoring and reporting of the EAP delivery model to allow for the development of analytics that support measurement and accountability. Management Response We concur with this recommendation. HRB is committed to undertake a review of the monitoring and reporting in Q2 of 2017-2018 to determine information needs and the identification of analytics needed to support program improvements based on the findings from this evaluation report. Based on this review, HRB will develop action plans to align with timelines outlined within the Respectful Workplace and Well-being Strategy action plan in Q2 of 2018-2019. This will result in an EAP measurement framework to support monitoring, reporting and accountability at the outset.      2. The Human Resources Branch should reassess the relevance of the Referral Agent role within the EAP delivery model. Management Response We concur with this recommendation. HRB is committed to undertake a review of the Referral Agent role in Q4 of 2016-2017. Results of this review as well as recommendations will be provided to HRB senior management at the end of Q3 of 2017-2018 to inform decision-making. 3. The Finance and Administration Branch should undertake a comparative analysis of the existing supply base model for EAP and the one offered by Health Canada to determine what makes the best business sense for the CRA, taking into consideration the need for a consistent level of service, value for money, and the shift in the EAP training. Management Response We concur with this recommendation. FAB’s Contracting Division will undertake this comparative analysis starting in Q1 2017-2018 with an expected completion date of Q3 2017-2018. This analysis will support senior management decision making as it will provide current information on what makes the best business sense for the CRA going forward.    4. The Human Resources Branch should continue to work with CSPS as well as develop analytics to assess the multiple training avenues to determine an effective and efficient learning delivery model with the shift in EAP training and the introduction of the CRA Respectful Workplace and Well-being Strategy. Management Response We concur with this recommendation. HRB recognizes that EAP training is currently in transition and will continue to monitor, establish analytics, when feasible, and will adjust CRA training delivery avenues as the CSPS evolves with their new mandate. Status of EAP training will be included in the HRB Annual Report starting in Q1 2017-2018 to inform decision-making. 


Acknowledgement
We would like to acknowledge and thank all members of the EAP Working Group and employees interviewed from all branches and regions. We observed that the CRA has a dedicated workforce who respect differences, diversity and are supportive of their colleagues struggling with mental health and/or difficult challenges at work or home.


Appendix A








Image description

The logic model of the EAP is represented by three major activities that will lead to sub-activities, outputs, immediate outcomes, intermediate outcomes and a final outcome.
The first major activity is Program Management. This major activity is linked to a list of sub-activities:

Policy and procedures
Resource and program planning
Monitoring and reporting
Functional direction and advice
Establish contracts for external service providers
Complaint Investigation
National and Local EAP Advisory Committees

These sub-activities are now linked to outputs:

Policies and procedures developed
Resources allocated
Program performance and monitoring reports
Contracts for external service providers established
Complaints investigated
Client Satisfaction Questionnaires reviewed
Sharing of information, advice and guidance with National and Local EAP Advisory Committees and referral agents

These outputs are linked to immediate outcomes:

Consistent level of EAP services available in Headquarters and Regions
Ability to identify and implement EAP strategies to meet current and future needs

These immediate outcomes are linked to intermediates outcomes:

Employees and their families have access to services to foster and maintain well-being
Increased ability to address personal, health and work related issues

These intermediate outcomes are linked to a final outcome:

Efficient and effective program management and delivery to foster employee well-being in the workplace

The second major activity is Education and Awareness. This major activity is linked to a list of sub-activities:

Website
Awareness materials
Orientation, training, workshops and information sessions for management, employees, union, human resources community, National and Local EAP Advisory Committees and referral agents

These sub-activities are now linked to outputs:

Website developed
Awareness materials developed
Orientation, training, workshops and information sessions delivered

These outputs are linked to immediate outcomes:

Increased awareness of the EAP resources
Knowledgeable and trained management, union, referral agents and employees

These immediate outcomes are linked to intermediate outcomes:

Employees and their families have access to services to foster and maintain well-being
Increased ability to address personal, health and work related issues

These intermediate outcomes are linked to a final outcome:

Efficient and effective program management and delivery to foster employee well-being in the workplace

The third major activity is Confidential Assistance and this is provided by two ways – CRA Referral Agents and Professional CRA and External Counsellors. The CRA Referral Agents are linked to a list of sub-activities:

Listen and provide information on resources to employees
Referrals to professional counsellors

These sub-activities are now linked to outputs:

Information and support provided
Employees referred to EAP counsellors

These outputs are linked to an immediate outcome:

Assistance is provided in an accessible, confidential, neutral and timely manner

These immediate outcomes are linked to intermediate outcomes:

Employees and their families have access to services to foster and maintain well-being
Increased ability to address personal, health and work related issues

These intermediate outcomes are linked to a final outcome:

Efficient and effective program management and delivery to foster employee well-being in the workplace

The Professional CRA and External Counsellors are linked to a list of sub-activities:

Respond to employees and their families
Advice and guidance to management, human resources community, union and referral agents
Critical Incident Stress Management support

These sub-activities are now linked to outputs:

Professional counseling provided
Advice and guidance provided
Critical Incident Stress Management services provided

These outputs are linked to an immediate outcome:

Assistance is provided in an accessible, confidential, neutral and timely manner

These immediate outcomes are linked to intermediate outcomes:

Employees and their families have access to services to foster and maintain well-being
Increased ability to address personal, health and work related issues

These intermediate outcomes are linked to a final outcome:

Efficient and effective program management and delivery to foster employee well-being in the workplace






Footnotes

Footnote 1

For the purpose of this study “employee” represents all levels within the CRA organization - executives, managers and employees.

Return to footnote1 Referrer


Footnote 2

For EAP, “family member” is defined as spouse or common-law spouse, dependent children (including foster children or children of the employee’s legal or common-law spouse), and any relative permanently residing in the employee’s household or with whom the employee permanently resides and who is financially dependent on the employee.

Return to footnote2 Referrer


Footnote 3

Twenty-Third Annual Report to the Prime Minister on the Public Service of Canada, Clerk of Privy Council, March 2016.

Return to footnote3 Referrer


Footnote 4

Launched on October 3, 2016.

Return to footnote4 Referrer


Footnote 5

For the purpose of this study “employee” represents all levels within the CRA organization - executives, managers and employees.

Return to footnote5 Referrer


Footnote 6

Twenty-Third Annual Report to the Prime Minister on the Public Service of Canada, Clerk of Privy Council, March 2016.

Return to footnote6 Referrer


Footnote 7

For EAP, “family member” is defined as spouse or common-law spouse, dependent children (including foster children or children of the employee’s legal or common-law spouse), and any relative permanently residing in the employee’s household or with whom the employee permanently resides and who is financially dependent on the employee.

Return to footnote7 Referrer


Footnote 8

Family members access services via ESP and on occasion CCs.

Return to footnote8 Referrer


Footnote 9

Includes management, employees, union representatives, referral agents and coordinator-counsellors.

Return to footnote9 Referrer


Footnote 10

Salary, operating and maintenance costs.

Return to footnote10 Referrer


Footnote 11

Salary: $178,457 and Training: $16,728

Return to footnote11 Referrer


Footnote 12

CRA EAP website, February 29, 2016 for RA and CC resources.

Return to footnote12 Referrer


Footnote 13

Contract information from NEAPO, February 8, 2016.

Return to footnote13 Referrer


Footnote 14

Cases are counted as “new cases” only once per fiscal year, regardless of how often the client is seen. However, if the same client contacts the EAP later in the same fiscal year about an issue unrelated to the issue discussed the first time, the client would be considered a new case.

Return to footnote14 Referrer


Footnote 15

National complaints are tracked by NEAPO who encourages clients to contact the CCs if they are unhappy with the services received from the ESPs or RAs.

Return to footnote15 Referrer


Footnote 16

ESPs dealt with 70% of the types of issues-counselling in 2014-2015 (Table 3).

Return to footnote16 Referrer


Footnote 17

PROTECTED

Return to footnote17 Referrer


Footnote 18

PROTECTED

Return to footnote18 Referrer


Footnote 19

One complaint was related to an invoicing error.

Return to footnote19 Referrer


Footnote 20

PROTECTED

Return to footnote20 Referrer


Footnote 21

New cases may involve multiple issues.

Return to footnote21 Referrer


Footnote 22

No definition available.

Return to footnote22 Referrer


Footnote 23

Other is defined as referral by family doctor, friend, family member, etc.

Return to footnote23 Referrer


Footnote 24

NEAPO data: RA new contacts totaled 1,004 of which RAs referred 540 cases to ESPs.

Return to footnote24 Referrer


Footnote 25

For Health Canada Employee Assistance Services (EAS), Interdepartmental Letter of Agreement (ILA) and Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) are in place with Atlantic and Pacific, respectively.

Return to footnote25 Referrer


Footnote 26

Working population is based on HRB demographic reports and is the average number of employees within a given year.

Return to footnote26 Referrer


Footnote 27

Prairie Region reduced their ESP contracts from three to one effective June 1, 2016.

Return to footnote27 Referrer


Footnote 28

With the exception of RAs.

Return to footnote28 Referrer


Footnote 29

Financial Administration Act, Section 61 of the Canada Revenue Agency Act.

Return to footnote29 Referrer


Footnote 30

Pacific Region EAP Service Provider Review for 2015-2016 Implementation, dated August 2014.

Return to footnote30 Referrer


Footnote 31

CSPS Comparison to EAP National Training Products.

Return to footnote31 Referrer









Report a problem or mistake on this page












Please select all that apply:

A link, button or video is not working



It has a spelling mistake



Information is missing



Information is outdated or wrong



Login error when trying to access an account




I can't find what I'm looking for



Other issue not in this list



Submit



Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries, contact us.










Date modified:
2017-01-27





Evaluation Study – Horizontal Compliance Management: GST/HST Audit Program


Final Report
Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch
May 2018


 Table of contents

Executive summary
1. Introduction
2. Background
3. Evaluation methodologies
4. Findings

4.1 Performance measurement, monitoring, and reporting

4.1.1 GST/HST Audit Program performance results suggest productivity declined, as to be expected when implementing organizational change
4.1.2 Setting GST/HST program targets has challenges and may be working at cross-purposes with the importance of audit quality
4.1.3 There are no performance measures in place to enhance coordination and facilitate the horizontal compliance management of multiple obligations of the same taxpayer


4.2 GST/HST audit community experience

4.2.1 As early adopters of a new case management system, GST/HST auditors had access to timelier and a greater amount of information
4.2.2 The new case management system demonstrated inconsistent system performance when implemented
4.2.3 Sick leave usage increased significantly in the GST/HST Audit Program after the introduction of organizational changes and has since stabilized


4.3 Governance

4.3.1 Project oversight in the CRA focuses on project management metrics such as milestones, dates, and budget
4.3.2 The adoption of Agile strengthened the collaboration between business and IT
4.3.3 Post-implementation performance gaps emerged based on the approach to monitoring and reporting




5. Conclusion
6. Recommendations and management response
7. Acknowledgement
8. Appendices

8.1 Appendix A: Glossary





Executive summary
The Agency Management Committee of the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) approved the evaluation framework of the Horizontal Compliance Management Evaluation Study on July 18, 2012. Horizontal compliance management refers to factors which are seen to support an organization’s ability to operate in a coordinated way. These factors include governance structures which oversee strategic and operational decisions, information systems, and performance measurement. Greater coordination can be achieved by effectively managing these factors and their downstream impacts on each other or on other stakeholders.
In order to assess the effectiveness of internal management practices, the evaluation examined organizational change introduced to the Goods and Services Tax/Harmonized Sales Tax (GST/HST) Audit Program over the period of April 2012 to March 2017. This evaluation looks at the governance structures providing oversight, the ability of compliance workers to access and use compliance information, and the monitoring and reporting framework in place. The evaluation assesses the effectiveness of practices at the organizational level rather than through the lens of a particular program or activity in order to examine interrelated and interdependent parts.
Findings
Overall, a series of organizational changes impacted the GST/HST Audit Program in expected and unexpected ways. Lessons can be learned from the post-implementation monitoring that occurred, as the impacts were not all detected.
In examining program results, the following key findings emerged with respect to a robust performance measurement and reporting system which can shed light on both desired and undesired results:

the GST/HST Audit Program performance results suggest productivity declined after the introduction of organizational changes;
the emphasis on audit quality is competing with traditional targets and performance indicators; and
performance indicators reinforce individual program mandates and do not provide insight on multiple obligations of the same taxpayer (filing, reporting, and payment).

With respect to the availability of sufficient and timely information which can impact the CRA’s ability to achieve its results and compliance objectives, the following emerged:

GST/HST auditors had access to timelier and a greater amount of information with the introduction of a new case management system; and
the inconsistent performance and reliability of the new case management system limited GST/HST auditors’ ability to access and use the information.

In examining what contributed to the observations noted above, the following key findings emerged with respect to the design and functioning of governance structures:

oversight focuses on project management metrics while aspects of quality receive less attention;
the adoption of Agile strengthened the collaboration between business and Information Technology (IT); and
there are post-implementation performance gaps based on the monitoring and reporting approach for major projects.

Recommendations
A series of four recommendations are provided. Management responses have been developed for the recommendations.
One recommendation has been developed for GST/HST program-specific reporting to support comprehensive measurement of results and increased collaboration.
1. The CRA should articulate a plan to supplement the Taxes Earned By Audit performance indicator with other measures and consider their impact on horizontal compliance.
One recommendation has been developed to support integrated corporate reporting.
2. The CRA should adopt a GST/HST horizontal performance indicator and also examine and implement ways to strengthen the organization’s ability to introduce more horizontally integrated performance indicators.
Two recommendations have been developed to reduce pre- and post-implementation risks of Strategic Investment Plan projects within CRA governance structures.
3. The CRA should re-examine and modify as required its approach to the planning and subsequent post-implementation monitoring and reporting of Strategic Investment Plan projects and performance.
4. The CRA should strengthen its governance to ensure product quality, system functionality and user experiences are considered.
1. Introduction
Evaluation foundation and framework
A feasibility study completed in 2011 found that an evaluation of horizontality was possible from two perspectives: first, in an external taxpayer behaviour sense, captured by the term “full compliance” and second, in the sense of internal administration captured by the term “horizontal compliance management”. In July 2012, the Agency Management Committee of the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) approved the evaluation framework of the Horizontal Compliance Management Evaluation Study.
The framework identified two evaluation issues to align with the concept of horizontality in both the external, taxpayer-centric sense and the internal, management sense. The framework noted that Issue 1 findings (external focus) would play an important role in supporting how Issue 2 (internal focus) would be addressed and that they would need to be completed sequentially.
In February 2014, findings on Issue 1 were delivered in the Horizontal Compliance Management T1 Self-Employed Interim Report to the CRA’s Management Audit and Evaluation Committee. This report was exploratory in nature and did not contain recommendations. It provided the known compliance outcomes being achieved in the T1 self-employed segment, using the full compliance perspective (filing, payment, and reporting)Footnote 1 .
Establishment of current evaluation
This evaluation provides findings on Issue 2 by assessing the effectiveness of internal horizontal management practices within the organization. The following four research questionsFootnote 2  capture the factors which are seen to support an organization’s ability to operate in a coordinated way: 

Do those involved in co-managed accounts (i.e., accounts that require intervention by multiple programs) have sufficient information?
Are governance structures used for sharing information and coordinating program changes that are undertaken?
How are downstream impacts managed?
What alternative indicators may shed new insight into past performance or support early warning systems?

To assess management practices, the evaluation scoped in the Goods and Services Tax/Harmonized Sales Tax (GST/HST) Audit Program; this was approved by the Management Audit and Evaluation Committee in May 2014. As a compliance organization, CRA employees require tools and materials which facilitate a consistent, efficient, and accurate approach to work. In recent years, the CRA introduced a fully integrated technology solution to compliance workers. It was designed to improve the ability to share, collaborate, and move work across geographic and business lines while ensuring integrity.
In the context of the GST/HST Audit Program, this evaluation looks at the governance structures providing oversight, the ability of compliance workers to access and use compliance information, and the monitoring and reporting framework in place. The evaluation assesses the effectiveness of practices at the organizational level rather than through the lens of a particular program or activity in order to examine interrelated and interdependent parts.
Scope exclusion
The evaluation had two initial research purposes: to merge the T1 self-employed population with its GST/HST reporting requirements in order to achieve a more fulsome taxpayer view related to Issue 1 and to examine the effectiveness of internal horizontal management practices (Issue 2). The evaluation originally pursued the commitments in the context of both T1 self-employed and GST/HST compliance activities. However, data gathering activities led to the evaluation reducing scope to focus on Issue 2, the effectiveness of internal management practices, and in respect of the GST/HST Audit Program only. There was significant complexity merging data across the T1 and GST/HST business lines and early fieldwork did not find an adequate sample of T1 self-employed governance decisions to seek evidence of coordinated actions based on the decisions taken.
2. Background
GST/HST Audit Program
The CRA’s GST/HST Audit Program is designed to make sure GST/HST registrants comply with reporting requirements and to identify and address non‐compliance in order to protect Canada’s revenue base. Within the CRA, the GST/HST Directorate of the Domestic Compliance Programs Branch is responsible for the functional management of three Divisions delivering a suite of five GST/HST audit programs:

Large Business Audit Program;
Refund Integrity Program;
Small and Medium Business Audit Program;
Specialty Audit Program; and
Aggressive GST/HST Planning.

Between fiscal yearsFootnote 3 2012 to 2013 through 2015 to 2016, the GST/HST Audit Program had an average budget of $165 million, representing 2,100 full-time equivalents. The CRA completes approximately 70,000 GST/HST audits annually, generating a reported fiscal impactFootnote 4 between $1.5 and $2.4 billion from fiscal years 2012 to 2013 and 2015 to 2016.
The CRA recognizes that enhancements and innovations are important to be a world class tax and benefit administration. It periodically implements organizational changes of varying degrees and scopes. Between 2010 and 2014, the GST/HST Audit Program experienced a series of organizational changes (Figure 1). The organizational changes did not impact all GST/HST audit programs to the same extent, as certain changes were targeted to specific programs. Select changes are further described given their operational impacts on the day-to-day routines and performance of auditors.  
Figure 1: Organizational changes introduced  to the GST/HST Audit Program from 2010 to 2014








Figure 1 - Image description

In 2010, the following organizational change occurred:

Ontario and British Columbia harmonization.

In 2012, the following organizational change occurred:

Pre-Assessment National Inventory.

In 2013: the following organizational changes occurred:

Business Intelligence
Audit Quality Review
Prince Edward Island harmonization
British Columbia de-harmonization

In 2014, the following organizational change occurred:

Case management system





Harmonization
In July 2010, Ontario and British Columbia implemented a harmonized sales tax. British Columbia subsequently voted to exit harmonization which took effect in April 2013. The workload effects of harmonization began to operationally impact GST/HST auditors in fiscal year 2012 to 2013 as the harmonized audits entered the workload. As part of the transfer of responsibilities, employees from the province of Ontario joined the CRA in 2010 and again in 2012. Similar employee transfers occurred on a smaller scale with British Columbia and Prince Edward Island.
Pre-Assessment National Inventory
In 2012, the Refund Integrity Program shifted from a regional to a national inventory workload called Pre-Assessment National Inventory. It is the primary risk assessment tool for all credit returns filed by registrants across the country. The national inventory allowed auditors to identify and examine high risk files no matter where they happened to be located.
Business Intelligence and Audit Quality Review
In September 2013, the Business Intelligence Program and the Audit Quality Review Program were implemented. The two programs are based on the pillars of enhanced risk assessment and an increased focus on audit quality.
The Business Intelligence Program consists of workload development. A new business intelligence role was created to segregate duties so that auditors could no longer both select files and audit them. The business intelligence teams are responsible for gathering, analyzing, integrating and applying business intelligence in determining file selection. This approach improves the organization’s ability to select the highest risk files and develop more focused strategies. Choosing the highest risk files is the first step to detecting and addressing non-compliance.
The Audit Quality Review Program provides the Business Intelligence Program with better information which can then be mined to enhance the subsequent file selection. It is a national program designed to improve the quality of audits and provide management with a degree of assurance that audit activities are performed with integrity and meet national pre-determined standards.
Case management system (Integras)
From October 2013 to April 2014, a new case management systemFootnote 5 (Integras) was deployed to the GST/HST Audit community across the country. GST/HST was part of the first wave to receive full deployment of the system, adding 2,500 employees to the user base. Integras was intended for use by all audit groups and was eventually deployed to the T1 and T2 business lines bringing the total number of users to 7,000 employees.
The development and deployment of Integras was a major investment project for the CRA. The project consolidated and modernized the tool set used by auditors and addressed sustainability issues related to legacy compliance systems. Integras provided an automated workload management, auditing, and reporting system, including an electronic record of decisions, approvals, and accesses. It is a common workload tool across audit functions helping ensure horizontality across audit programs.
Integras was built on the whole of client approach to compliance, incorporating audit controls, supporting business transformation initiatives including enhanced business intelligence capacity, and improving the efficiency and effectiveness of auditors by housing all information in an integrated work environment. Auditors rely on Integras to, among other things, view and access assigned cases, communicate with team leaders, and store evidence and documentation. It transformed the way audit cases were processed, managed, stored and retrieved.
3. Evaluation methodologies
The evaluation study covers the period from April 2012 to March 2017 to ensure a broad timeframe and allow for trend analysis. The period of time studied provided an opportunity to examine GST/HST Audit Program performance prior to and after the changes introduced in 2013 and 2014 that impacted the daily routines of the GST/HST audit community, namely Business Intelligence, Audit Quality Review, and Integras. Five main methodologies were used in support of this evaluation:
Data analysis of GST/HST audit results from a variety of sources and systems within the Agency Data Warehouse such as Integras, Audit Information Management System, GST “Line of Business” Case System, GST/HST Return and Adjustment Processing System, Standardized Accounting, Automated Collections and Source Deductions Enforcement System, Revenue Enforcement Management Information and Tracking System, and CRA administrative data.
Document reviews of program information, policies, and procedures; project documentation and communications; corporate and performance reporting instruments; governance structures; executive performance agreements; and third party research and reports.
Case study of the Compliance Systems Redesign project which deployed Integras to the GST/HST Audit Program and the existing governance and oversight processes from the time period.
Benchmarking of performance reporting from other tax administrations – United States of America, Province of Quebec, United Kingdom, and Australia, as well as an audit from the Office of the Auditor General of Ontario on the deployment of an information technology (IT) project supporting the administration and delivery of social assistance in Ontario.
In-depth interviews with a horizontal cross-section of CRA managers and staff from five branches and four regions. A total of 40 officials from Headquarters (HQ) and 60 from the regions were interviewed. Representatives were included from the Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch, Collections and Verification Branch, Compliance Programs BranchFootnote 6, Information Technology Branch, and Strategy and Integration Branch.
4. Findings
A series of organizational changes impacted the GST/HST Audit Program in expected and unexpected ways. Findings suggest there is unmitigated risk in the period prior to a major IT deployment and immediately after which may not be detected by monitoring and reporting.
4.1 Performance measurement, monitoring, and reporting
Robust performance measurement and reporting provide the ability to shed light on desired and undesired results and initiate corrective measures when needed. For the GST/HST Audit Program the key internal performance measure is “Tax Earned by Audit” and the key measure reported publicly is “fiscal impact.” Tax Earned by Audit and fiscal impact are similar measures that both provide a global dollar value of detected reporting non-compliance. For GST/HST, Tax Earned by Audit represents the sum of federal and provincial taxesFootnote 7 while fiscal impact includes Tax Earned by Audit, interest and penalties, and other audit related adjustments.
The GST/HST Tax Earned by Audit and fiscal impact performance indicators represent the breadth of audit activity. They are calculated based on audits which vary in their taxes at risk and therefore, revenues due (payable) to the government. Generally, GST/HST audits classify taxes at risk in one of three ways:

Audits which prevent unwarranted refunds from being paid: these audits contribute to Tax Earned by Audit by preventing refund payments to non-compliant credit filers. The Refund Integrity Program is the primary contributor. The Program’s verification work prior to assessment prevents the issuance of large refunds that may, if issued, pose a collections risk. For example, over the eight-year period from 2009 to 2017, 19 cases totalling $1.1 billion in refunds claimed, had the refunds disallowed before any payments were made.
Audits which do not result in a loss of tax revenues at all and require no subsequent payment or collections efforts: these audits contribute to Tax Earned by Audit but do not result in taxes payable. A coding change introduced in fiscal year 2014 to 2015 newly recognized “wash” transactions as part of GST/HST Tax Earned by Audit calculations. Wash transactions involve situations where the GST/HST that was not charged by one taxpayer would have resulted in an equal and offsetting input tax credit for another taxpayer. In other words, the transaction resulted in no permanent gain or loss of tax revenuesFootnote 8.
Audits which result in a loss of tax revenues and require subsequent payment or collections efforts: these audits contribute to Tax Earned by Audit by detecting reporting non-compliance. It comes with the risk that the taxes re-assessed need to be paid, but may be disputed by the taxpayer through the objections process, may require collections actions, and may not be fully collected.

Overall, understanding how different audit work contributes to Tax Earned by Audit highlights that not all Tax Earned by Audit is created equal in terms of the potential taxes payable. It is a measure of legitimate audit activity that does not reflect results or outcomes once subsequent CRA interventions on the same taxpayer file are taken into account.
With a better understanding of what Tax Earned by Audit represents, the evaluation reviewed program results to examine trends in performance.
4.1.1 GST/HST Audit Program performance results suggest productivity declined, as to be expected when implementing organizational change
GST/HST auditors stated in interviews that they perceived tasks to take longer to complete after the introduction of organizational changes that impacted their day-to-day activities and processes. In the years following Ontario harmonization, the complexity of files and associated dollars at risk gradually increased over time as the harmonized audits entered the workload and were selected for audit. With the emphasis placed on audit quality and the introduction of the business intelligence function during fiscal year 2013 to 2014, it would be expected to take longer to close an audit as more complex files were selected and decisions were documented to a consistent standard.
According to Program statistics, the number of cases closed by the GST/HST Audit Program declined from almost 89,000 in fiscal year 2012 to 2013 to 68,000 during fiscal year 2015 to 2016, for a total decline of 23% over the four year period. During this same period, the number of annual full-time equivalents increased by 4%.
Further exploring these results found the median time (days) to close a file increased in the Small and Medium Business Audit Program and, to a smaller extent, the Refund Integrity Program. For the Small and Medium Business Audit Program, over the four-year period the overall change in the median time (days) to close a file increased by 35% or 67 days (from 189 days to 256 days). The largest year-over-year increase (20% or 38 days) occurred in the year business intelligence and audit quality review were introduced. The evaluation also observed a 15% year-over-year increase (or 35 days) the next year when the new case management system, Integras, was fully deployed, followed by a 2% year-over-year decrease (or 6 days) the final year.
Figure 2 shows nearly $2.5 billion in fiscal impact identified in fiscal year 2015 to 2016 compared to $745 million in fiscal year 2010 to 2011. Year-over-year increases in total fiscal impact were unexpected given the metrics indicating a decline in productivity. Growth in fiscal impact provides an indication the CRA is selecting and auditing files with greater tax at risk.
In fiscal year 2014 to 2015, the GST/HST Audit Program introduced a coding change to its audit result methodology following an extensive review of policies and practices. The change aimed to ensure the CRA reported on the full spectrum of its audit efforts and resulted in additional fiscal impact due to the inclusion of additional items such as uncollectable amounts, wash transaction amounts, and account correction amounts. This resulted in fiscal impact increasing by over $450 million, or about one-quarter of the total reported compared to earlier years.
Isolating the impact of the coding change provides a more accurate comparison of results year-over-year. All things being held equal, after fiscal impact increased by 33% in fiscal year 2013 to 2014, it declined 16% in fiscal year 2014 to 2015 and remained below its fiscal year 2013 to 2014 levels in the subsequent year. Aggregate reporting shows an increase of 10% in fiscal year 2014 to 2015 from the previous year.
Notably, the evaluation determined that a strategic shift in the workforce composition positively impacted results. The workforce shift over the five year period resulted in increased auditors eligible to take on more complex, higher revenue files that would not have been achieved had the workforce composition remained largely the same. This accounted for a 6% increase in results for fiscal year 2015 to 2016 compared to fiscal year 2010 to 2011.
Figure 2: GST/HST fiscal impact by fiscal year





Source: Agency Data Warehouse





Figure 2 - Image description

Fiscal impact in fiscal year 2010 to 2011 is 745 million $
Fiscal impact in fiscal year 2011 to 2012 is 1,118 million $
Fiscal impact in fiscal year 2012 to 2013 is 1,391 million $
Fiscal impact in fiscal year 2013 to 2014 is 1,847 million $
Fiscal impact in fiscal year 2014 to 2015 is 1,559 million $. Fiscal Impact in fiscal year 2014 to 2015 is 2,034 million $ after including the coding change.
Fiscal impact in fiscal year 2015 to 2016 is 1,703 million $. Fiscal Impact in fiscal year 2015 to 2016 is 2,472 million $ after including the coding change and workforce change.




This section analysed GST/HST audit results largely in terms of outputs and activities to identify trends in program performance not detected by the monitoring and reporting systems in place. These efficiency measures offer insight on the day-to-day experience of auditors which is not provided by reporting total fiscal impact, as Figure 2 shows an overall increase in year-over-year results.
With a better understanding of results, the evaluation looked at the processes that support the tracking and reporting of Tax Earned by Audit. The approach to set annual targets is of particular interest, given its potential to influence horizontal compliance management behaviours and create downstream impacts.
4.1.2 Setting GST/HST program targets has challenges and may be working at cross-purposes with the importance of audit quality
The CRA sets targets in part to support revenue commitments to external stakeholders. In order to track progress on commitments, a complex process is put in place to allocate annual targets at the program and regional levels and align resources accordingly.
To set targets, HQ and regional officials together assess risk in the GST/HST environment and discuss strategy for each program. HQ officials noted that the target-setting approach is largely quantitative and does not take into account contextual changes that could be expected to temporarily impact performance. Meanwhile, regional officials noted that context-dependent factors can make achieving targets a challenge, citing turnover and in-year staffing challenges, potential impacts from the deployment of a new system, and changes in policies and procedures. 
A challenge associated with target setting is that feedback on their accuracy can only be received 18 months after the fact. Targets for an upcoming year are largely finalized in February but results for are not available until June of the following year. The evaluation examined four years of data related to target achievement at the national and regional level. The analysis found that across the four years for all national GST/HST audit programs, Tax Earned by Audit results achieved were within +/- 15% of the target only 7 out of 20 total instances (35%). The variance was greater at the regional level, with results achieved within +/- 15% of the target only 20 out of 80 total instances (25%). Regional variance may be partially explained by the portability of certain workloads among regions to address resource gaps and emerging compliance risks.
In interviews, regional team leaders and auditors expressed mixed opinions about Tax Earned by Audit targets. When targets are reasonable, they can have a motivating effect on everyone. When they are unattainable, frustration and stress can set in, and when they are achieved early in the year, motivation and urgency decline.
In recent years, the Domestic Compliance Programs Branch has emphasized audit quality as a priority. The implementation of Audit Quality Review and a series of related performance indicators was a positive step in reinforcing the message. At the same time, the Branch continued to provide annual Tax Earned by Audit targets at the regional level. While nearly all of the auditors in the regions understood the reasons for the focus on audit quality, interviews found that despite the introduction of Audit Quality Review and its new measures, the field still considers achieving Tax Earned by Audit targets the priority of senior management. In fact, within-region cooperation is common in order to increase the chances of achieving the jointly held target.
Overall, the GST/HST Audit Program is in the midst of a process and cultural shift that accentuates the importance of audit quality and de-emphasizes Tax Earned by Audit targets. Higher quality audits support both the collections and appeals functions. Full realization may be a challenge as long as Tax Earned by Audit and its targets remain in place as the cornerstone of existing performance measurement and reporting.
4.1.3 There are no performance measures in place to enhance coordination and facilitate the horizontal compliance management of multiple obligations of the same taxpayer
Contents of corporate performance reports tend to be vertically aligned to the mandates of branches. Reported outputs from filing, reporting, and payment compliance programs are not connected to determine the extent of horizontal management: the compliance function reports on Tax Earned by Audit, the collections function reports on tax debt resolved, and there is no link made between the two nor to the results of disputed tax assessments reported by the appeals function.
By measuring performance aligned to the mandates of branches or programs, behaviours and choices are reinforced to also occur in silos so that one’s own performance reporting is optimized against the metric. GST/HST auditors interviewed noted this approach provides them with little incentive to act collaboratively with their colleagues in collections or appeals as each role is accountable for its own output. For example, GST/HST auditors have access to T1 and T2 information and notes that most collections agents find helpful but do not have access themselves. When this information is not shared, collection agents may spend time researching a taxpayer’s information which decreases the overall compliance-related productivity. There are no legislative requirements that would prohibit this information sharing from occurring.
An integrated, results-based performance indicator is not measured or reported to provide insight on multiple obligations of the same taxpayer or on performance that implicates multiple branches. Trend analysis of CRA data found that, in recent years, approximately 80% of the cases where the amount payable created by a GST/HST re-assessment exceeded $100,000 have been fully resolved within one year of the assessment being raised. Over time, there is potential to increase the target for this measure which could in turn enhance collaboration and coordination at the Tax Services Office level if implemented as a shared target to be achieved across functions.
Benchmarking suggests that other tax administrations report on variations of an integrated, results-based performance indicator that measures dollars collected from Tax Earned by Audit:

In its Annual Report 2015-2016, Revenu Quebec reported that 64.7% of the amounts assessed during the year were collected, exceeding its target of a 55% collection rate related to tax audit activities. Such information could support other performance monitoring, as Revenu Quebec reports a return on investment measure based on its collected Tax Earned by Audit measure. In 2014-2015, Revenu Quebec’s overall return on investment was 6.91 dollars of Tax Earned by Audit for every dollar spent.
The Australian Taxation Office reports the total liabilities raised and the estimated cash collected.
Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs of the United Kingdom reports compliance yield, comprised of four distinct and different yield types: cash collected; revenue loss prevention; future revenue benefit; and product and process yield which estimates the impact of legislative changes to close tax loopholes and changes to other processes that reduce opportunities to avoid or evade tax.

4.2 GST/HST audit community experience
The CRA relies on a combination of technology and human efforts to deliver high quality, accurate, and efficient service and compliance. Appropriate and high-performing IT systems are essential to ensure the right information is in the right hands at the right time. To be productive, compliance staff must access, interpret, and manage a vast amount of data and information to make decisions on a taxpayer’s account and support horizontal compliance.
The evaluation reviewed the availability and timeliness of information to GST/HST auditors provided by the new case management. The system eliminated the need for auditors to access three separate information systems and allowed auditors to access and view historical information.
4.2.1 As early adopters of a new case management system, GST/HST auditors had access to timelier and a greater amount of information
Interviews found that the breadth and timeliness of information available to GST/HST auditors improved in various ways during the first two years of the operation of Integras. Auditors noted more relevant information in one easy-to-access location, a more efficient review and monitoring process, and improved facilitation of horizontal information sharing between auditors and the areas of business intelligence and audit quality review. In the case of the Refund Integrity Program, they noted more real-time file selection and viewing in combination with the Pre-Assessment National Inventory in place since 2012.
4.2.2 The new case management system demonstrated inconsistent system performance when implemented
While the vast majority of GST/HST auditors understood the potential and benefits from the new system, they expressed frustration in interviews that Integras was deployed in a state that had undesired impacts on their day-to-day activities, particularly in light of other changes introduced to ensure adequate and accurate documentation of audit decisions. They recognized that there was a learning curve associated with Integras but they also noted that some functions were less reliable, while other functions simply did not work, which they felt reduced their productivity. They noted issues of logging on to the system, synchronization, an unreliable checking-out feature, slow response times, and difficulty finding and organizing files.
Available data supports the perception that Integras did not function reliably upon deployment to the GST/HST Audit community. By November 2015, 18 months after deployment, there were 150 documented workarounds in use by GST/HST auditors for Integras. In fiscal year 2014 to 2015, GST/HST auditors opened over 2,700 bug-related Integras tickets, as tracked by the project office. While the total number of tickets opened in fiscal year 2015 to 2016 declined to 2,200, the average time to resolve tickets increased year over yearFootnote 9.
Auditors also experienced frequent system outages, which are periods where Integras was unavailable for a portion of the workday. The nature, scope, and duration of outages varied. Over the high-demand six month period of January 2016 to June 2016, Integras experienced periods of outages that impacted operations an average of 3.33 days each month. Improvement was noted for the period of July to September 2016 when the system experienced periods of outages that impacted operations an average of only 0.66 days per month.
When Integras is combined with the Business Intelligence and Audit Quality Review programs, auditors felt they had to spend more time inputting data into an imperfect system in order to close a file. Closing a file finalizes the CRA’s assessment of a taxpayer’s reporting requirements, allows a notice of re-assessment to be issued, and enables the results to be counted and reported in key performance results.
4.2.3 Sick leave usage increased significantly in the GST/HST Audit Program after the introduction of organizational changes and has since stabilized
The available literature suggests a relationship between organizational changes, work-related stress, and employee absenteeism. After computer usage became a part of the daily routine of many workers, a substantial body of research began to emerge establishing a linkage between slow or poorly designed software and user stress, frustration, anger and even helplessnessFootnote 10. Furthermore, the causal link between stress and poor health has been widely accepted by researchers and the general public since the late 1990sFootnote 11. Triggers of stress include having little control over the terms and conditions of the work being done, occupying a job that does not match one’s skills and abilities, and having insufficient support from supervisors or colleaguesFootnote 12.
By the mid-2000s, it was generally accepted that untreated workplace stress was associated with increased levels of employee absenteeism and turnover, decreased levels of productivity, as well as lost workdays due to disability or sick leaveFootnote 13. More recently, a Morneau Shepell survey conducted in October 2016 of 1,018 employers and employees across Canada found that job re-design, which included technological changes, was found to have the strongest correlation to sick leave usage for both physical and mental healthFootnote 14.
As outlined in Figure 1, GST/HST auditors experienced a series of changes in their work environment which changed the ways in which GST/HST auditors routinely conducted their activities. Auditors stated in interviews that as a result of no longer being able to select files for audit, they felt less control over their work. This is to be expected as the segregation of duties was deliberately implemented to foster a culture of integrity. Further, when closing a file, auditors saw their work as becoming increasingly clerical, given the emphasis on documenting decisions in support of audit quality. While there were a number of contributing changes over the period covered by this evaluation, auditors stated in interviews that Integras was the key change causing frustration due in large part to the inconsistent system performance during the first two years of operation.
Two studiesFootnote 15 that looked at a large-scale IT system deployment to the Ontario Ministry of Community and Social Services showed the unintended impacts on users of deploying a system that did not function optimally. This suggested that it would be worthwhile to examine trends in sick leave usage amongst GST/HST auditors as an indicator of user frustration and stress.
Trends in sick leave usage were examined amongst three mutually exclusive groups: GST/HST auditors, other auditors, and the population of CRA employees. These three groups were compared to control for the effects of proposed changes to sick leave benefits by the Government of CanadaFootnote 16 since all CRA employees would have been impacted.
Overall, median hours of sick leave usage increased across all three groups (Figure 3) while GST/HST auditors used more sick leave at a faster rate. Fiscal year 2013 to 2014 represents the year business intelligence and audit quality review were introduced and fiscal year 2014 to 2015 represents the year Integras was fully deployed and available for use by GST/HST auditors.
Figure 3 can be summarized as follows: GST/HST auditor sick leave usage increased from fiscal years 2011 to 2012 through 2014 to 2015 before levelling off in fiscal year 2015 to 2016, although at higher levels when compared to fiscal year 2011 to 2012. Overall, there was more time away from the office in the five-year period, and in particular following the introduction of the business intelligence program, audit quality review, and Integras. This may partially explain the decline in productivity and fiscal impact amounts noted in section 4.1.1.
Figure 3: Median Hours of Sick Leave Usage by GST/HST Auditors, Other Auditors and the Rest of CRA, Over Five Fiscal Years





Source: Corporate Administrative System




Figure 3 - Image description

Median Sick Leave Usage in fiscal year 2011 to 2012 is 67 hours for GST/HST Auditors, 67.8 for the Other Auditors, and 55 for the Rest of CRA
Median Sick Leave Usage in fiscal year 2012 to 2013 is 73 hours for GST/HST Auditors, 70.5 for the Other Auditors, and 59 for the Rest of CRA
Median Sick Leave Usage in fiscal year 2013 to 2014 is 74.6 hours for GST/HST Auditors, 70.5 for the Other Auditors, and 62 for the Rest of CRA
Median Sick Leave Usage in fiscal year 2014 to 2015 is 84.7 hours for GST/HST Auditors, 77.4 for the Other Auditors, and 65.3 for the Rest of CRA
Median Sick Leave Usage in fiscal year 2015 to 2016 is 84 hours for GST/HST Auditors, 74.3 for the Other Auditors, and 66.5 for the Rest of CRA




Within the GST/HST audit programs, the timing and frequency of a GST/HST auditor’s exposure to Integras would have been unique to each individual. Comparing auditors based on the number and timing of cases closed in the new system yielded two important findings. First, GST/HST auditors with a higher frequency of exposure took more sick leave. Those who closed a higher number of cases had a higher median use of sick leave than those who closed a smaller number of cases. Second, increases in GST/HST auditor sick leave usage occurred relative to when they were first exposed to the system. Those who closed a file in Integras in fiscal year 2014 to 2015 tended to use more sick leave during that year while those who first closed a file in fiscal year 2015 to 2016 tended to increase their sick leave usage in the second year of operation.
A post-implementation metric such as sick leave usage is not currently monitored to provide an indication of success or user satisfaction with organizational change. Timely post-deployment user surveys that measure the level of comfort in using system features, whether functions are working as intended, and a user’s overall well-being, can help to monitor any impact on employees when introducing change.
4.3 Governance
The ability to take into account potential downstream impacts relies on a combination of information sharing and the effective coordination of decisions within governance structures. The evaluation reviewed the governance around the development and deployment of Integras as a case study to illustrate the design of governance structures and how multiple stakeholders coordinate across functions and responsibilities.
The deployment of Integras was a priority for the CRA. Several years and millions of dollars were invested in developing the case management system recognizing the need for a more sophisticated and integrated solution than the existing one used by auditors.
4.3.1 Project oversight in the CRA focuses on project management metrics such as milestones, dates, and budget
The project to deliver Integras was an extremely large and complex undertaking, implemented over many years. During that time, the project saw its scope, plan, budget and expected benefits reviewed and modified a number of times.
In 2012, an independent third party review acknowledged the need to move forward with a deployment plan. It stated the solution was widely anticipated and the value was apparent while also noting the deployment approach was high risk given the unknowns and uncertainties at the time. The review made a number of recommendations to address key risks and issues. The CRA developed an action plan in response.
Among the over 40 detailed actions were commitments to include deployment in the performance agreements of executives in the Compliance Programs Branch, Information Technology Branch, and for regional Assistant Commissioners. Performance agreements provide insight into what is expected of CRA employees. Their content is guided by the mandates, roles and responsibilities, and changing priorities associated with various positions across the organization. As a result, they influence operational plans and priorities, including decisions on the allocation of resources in support of objectives.
The evaluation reviewed annual performance agreements over a six-year period for executives responsible for the deployment of Integras within the Information Technology Branch and the former Compliance Programs Branch. The analysis found common references to project management metrics such as milestones, dates, and managing budgets. There was little emphasis on monitoring the impact of system functionality on the user experience or productivity and reacting as needed, nor did they integrate and prioritize accountabilities for quality of the solution. Many interviewees stated that expectation for product quality was implied.
The action plan also included the development of deployment criteria used to identify the GST/HST business line as the second of four business lines to adopt the technology. One of the reasons was the level of risk associated with the sustainability of the existing legacy system on which the business line heavily relied. In 2008, a vendor declared, that as of October 2014, the underlying programming language in the existing system would no longer be supported. The programming language was critical to the functioning of GST/HST operations and no backup was available. If it ceased to function, over $1 billion in annual estimated recovery would be at risk. In 2012, the vendor declared that support would be extended until 2024 instead of 2014. No evidence was found of the change being reported in the context of the timing of the Integras deployment.
Considering these factors, senior management faced pressure with the Integras deployment in order to respect time and budget commitments and address sustainability risks. At the same time, there were indications the new system required further development in order to function optimally for users as the April 2014 GST/HST full deployment deadline approached.
In reviewing project documents, the concerns that auditors raised in interviews about the functioning of Integras aligned with testing results; system testing prior to deployment was predictive of impacts on the user experience. The Product Assurance Division of the Information Technology Branch and the Acceptance Testing Division of the Assessment, Benefit and Service BranchFootnote 17 tested and reported on the IT backbone and functionality. The Product Assurance Division was not able to fully verify that system stability and performance would meet production standards. The Acceptance Testing Division reported that the majority (71%) of elements tested had no defects however, several other key features, such as the synchronization, checking-out cases, and finding and organizing files functions had a failure rate of about 5%. The failure rates are within acceptable ranges for deployment. The system went into production with the expectation that improvements would be required.
Project documentation suggests that senior decision-makers knew that technical issues existed, as is the case with many system deployments, but were not fully aware of the extent of challenges faced by early adopters. Reporting occurred at regular intervals to various audiences given the importance of the project. Information reported to oversight bodies tended to be aggregated and focused on progress and readiness. Taking a user-centric perspective, the information did not specify the functionalities that more frequently failed during testing, nor did it describe how their failure could impact the user environment.
As the deployment deadline approached, the project management office did not request a change in timeframe and stakeholders did not voice concerns or issues. Integras was deployed nationally to the GST/HST Audit Program in April 2014 meeting the time and budget commitments. While sustainability of the legacy system was a continued risk, the opportunity to defer launch may have existed to allow more time to resolve technical issues and reduce negative impacts on the end users and performance results.
4.3.2 The adoption of Agile strengthened the collaboration between business and IT
The “Agile” methodology represents an iterative and incremental approach to software development, performed in a highly collaborative and flexible manner, within a governance framework that includes both the project sponsor representatives and the IT development team. Through repetition of short work cycles or “sprints”, teams can continually assess the direction of a project, providing time to correct and steer it in another direction. The Agile development methodology was adopted for the Integras development initiative as early as 2007 and was the first CRA project to use Agile.
Within the context of Integras, the project management office situated in the branch of the project sponsor was the hub of the planning, development, and deployment process. It regularly liaised with the Headquarters GST/HST Directorate and collaborated with the Compliance Portfolio Application SupportFootnote 18 group of the Information Technology Branch to ensure that user needs were appropriately communicated and implemented in the development process.
During the early years of Integras development, the Information Technology Branch had a greater understanding of business mapping and was put in a position to support the business architecture function. The project management office relied on the Information Technology Branch to bridge the gap due to its experience and struggled to offer a robust challenge function. As the Agile process took hold, the level of collaboration between the business and IT sides increased substantively when employees were co-located in the same building. All of this was seen to increase the business’ authority over the project and drive the project management office to invest in its business architecture function. Full benefits were not realized, as difficulties remained involving all stakeholders in user acceptance testingFootnote 19 and release activities.
The Canada Revenue Agency – Test Strategy Assessment: Target State Recommendations (Gartner Consulting; August 2016) identified the need for the Product Assurance and Acceptance Testing divisions to be consulted and included earlier in the development process. The study also identified that user acceptance testing performed was closer to being functional testingFootnote 20 and that end user acceptance testing was not being done at the CRA.
In support of delivering a quality end product for users, the CRA needs to allocate sufficient time and funding for end user acceptance testing and the consideration of testing results prior to decision-making. This needs to be balanced against other reasons which may drive the need to proceed to production and ultimately deal with issues that arise. For Integras, 61 auditors participated in pilot-testing which started in October 2013 and was intended to last 8 weeks. The decision to fully deploy the system nationally to all of GST/HST occurred three weeks after the start of pilot testing. Two weeks later, a gradual deployment began, enabling the April 2014 deadline where all new cases were to be opened in Integras.
4.3.3 Post-implementation performance gaps emerged based on the approach to monitoring and reporting
The CRA Resource Management CommitteeFootnote 21 is responsible for overseeing the management and progress of major project investments, including establishing budget priorities and requirements in accordance with CRA priorities, overseeing the allocation and control of the CRA's financial resources, and providing oversight of financial and control risks. As part of overseeing major investment projects, the Resource Management Committee and its secretariat review and request details on the future anticipated benefits associated with projects. During the planning phase of a project, a project sponsor is expected to complete a benefits measurement plan that describes the benefits anticipated with the entire investment. After the project is executed and deployed, the project sponsor completes a benefits realization report providing feedback on the extent to which the anticipated benefits were achieved, as assessed by the project sponsor.
In recent years, the Finance and Administration Branch introduced a number of changes to the benefit management process:

migrated the leadership of the benefit management practice from the Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch to the Resource Management Secretariat in the finance and Administration Branch in January 2016 to highlight the importance of this practice and increase information about benefits to decision makers;
benefit mapping for all major projects to illustrate how the scope is linked to the business outcomes and ultimately to the strategic outcomes of the CRA; and
a revised guide to benefit management providing an overview of how the intended benefits of a project are expected to be planned, substantiated, tracked, and reported on through each stage of the Major Project Investment Oversight Process.

The process changes show the CRA’s desire to continuously evolve its management practices based on lessons and observations. The impact of the changes are not assessed as part of the evaluation as the requirements were not in place at the time of the Integras deployment for GST/HST. Taking into consideration the steps already taken to provide additional information to decision-makers, the evaluation identified a risk that information on post-implementation performance may not be timely or complete.  
In terms of completeness, when a project sponsor’s planning and reporting responsibilities are considered within the “benefits” paradigm, there is incentive to choose and report primarily on performance indicators that are seen as positive changes. The full range of potential impacts may not be taken into account. In most cases, without an expected improvement against the status quo, the rationale for an investment does not exist. A complete and realistic benefits plan would include undesirable changes or impacts. Revisions were made to the benefits measurement guide in 2017 in an effort to keep benefits evergreen and allow “disbenefits” to emerge.
In terms of timeliness, it is common practice to give users time to familiarize themselves with a new IT system before measuring the benefits derived. The Integras project sponsor, in its project close-out report of April 2017, coped with this issue which can be summarized as follows: measuring too early in the system’s evolution may provide an incomplete view of performance, yet as more time passes it becomes a greater challenge to establish a causal relationship between an IT system and performance given other changes that may occur in the work environment.
The evaluation observations and findings highlight the value and feasibility of immediate post-implementation measurement. Committing to monitor and report during the early days of a deployment might capture important feedback to provide early detection of challenges or unintended impacts such as those noted in sections 4.2.1 and 4.2.2. There is emerging literature suggesting that organizations make insufficient effort to monitor the human asset perspective such as the emotional state of employees and its associated impacts on productivity, corporate performance, and mental health.
In the transition from an implemented project to business as usual, it is unclear where the resources and responsibility would lie to monitor and report on early performance. Once a project is implemented, the project management office begins to wind down and transfer the ongoing maintenance to a functional owner. Reporting on post-implementation metrics such as system performance, tickets raised, or user satisfaction requires resources to gather and analyze the data.
When the Integras project submitted its close-out report in April 2017, three of the four intended benefits were reported as realized. The fourth benefit is measurable and will be reported in 2019. It relates to increased revenue, across several business lines (GST/HST, T1 and T2), resulting from the automation of certain manual processes. The bulk of increased revenue is expected to come from the large file business line onboarded in 2015 through 2016. As noted in section 4.1.1, GST/HST program results are available to provide an indication of partial performance. It may be worthwhile to include more measurable, timely indicators in future project close-out reports.   
5. Conclusion
The CRA has mature structures and processes that work quite well. Within the organization, there are many actors and forces doing the job intended. At times, they are at cross-purposes with each other or result in unintended impacts which may go unmeasured or undetected. Knowledge of these various impacts can be enhanced through better integration and collaboration along the compliance continuum and within governance structures.
The horizontal perspective of this evaluation and its report puts the GST/HST Audit Program performance in context by seeking a greater understanding of performance results. This perspective generates important insights and lessons which can be applied against the governance of future projects and organizational changes.
In examining program results, the following key findings emerged with respect to a robust performance measurement and reporting system which can shed light on both desired and undesired results:

the GST/HST Audit Program results suggest productivity declined after the introduction of organizational changes;
the emphasis on audit quality is competing with traditional targets and performance indicators; and
performance indicators reinforce individual program mandates and do not provide insight on multiple obligations of the same taxpayer (filing, reporting, and payment).

With respect to the availability of sufficient and timely information which can impact the CRA’s ability to achieve its results and compliance objectives, the following key findings emerged:

GST/HST auditors had access to timelier and a greater amount of information with the introduction of the new case management system; and
the inconsistent performance of the new case management system limited GST/HST auditors’ ability to access and use the information.

In examining what contributed to the observations noted above, the following key findings emerged with respect to the design and functioning of governance structures:

oversight focuses on project management metrics while aspects of product quality receive less attention;
the adoption of Agile strengthened the collaboration between business and IT; and
there are post-implementation performance gaps based on the monitoring and reporting approach for major projects.

6. Recommendations and management response
One of the benefits to a horizontal perspective is that it can highlight the need for targeted changes rather than transformational ones. If implemented in a coordinated manner, these changes could have fairly large effects across the system. 
The GST/HST case study suggests that unmitigated risk may exist in the period prior to a major IT deployment and immediately after. This can largely be addressed through modifications to governance, roles and responsibilities, communications, and reporting.
One recommendation has been developed for GST/HST program-specific reporting to support comprehensive measurement of results and increased collaboration.
1. The CRA should articulate a plan to supplement the Taxes Earned By Audit performance indicator with other measures and consider their impact on horizontal compliance.
Management response
Domestic Compliance Programs Branch will develop a number of internal performance measures for consideration to supplement existing measures to provide a more comprehensive measure of program outcomes. The proposal will detail potential indicators, risks and costs associated with their adoption, along with proposed implementation strategies and timelines. Following the development of a proposal, suggested program outcomes will be piloted across various GST/HST program areas, prior to full implementation across GST/HST and Small and Medium Enterprises Directorate compliance programs.
Proposed timelines:
March 31, 2019: Development of plan including proposed indicators and detailed roll-out of pilot projects
March 31, 2020: Completion of pilot projects including close-out report
March 31, 2021: Implementation across GST/HST and Income Tax (Small and Medium Enterprise Directorate) compliance programs
One recommendation has been developed to support integrated corporate reporting.
2. The CRA should adopt a GST/HST horizontal performance indicator and also examine and implement ways to strengthen the organization’s ability to introduce more horizontally integrated performance indicators.
Management response
The Strategy and Integration Branch will develop and make recommendations on performance indicator(s) that could be used to track the percentage of GST/HST reassessed through audit compliance actions that is paid/collected, taking into account objections. The recommendation will also take into account data/system limitations.
The Strategy and Integration Branch will undertake this endeavor, which will include proof of concept and testing, in collaboration with impacted program branches: the Domestic Compliance Programs Branch, the Appeals Branch, the Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch, and the Collections and Verification Branch. This assessment will highlight different options that could ensure a horizontal approach to tracking the performance of GST/HST audit outcomes and which could also be considered for a similar application across other business lines. Consideration will be given to relevant international best practices.
Proposed implementation date: the Strategy and Integration Branch will provide results and options at the Operations and Policy Committee by April 2019.
Two recommendations have been developed to reduce pre- and post-implementation risks of Strategic Investment Plan projects within CRA governance structures. Given the horizontal nature of governance and oversight, the action plans for recommendations 3 and 4 are mutually supportive.
3. The CRA should re-examine and modify as required its approach to the planning and subsequent post-implementation monitoring and reporting of Strategic Investment Plan projects and performance.
Management response
The CRA strives to continuously improve its approach to planning, oversight, post-implementation monitoring, and reporting of major projects. In addition to the changes described in section 4.3.3 which were not considered due to the timing of this evaluation, the following are examples of other improvements recently made:

Introduced a framework for the analysis of the type of benefits achieved in the Strategic Investment Plan;
Added a benefits indicator to the CRA’s portfolio overview to report on the continued achievability of the benefits of a project; and
Added the User Experience Testing group to the Corporate Stakeholders to be consulted as part of the Major Project Investment Oversight Process.

Going forward, the plan for 2018-2019 for the Secretariat in the Finance and Administration Branch supporting the Resource Management Committee responsible to exercise oversight on the portfolio of projects includes:  

Adjusting the governance of the Major Project Investment Oversight Process so that all discussion for projects with lifecycle costs >$20M take place at the Agency Management Committee rather than the Resource Management Committee. 
Continuing to use Independent Third Party Reviews to help identify areas requiring additional attention from projects and oversight.
Continuing to support the Project Management Community of Practice in the CRA by sharing best practices and promoting lessons learned.
Ensuring resources in the Resource Management Secretariat get certified on change management.
Completing the CRA self-assessment of the recommendations from the Goss Gilroy report on the lessons learned on the management and implementation of the Transformation of Pay Administration Initiative (Phoenix).
Using the results of the above-noted Goss Gilroy self-assessment as well as this evaluation to explore and articulate for the Resource Management Committee’s consideration how the CRA’s oversight processes can be further enhanced to inform decision making and better recognize the role of users in the success of projects and the realization of benefits. Areas to be explored for potential improvements include user-centric design, project governance, change management, communication, and post-implementation monitoring.

4. The CRA should strengthen its governance to ensure product quality, system functionality and user experiences are considered.
Management response
With regard to quality and the user experience (UX), processes have evolved significantly. Agile testing practices piloted during Integras have been adopted as best practices and the CRA continues to mature its UX design practice as more and more applications become UX design-enabled. Examples of changes and innovations in testing include:

Increased reliance on automated testing, as well as earlier and more frequent integration testing.
Greater coordination between the Information Technology Branch and the Acceptance Testing Division, with user acceptance testers being embedded in development teams when feasible. As an example, Acceptance Testing Division user acceptance testers are currently working in collaboration with IT developers as part of the T1 Systems Redesign Project in a shared Integrated Unit Testing environment.
Introduced Governance of the CRA UX design as a shared responsibility between the Public Affairs Branch, the Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch, and the Information Technology Branch.
Established a UX Design Board with membership from across the CRA.
Updated the CRA’s Project Gate Assessment documentation requirements to include usability and accessibility artifacts to ensure IT-enabled projects are leveraging the UX design-enabled approach.

Going forward, the plan for 2018-2019 includes:

revising the Terms of Reference for the UX Design Board to elaborate on the importance of the role of the committee and to strengthen its reporting relationship to the Digital Services Assistant Commissioner Steering Committee, the Resource Management Committee and the Agency Management Committee.

7. Acknowledgement
In closing, the evaluation team would like to acknowledge, recognize, and thank all CRA stakeholders for the time dedicated and the information provided during the course of this engagement. Auditors and collectors across the country and headquarters personnel shared their valuable insight and experiences with the evaluation team to enrich the analysis and interpretation of findings.
8. Appendices
8.1 Appendix A: Glossary



Term
Definition
Agile
The “Agile” methodology represents an iterative and incremental approach to software development, performed in a highly collaborative and flexible manner, within a governance framework that includes both the project sponsor representatives and the IT development team.
Fiscal impact
Fiscal impact consists of tax assessed, tax refunds reduced, interest and penalties, and present value of future federal tax assessable arising from compliance actions. It excludes the impact of appeals reversals and uncollectable amounts.
Functional testing
Functional testing is a software testing process used within software development in which software is tested to ensure that it conforms with all requirements. Functional testing is a way of checking software to ensure that it has all the required functionality that's specified within its functional requirements.
Integras
A case management system for the audit community that provides tools to assign and track audit workloads, help risk assess taxpayers and better select audits, and improve the way audits are conducted.
Tax Earned by Audit
Tax Earned by Audit allocates results to the years audited and to all subsequent years. These results often vary from the amount of the actual reassessments because of certain factors taken into account when calculating Tax Earned by Audit and which are not identifiable solely from reassessments.
User acceptance testing
User acceptance testing is the last phase of the software testing process. During user acceptance testing, actual software users test the software to make sure it can handle required tasks in real-world scenarios, according to specifications.





Footnote 1


					   The Interim Report found that those who are fully compliant, and many of those who are non-compliant, require little to no effort on the part of the CRA. The study population had paid approximately 84% of the taxes owed by the time it was initially assessed and 95.7% were resolved within one year.

Return to footnote1 Referrer


Footnote 2


					   Research questions 1, 2, and 3 are part of the 2012 framework and research question 4 was added in May 2014. 

Return to footnote2 Referrer


Footnote 3


					   A fiscal year runs from April 1 to March 31.

Return to footnote3 Referrer


Footnote 4


					   Fiscal impact consists of tax assessed, tax refunds reduced, interest and penalties, and present value of future federal tax assessable arising from compliance actions. It excludes the impact of appeals reversals and uncollectable amounts. 

Return to footnote4 Referrer


Footnote 5


					   Case management solutions are applications designed to support a complex process that requires a combination of human tasks and electronic workflow. These solutions support the workflow, management collaboration, storage of content, decisioning, and processing of electronic files or cases. (Gartner IT Glossary)

Return to footnote5 Referrer


Footnote 6


					   In April 2016, the Compliance Programs Branch was separated into the Domestic Compliance Programs Branch and the International, Large Business, and Investigations Branch. 

Return to footnote6 Referrer


Footnote 7


					   In other tax lines, Tax Earned by Audit represents federal taxes only as the provincial taxes are added along with the interest and penalties to calculate their respective fiscal impacts.

Return to footnote7 Referrer


Footnote 8


					   The absolute amount of both changes were included in fiscal impact calculations, as both were the result of legitimate audit activity.

Return to footnote8 Referrer


Footnote 9


					   Average time to resolve tickets: 40 days (2013-2014); 54 days (2014-2015); 63 days (2015-2016).

Return to footnote9 Referrer


Footnote 10


					   Irina Ceaparu, et al, (2003), ‘Determining causes and severity of end-user frustration’

Return to footnote10 Referrer


Footnote 11


					   J Rick, et al, (1997), ‘Stress: Big issue, but what are the problems?'

Return to footnote11 Referrer


Footnote 12


					   Susan Crompton, (2011), ‘What’s stressing the stressed? Main sources of stress among workers'

Return to footnote12 Referrer


Footnote 13


					   Melanie Bickford, (2005), ‘Stress in the workplace: A general overview of the causes, the effects, and the solutions’

Return to footnote13 Referrer


Footnote 14


					   CISION, Toronto, (2017), ‘Morneau Shepell finds organizational change linked to physical and mental health sick leave’

Return to footnote14 Referrer


Footnote 15


					   Office of the Auditor General of Ontario, (2015), ‘Annual Report 2015 – Chapter 3.12: SAMS-Social Assistance Management System’; Lewchuk, (2016), ‘When SAMS met “ad-hoc”: Work organization and stress at ODSP’

Return to footnote15 Referrer


Footnote 16


					   In October 2013, the Treasury Board President announced the federal government intended to overhaul the way public servants take time off work for being sick. In September 2014, during collective bargaining with the Public Service Alliance of Canada, federal government negotiators tabled a proposal that would eliminate all accumulated sick leave for public servants.

Return to footnote16 Referrer


Footnote 17


					   At the time of deployment, the Acceptance Testing Division was situated in the Ontario Region.

Return to footnote17 Referrer


Footnote 18


					   Compliance Portfolio Application Support of the Information Technology Branch is focused on building and maintaining IT solutions to meet the needs of the compliance programs. IT investments are managed using a portfolio approach that facilitates business and IT alignment.

Return to footnote18 Referrer


Footnote 19


					   User acceptance testing is the last phase of the software testing process. During user acceptance testing, actual software users test the software to make sure it can handle required tasks in real-world scenarios, according to specifications.

Return to footnote19 Referrer


Footnote 20


					   Functional testing is a software testing process used within software development in which software is tested to ensure that it conforms with all requirements. Functional testing is a way of checking software to ensure that it has all the required functionality that's specified within its functional requirements. 

Return to footnote20 Referrer


Footnote 21


					   Formerly called the Finance Committee.

Return to footnote21 Referrer









Report a problem or mistake on this page












Please select all that apply:

A link, button or video is not working



It has a spelling mistake



Information is missing



Information is outdated or wrong



Login error when trying to access an account




I can't find what I'm looking for



Other issue not in this list



Submit



Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries, contact us.










Date modified:
2018-07-10





Follow-up Study – External Administrative Correspondence Evaluation


Final Report 
Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch
January 2019


Table of contents

Executive summary
1. Introduction
2. Background
3. Evaluation methodology
4. Findings

4.1 The CRA centralized its administration of external administration correspondence.
4.2 The CRA improved the overall understandability of external administrative correspondence.
4.3 Although the CRA has made progress in the administration and understandability of external administrative correspondence, opportunities exist for further improvement.
4.4 Going forward


5. Conclusion
6. Acknowledgements
Appendix A: Evaluation issues and methodology
Appendix B: Glossary



Executive summary
This study is a follow-up to the Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch’s 2014 External Administrative Correspondence Evaluation. The objective of this study is to provide the Canada Revenue Agency’s (CRA’s) Commissioner, senior management, and Board of Management with an independent assessment of the progress that the CRA has made since 2014 with respect to improving external administrative correspondence sent to Canadians.
External administrative correspondence is personalized correspondence that the CRA generates for an individual, a business, or their authorized representatives. This correspondence includes notices, statements, and letters but excludes standardized returns, forms, and guides.
Based on recommendations of the 2014 evaluation, the Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch created and implemented the External Administrative Correspondence Project to improve correspondence for Canadians and centralize review work. This project was completed in 2 phases. The present study is limited to changes made to correspondence in the first phase of the project, which reviewed 75% of the total correspondence (by volume) issued by the CRA.
Overall, since the 2014 evaluation, the CRA has improved its external administrative correspondence. One of the key changes that the CRA has made is clarifying the required actions taxpayers must take. All correspondence within the scope of Phase 1 of the External Administrative Correspondence Project went through plain language and verse reviews to ensure the use of consistent wording and language. In addition, the Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch applied a more common “look” and “feel” to all correspondence, with only slight variations to account for individual program and system differences. These improvements aim to help taxpayers better engage with the CRA. Public opinion research conducted by the CRA and finalized in August 2017 indicated that taxpayers reacted positively to the changes.
The evaluation team recognizes the improvements that have been made to the administration and production of external administrative correspondence since the 2014 evaluation. However, as stated in the 2014 evaluation report, the CRA’s systems limit the extent to which certain improvements can be made. The age and limited functionality of CRA legacy systems don’t allow for extensive changes to the content, format, or design of the external administrative correspondence that they generate.
Currently, the Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch and the Public Affairs Branch are considering a permanent governing body to oversee the continuous maintenance and modernization of correspondence. This governing body will ensure that external administrative correspondence responds to taxpayer needs and expectations, keeps pace with changes in legislation and technology, and supports the CRA’s focus on correspondence as a core business priority and service initiative.
Recommendation
The Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch and the Public Affairs Branch, in consultation with the Chief Service Officer, should formalize a central governing body for the administration of external administrative correspondence that includes all of the following:

the appropriate level of authority for decision making
the ability to assess system-wide costs to modify correspondence
a dispute resolution process to resolve differences between stakeholders  

Management response
The Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch and Public Affairs Branch agree with the recommendations in this report and have developed related action plans. The Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch has determined that these action plans appear reasonable to address the recommendation.
1. Introduction
This follow-up study was first included in the Board of Management approved Risk-Based Audit and Evaluation Plan 2016-2019. The Management Audit and Evaluation Committee approved the Follow-up Study Framework on May 8, 2018. Two issues were identified for the follow-up study:

administration of external administrative correspondence
understandability of external administrative correspondence

Appendix A includes a detailed description of each.
2. Background
This study is a follow-up to the Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch’s 2014 External Administrative Correspondence Evaluation. The objective of this report is to provide the Canada Revenue Agency's (CRA’s) Commissioner, senior management, and Board of Management with an independent assessment of the progress that the CRA has made since 2014 with respect to improving external administrative correspondence for Canadians.
External administrative correspondence is personalized correspondence that the CRA generates for an individual, a business, or their authorized representatives. This correspondence includes notices, statements, and letters but excludes standardized returns, forms, or guides.
Each year, the CRA sends out approximately 130 million pieces of correspondence to taxpayers and their representatives. Numerous letter creation systems and over 40 input systems generate external administrative correspondence. This correspondence ensures that taxpayers have the information they need to comply with Canada’s tax laws and that they can access the benefits available to them.
In 2014, the External Administrative Correspondence Evaluation concluded that the CRA’s external administrative correspondence was difficult to read and understand due to its complex structure, formal tone, and use of technical language.
In response, the Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch initiated the External Administrative Correspondence Project with the assistance of the Public Affairs Branch, the Information Technology Branch, and other stakeholders. The goal of this project was to improve the clarity, readability, accessibility, and understandability of written external administrative correspondence. Due to the large volume of correspondence that needed to be reviewed, the External Administrative Correspondence Project was designed to be completed in 2 phases. Phase 1 of the project ended in 2017 and cost $7.5 million. It addressed the top 20 types of external administrative correspondence, which constitute approximately 75% of the CRA’s external correspondence (by volume). The scope of the present follow-up study is limited to the results of Phase 1.
Phase 1 focused on the review and revision of 22,000 verses in English and French as well as 75 redesigned templates. These templates included the following:

notice of assessment or notice of reassessment
corporate income tax assessment or reassessment
Canada Child Benefit (CCB) notice
statement of account for current source deductions (PD7A)
with extra remittance voucher
for monthly remitter
for threshold 1 remitter
for threshold 2 remitter
for quarterly remitter


Goods and Services/Harmonized Sales Tax Credit (GST/HST) notice

The CRA recognizes the importance of correspondence as a core business priority in its corporate business plan:
One of the most important ways the CRA serves Canadians is by clearly communicating tax-related information in plain language and telling them about any action they should take. The CRA has already simplified 75% of the millions of notices and letters we send annually. Over the planning period, we will simplify more of our notices, statements and letters to make it easier for Canadians to understand their tax obligations. We will also simplify tax and benefit forms so it will be easier for Canadians to complete and send these forms to the CRA.Footnote 1
3. Evaluation methodology
This study looked at improvements made to the administration and understandability of external administrative correspondence between 2015 and 2017. The evaluation team conducted a document review, internal interviews, and an external review. Appendix A provides additional information on the methods and their limitations.
4. Findings
Taxpayers’ understanding of their tax obligations is paramount to ensuring that they comply with them. Therefore, the CRA communicates with taxpayers through external written correspondence to ensure that they have the information that they need. The 2014 External Administrative Correspondence Evaluation stated that the CRA could improve correspondence by making it easier to read and understand and that such improvements would:

result in better service
streamline and simplify the presentation of notices, statements, and letters
and potentially increase tax compliance

Since 2014, the CRA has improved the delivery model and quality of external administrative correspondence. Correspondence now has a more common “look” and “feel,” with only slight variations to account for individual program and system differences. In addition, all correspondence underwent plain language and verse reviews to ensure the use of consistent wording and plain language.
The following sections outline the steps that the CRA has taken since the 2014 evaluation to improve the administration and understandability of external administrative correspondence.
4.1 The CRA centralized its administration of external administration correspondence.
In the CRA’s previous model, each independent program autonomously managed the production and delivery of external correspondence; no centralized enterprise approach was in effect (see Figure 1). Because the CRA administered correspondence using as many as 15 letter creation systems and over 40 input systems, the decentralized approach was especially challenging. As noted in the 2014 evaluation, this model presented several administrative issues, including:

an inconsistent approach to the production and delivery of correspondence
an inconsistent application of language and formatting rules
system incompatibility problemsFootnote 2






Figure 1 – Previous decentralized correspondence model




Image description of Figure 1

This figure contains clusters of circles representing programs at the CRA. Each cluster appears as a different shade of gray, and has arrows that show correspondence being sent to other clusters in the figure, representing the many internal stakeholders who perform a specific activities related to generating CRA correspondence. The arrows connecting the clusters together indicate an uncoordinated web of interactions between CRA programs. 




In Phase 1 of the External Administrative Correspondence Project, the project team developed a new centralized model. In this new model, a branch that administers multiple programs relies on the External Administrative Correspondence Project team to manage the administration of each output of correspondence with the other stakeholders. In other words, the project team acts as a governing body that effectively manages revisions to be made to existing or newly created correspondence, including communication between programs and key internal and external stakeholders (see Figure 2).
The policies and procedures that were put in place following the External Administrative Correspondence Project ensured a standardized process for revising all correspondence. Because of the new centralized external correspondence delivery model, the CRA was able to improve the design, language, tone, and clarity of its external administrative correspondence in a consistent manner. The model also disentangled the previous model’s web of communications that was required to administer correspondence. These changes simplified and improved the way in which the CRA delivers correspondence to Canadians.





Figure 2 – New centralized correspondence model




Image description of Figure 2

This figure contains clusters of circles representing programs at the CRA. Each cluster appears as a different shade of gray, and there is a darker circle in the middle of the figure with the words “Governing Body” written in the center. There are arrows emanating to and from the governing body from the various clusters of programs, demonstrating how the governing body coordinates the interactions between CRA programs who generate CRA correspondence. The governing body minimizes the web of communications created through the previous model indicated in Figure 1. 




In order to develop the new model, the project team leveraged numerous multi-disciplinary teams to involve stakeholders in the project. The multi-disciplinary teams included representatives from internal and external stakeholders and from various levels of the CRA.
Internally, early in the project’s planning process, the project team held consultations with stakeholders from across the CRA. Externally, the project team consulted with stakeholders who would be directly affected by changes made to correspondence in order to ensure functionality within their systems and processes.
4.2 The CRA improved the overall understandability of external administrative correspondence.
Following the 2014 evaluation and an independent assessment in 2015, the CRA improved the understandability of its external correspondence in the following ways:

using cleaner, larger, and more modern fonts
boldfacing headings and key terms
using simpler and clearer language (including less legal terminology)
using personal pronouns
reducing the length of notices
placing key information on page 1 of a document (what the document is about, why the taxpayer is receiving it, and whether any action is required)

An independent assessment conducted in 2017 using focus groups with taxpayers, businesses, and their authorized representatives validated that these changes indeed improved the understandability of the CRA’s external correspondence. Independent external subject matter experts and taxpayers who participated in the focus groups found that the many modifications made to the former versions of the notices were improvements and “are likely to encourage a reader’s engagement.”
The 2014 evaluation revealed that the information-technology systems and infrastructure in place made it challenging to administer external administrative correspondence. The age and limited functionality of CRA legacy systems didn’t allow for much flexibility in making changes to the content, format, or design of the external administrative correspondence that they generate. Many of the challenges experienced when modifying correspondence still exist and can be attributed to the limited functionality of these systems.
The methodology used for the present study included an external assessment of correspondence that was revised as part of Phase 1 of the External Administrative Correspondence Project. This external assessment (2018) replicated work completed in 2014 and included a series of recommendations for improving correspondence sent to taxpayers. The previous review, which was conducted as part of the 2014 evaluation, didn’t include recommendations.
The recommendations in the 2018 external review provide an independent assessment of the CRA’s revised external administrative correspondence and outline additional opportunities for improvements to external administrative correspondence. An analysis revealed that some of the 2018 recommendations were in effect at the start of this follow-up study while other recommendations couldn’t be incorporated due to current business rules, system limitations, legislative requirements, or conflicts with government policy and guides. Of the 17 recommendations, only 6 remain to be implemented. The External Administrative Correspondence team agreed to assess these recommendations and to continue addressing them in their ongoing efforts to improve correspondence, where feasible.
4.3 Although the CRA has made progress in the administration and understandability of external administrative correspondence, opportunities exist for further improvement.
Phase 1 of the External Administrative Correspondence Project was successful in making improvements to correspondence. However, stakeholders identified several challenges that arose during the project’s implementation.Footnote 3 Many of these challenges are common in horizontal projects of this size, with this degree of reach, and with this volume of correspondence.
Project management challenges included the following:

The project team had difficulty properly planning the project due to the short timelines that they had for revising the CRA’s correspondence following the publication of the 2014 evaluation.
Sharing information through the new communication model was at times difficult for the External Administrative Correspondence Project team due to some programs’ preference for pre-existing practices.
Unclear roles and responsibilities for the project led to reduced accountability among project stakeholders and to delays in the coordinators receiving input. No formal dispute resolution process was in place to resolve differences in opinion.

Systemic challenges included the following:

A lack of available expertise caused delays throughout the project. Training was necessary to ensure personnel had the required skills to use the new software. Additionally, the level of subject matter expertise required to modify correspondence wasn’t readily available within the CRA. As a result, consultants were enlisted to provide the necessary expertise.
The project team lacked authority to make changes to correspondence, which hindered their ability to implement recommendations supported by independent external experts and public opinion research.
System incompatibility prevented the implementation of certain modifications to the design and layout of correspondence.

The project team was successful in overcoming many of the challenges noted. These challenges now serve as lessons learned.
4.4 Going forward
In 2016, the CRA developed its own style guide. The Public Affairs Branch played a key role in the development of this guide. It provides information on writing standards and guidelines for CRA correspondence. The 4-part guide outlines the design, language, mechanics, and layout principles for the creation of all paper and online correspondence from the CRA. During interviews, the Public Affairs Branch confirmed that it would revise the style guide on a quarterly basis to assist the Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch and other CRA areas with work related to external administrative correspondence.
Currently, the Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch and the Public Affairs Branch are considering a permanent governing body to oversee the continuous maintenance and development of correspondence. This body would include a centralized office of responsibility for all correspondence, paper and electronic, and their related workloads. An opportunity exists to implement the outstanding recommendations from the independent third-party reviews noted in this report.
This external administrative correspondence program office will:

build on the processes of the External Administrative Correspondence Project to become the Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch’s central hub for comprehensive correspondence services
regularly evaluate all correspondence
identify and correct any issues with correspondence

Without centralizing correspondence activities, the CRA risks reverting to the previous fragmented approach, which directly reduces the quality of service that taxpayers receive. The inclusion of the CRA’s Chief Service Officer in future plans to improve correspondence might help the CRA to improve horizontality.
The CRA recognizes the ongoing need to review and modernize correspondence to keep pace with taxpayer needs and expectations, changes in legislation, and advances in technology. This recognition will also allow the CRA to focus on the importance of correspondence as a core business priority, as specified in the CRA’s corporate business plan.
Recommendation
The Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch and the Public Affairs Branch, in consultation with the Chief Service Officer, should formalize a central governing body for the administration of external administrative correspondence that includes all of the following:

the appropriate level of authority for decision making
the ability to assess system-wide costs to modify correspondence
a dispute resolution process to resolve differences between stakeholders  

Management response
The Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch, along with the Public Affairs Branch, agree with the recommendations in this report and have developed a related action plan, including:

Implementing a governing body, overseen by the Public Affairs Branch, which has the appropriate decision making authority to ensure that External Administrative Correspondence standards and plain language are consistently applied and to continuously assess system-wide costs to modify Agency correspondence.
Establishing an External Administrative Correspondence Steering Committee made up of representatives from across the Agency and chaired by the Public Affairs Branch whose mandate will be to resolve issues related to the application of External Administrative Correspondence standards.
Continuing the work completed by the External Administrative Correspondence project within the Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch, by creating a governing section responsible for overseeing all Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch correspondence. This will include changes to current correspondence and the development of new correspondence.

The Public Affairs Branch and the Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch representatives will be working towards implementing the above recommendations by April 2019. Once the details and framework are finalized, the Public Affairs Branch and the Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch will be reaching out to the Chief Service Officer for final approval and direction.
5. Conclusion
This follow-up study revealed that the CRA notably improved the administration and understandability of external administrative correspondence. A common “look” and “feel” was applied to all Phase 1 correspondence, with only slight variations to account for individual program and system differences. In addition, all correspondence went through plain language and verse reviews to ensure that consistent wording and plain language standards were used. Taxpayers recognized these improvements as a step toward the CRA providing clear and understandable external administrative correspondence.
The evaluation team recognizes the improvements that have been made to the administration and production of external administrative correspondence since the 2014 evaluation. As stated in the 2014 evaluation report, the CRA’s systems limit the extent to which certain improvements can be made. The age and limited functionality of CRA legacy systems doesn’t allow for extensive changes to the content, format, or design of the external administrative correspondence that they generate.
6. Acknowledgements
In closing, we would like to recognize and thank the Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch and the Public Affairs Branch for the time they dedicated and the information they provided during the course of this engagement.
Appendix A: Evaluation issues and methodology
A.1 Evaluation issues
The evaluation team identified 2 evaluation issues for the purposes of this follow-up:
Issue 1: Has the program made progress in increasing the understandability of external administrative correspondence since the 2014 evaluation?

How were the various stakeholders consulted to increase the understandability of external administrative correspondence?
What progress was made to improve overall clarity, readability, appearance of external administrative correspondence to meet the needs of Canadians?
Were there any barriers to addressing the main findings identified in the 2014 Evaluation under issue 1 (correspondence needs to be clear and understandable)?

Issue 2: Has the program made progress in its administration of external administrative correspondence since the 2014 evaluation?

To what extent has the CRA modernized and redesigned its processes to better deliver external administrative correspondence?
Were there any barriers to addressing the main findings identified in the 2014 Evaluation under issue 2 (administration could be improved)?

A.2 Methodology
This follow-up study used the following methods:
Document review: a review of CRA documentation related to the External Administrative Correspondence Project
Internal interviews: interviews with CRA management and staff from the Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch and the Public Affairs Branch
External review: a replication of the assessment of the revised Phase 1 external correspondence using SiegelVision (the same independent third-party contractor that was used for the 2014 External Administrative Correspondence Evaluation Study) to assess progress made toward improving correspondence for Canadians
A.3 Limitations of the methodology
Document review: Considering the limited scope of this study, document review was limited to internal program documentation directly related to the External Administrative Correspondence Project. In addition, some of the findings in this report are corroborated by a research piece prepared for the Assessment, Benefits, and Service Branch and conducted by a third-party supplier. The evaluation team didn’t complete a detailed review of the methodology that the supplier used to reach their conclusions.
Internal interviews: In accordance with the limited scope of this study, interviews were conducted with the Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch and the Public Affairs Branch. Other stakeholders weren’t interviewed as part of this study.
External review: The external research firm engaged to review the CRA correspondence wasn’t able to compare the revised correspondence to the original. As a result, an independent assessment of the overall improvement to external administrative correspondence wasn’t possible.
Appendix B: Glossary



Glossary
Term
Definition
Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch
The Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch administers key services on behalf of the CRA. It drives the tax and revenue generation programs, which finance most federal government activities and much of what the provinces (except Quebec) and territories do as well.
The branch also administers benefit programs, which contribute significantly to the wellbeing of Canadians. By providing effective and exceptional service, the Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch shows Canadians that their tax dollars are being used efficiently.
CRA Corporate Business Plan
The Corporate Business Plan provides an overview of the CRA's objectives, strategies, performance expectations, and financial projections.
External administrative correspondence
External administrative correspondence is personalized correspondence that the CRA generates for an individual, a business, or their authorized representatives. This correspondence includes notices, statements, and letters but excludes standardized returns, forms, and guides.
Information Technology Branch
The Information Technology Branch provides information-technology infrastructure and security to the Canadian tax and benefits delivery systems and, in partnership with the Finance and Administration Branch, proper allocation of security resources. The branch is responsible for the CRA’s information-technology strategy; the management of the implementation, evolution, and maintenance of software solutions through the Solutions directorate; and, to support program delivery, the management and operation of the network and computing infrastructure through the Corporate Systems and Support directorate.
Public Affairs Branch
The Public Affairs Branch provides effective public affairs advice, products, and services to the CRA and its clients in a variety of functions, including communications, issues management, brand management, ministerial services, parliamentary affairs, access to information and privacy, public opinion research, internet planning, and publishing.
Service delivery model
A service delivery model is a set of principles, standards, policies and constraints used to guide the designs, development, deployment, operation, and retirement of services delivered by a service provider with a view to offering a consistent service experience to a specific user community.





Footnote 1

Summary of the Corporate Business Plan 2018-2019 to 2020-2021

Return to footnote1 Referrer


Footnote 2


					   For example: There can be challenges combining account summary information from multiple systems on the same notice due to spacing limitations and duplication of summary title terminology.

Return to footnote2 Referrer


Footnote 3


					   Close-out report for the External Administrative Correspondence Phase 1 Project (Lessons learned)

Return to footnote3 Referrer









Report a problem or mistake on this page












Please select all that apply:

A link, button or video is not working



It has a spelling mistake



Information is missing



Information is outdated or wrong



Login error when trying to access an account




I can't find what I'm looking for



Other issue not in this list



Submit



Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries, contact us.










Date modified:
2019-02-15


