Departmental Evaluation Plan 2021 and 2022 to 2025 and 2026
On this page
List of acronyms
Deputy Head Departmental Evaluation  Plan confirmation note
Executive summary
Introduction
Accomplishments in 2020 to 2021
Results
Evaluation coverage in 2020 to 2021
Challenges and opportunities
Resource allocation
Going  forward
Annex 1 – Evaluation governance
Annex 2 – Planned annual coverage table
Alternate formats
Departmental Evaluation Plan 2021 and 2022 to 2025 and 2026
[
PDF
- 1.9
Mo
]
Large print, braille,
MP3
(audio), e-text and
DAISY
formats are available on demand by
ordering online
or calling 1 800 O-Canada (1-800-622-6232). If you use a teletypewriter (
TTY
), call 1-800-926-9105.
List of acronyms
CPP
Canada Pension Plan
EI
Employment Insurance
ESDC
Employment and Social  Development Canada
GBA+
Gender-Based Analysis Plus
LMDA
Labour Market Development  Agreements
OAS
Old Age Security
PMEC
Performance Measurement and  Evaluation Committee
TBS
Treasury Board Secretariat
Deputy Head Departmental Evaluation Plan confirmation  note
I  approve the Departmental Evaluation Plan of Employment and Social Development  Canada for 2021 to 2026. I submit it to the Treasury Board of Canada  Secretariat as required by the
Policy on Results
.
I  confirm that this 5 year rolling Departmental Evaluation Plan:
plans for evaluation of all ongoing programs  of grants and contributions with 5-year average  actual expenditures of $5 million or greater per year at least once  every 5 years, in fulfillment of the requirements of subsection 42.1 of the
Financial Administration Act
meets the requirements of  the Mandatory Procedures for Evaluation; and
supports the requirements of the expenditure management system including, as applicable,  Memoranda to Cabinet, Treasury Board Submissions, and resource alignment  reviews
I  will ensure that this plan is updated annually. I will provide information  about its implementation to the Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat, as  required.
Graham  Flack
Deputy Minister of Employment and  Social Development
Executive summary
In 2020 to 2021, ESDC’s Evaluation  Directorate continued to fulfill its mandate to support evidence-based  decision-making at the Department. Evaluators adjusted rapidly to the emergency  circumstances created by the COVID-19 pandemic, providing strategic and  tactical support to decision-makers across the Department. They maintained  close partnerships with program officials with a view to developing evaluation  evidence and providing trusted advice based on their knowledge of ESDC’s  programs, and expertise in the conduct of various assessment methods. At the  same time, the Directorate succeeded in consulting broadly with partners on the  timing and scope of future evaluations that are targeted for completion between  2021 and 2026.
Evaluation Directorate accomplishments in 2020 to 2021
Supported evidence-based decision making
Completed 8  evaluation reports and 24 technical studies to assist program officials
Provided sound  advice to support ESDC’s COVID-19 response
Extended Labour Market  Program Data Platform to conduct net impact analysis for the Opportunities Fund  for Persons with Disabilities
Provided  evaluation evidence to enable sound decision-making for ESDC’s Labour Market  programs
87%: Percentage of evaluation clients  who thought the evaluations contained valid, evidence-based findings
Shared knowledge through dissemination & engagement
Shared best  practices with the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development  (OECD)
Published 8  reports online and delivered 5 virtual presentations on evaluation techniques
Promoted public  awareness of ESDC evaluations through social media platforms
90%: Percentage of evaluation clients who believed that evaluators’ recommendations were realistic and actionable
Broadened the trusted advisor role
Advised program  officials and Head of Performance Measurement on 7 Performance Information  Profiles, including regarding quality of performance indicators
Assisted a  project by Service Canada to identify lessons learned and good practices during  the time of the Canada Emergency Response Benefit call centre operations
Informed  development of COVID-19 measures with existing body of evaluation evidence and  agile assessments to produce early knowledge
Supported EI  Commissioner of Employers’ and Workers’ Forums through evaluation findings and  studies
Challenges and opportunities for the evaluation function
1. Human resource capacity
The Directorate is responding by:
continuing to  recruit a diverse and inclusive workforce
supporting the  professional development of staff
empowering staff  to remain healthy, positive and engaged as they work remotely
using flexible  staffing options
2. Quality of ESDC’s data and performance measures
The Directorate is responding by:
providing advice  on the quality of Performance Information Profiles to support evaluations and  ESDC’s COVID-19 response
assessing data  and performance indicators in evaluability assessments and strategies
leveraging  machine learning to determine what labour market programs work for which  clients
increasing use of  datasets in collaboration with Statistics Canada
Going forward
In the coming years, the Directorate’s  evaluations will look at ESDC’s COVID-19 response. This work will encompass a  range of programs dealing with labour market development, learning and income  security. In addition to these evaluation activities, evaluators will assess the impact of the Employment Insurance Program, the Canada Education Savings Program, and the Canada Pension Plan Disability Benefits, among other programs.
The Directorate  will cooperate with program officials to continue to furnish timely evidence  for strategic and tactical decision-making and ensure that the scope and timing  of evaluations meet the evolving needs of the Department. The plan is to  complete 10 evaluations in 2021 to 2022 and 13 in 2022 to 2023.
The Directorate will continue to expand  its ability to use innovative data analysis techniques, such as machine  learning, to identify program impacts. The Directorate remains committed to  ensuring the professional development of its staff. This will help staff to  adapt to the increasingly demanding work of program evaluation. Efforts to recruit  and retain staff will continue to emphasize maintaining a diverse and inclusive  workforce.
Introduction
Purpose of the report
As per the Treasury Board of Canada  Secretariat (TBS)
Policy on Results,
each  department must develop and publish an annual 5-year departmental evaluation  plan. The purpose of this plan is to assist the Deputy Head to ensure the  availability of factual, neutral, and timely information on the department’s  programs. This information supports evidence-based decision-making and helps  keep Canadians informed on departmental results.
Rigorous planning is important to  ensuring the effectiveness of ESDC’s evaluation function. The Directorate  determines the timing of evaluations by consulting with program officials and central  agencies on the basis of need, risk, and priorities. The Plan also helps ensure  transparency in the decision making process for the evaluation function,  highlighting priorities and coverage decisions.
Departmental context
Employment and Social Development  Canada’s mandate is to build a stronger and more competitive Canada, to support  Canadians in:
helping them live  productive and rewarding lives; and
to improve  Canadians’ quality of life
The Department delivers a range of programs and  services that affect Canadians throughout their lives.
The Department’s portfolio includes  Employment and Social Development, the Labour Program, and Service Canada.
Employment and  Social Development delivers a range of programs and services that assist  Canadians throughout their lives. It provides seniors with basic income  security, supports unemployed workers, helps students to finance their  post-secondary education, and assists parents who are raising young children.  The Department also assists persons with disabilities and their families, and  supports the homeless-serving sector through Reaching Home: Canada’s  Homelessness Strategy
The Labour  Program fosters safe, healthy, fair and inclusive work environments and  cooperative workplace relations in the federal jurisdiction
Service Canada  serves as a single point of access for some of the Government’s largest and  most well known programs and services. This includes Employment Insurance (EI),  Old Age Security (OAS), Canada Pension Plan (CPP), the Social Insurance Number,  and the Passport Program
ESDC played a key role in supporting the  Government of Canada’s significant and decisive actions to support Canadians  and businesses facing hardship due to the COVID-19 pandemic. This included  developing an array of programming for individuals and families, including  Indigenous people and self-employed individuals. ESDC’s COVID-19 measures also  targeted various non-governmental organizations and non-profit sectors helping  Canadians.
In 2019 to 2020, the Department spent  $144.4 billion on programs and services
Footnote
1
. Most of  this spending directly benefited Canadians through statutory transfer payment  programs, including EI, CPP, and OAS. The Department also administers  employment benefits and support measures, which include billions of dollars in  transfers annually to provinces and territories. Finally, in 2020, ESDC  delivered a range of emergency benefits to Canadians in collaboration with the  Canada Revenue Agency. These benefits, which included the Canada Emergency  Response Benefit, helped those struggling with the impact of COVID-19.
The Department interacts with Canadians  across the country. These interactions occur through online service channels,  over the telephone, and through a regional network of in-person sites. The  Evaluation Directorate systematically collects and analyzes evidence in a  neutral fashion to support the Department’s decision-making and inform  Canadians. Evaluators look at the relevance, effectiveness and efficiency of  departmental programs and services.
ESDC programs touch the lives of Canadians  across the country. The Department works to ensure that these programs and  services meet the diverse needs of all Canadians. Evaluators use a GBA+ analytical  framework when carrying out their work. The most recent Mandate Letters for the  4 Ministers of the Department call on them to apply GBA+ when making decisions.
Evaluation Directorate mandate
Evaluation Directorate collaborates and  shares knowledge with program officials across the Department to support  evidence-based decision-making. The Directorate seeks input from program  officials and senior management on the evaluation process through an inclusive  approach to governance (
Annex 1
).
Evaluation Directorate supports program  officials at all stages of the policy life cycle. At the initial stage, officials  use evaluations to help inform the development of new programs and policies.  During implementation, officials use evaluation recommendations to guide  adjustments or program renewal. As a program or policy matures or winds down, officials  can use evaluations to inform lessons learned for future programs or policies.
Evaluation Directorate occasionally  advises program officials that are developing responses to the recommendations  found in final reports. Evaluators can assist officials with developing action  plans for recommendations. The Directorate monitors progress on the  implementation of action plans. This promotes a system of continuous  improvement throughout the evaluation cycle.
Accomplishments in 2020 to 2021
The Evaluation  Directorate’s products focused on key knowledge gaps and on the relevance,  effectiveness and efficiency of programs. Most evaluations included  recommendations for program improvement.
Supporting evidence-based decisions
Evaluation  influenced and supported evidence-based decision making at ESDC by:
completing 8  evaluation reports and 24 technical studies to support program officials, and  the EI Monitoring and Assessment Report
advising on 23 Treasury  Board Submissions and 9 Memoranda to Cabinet to inform policies and programs
providing  information and advice to ESDC so that it can make sound decisions on labour  market and social development programs. These include programs focusing on the  unemployed, Indigenous peoples, persons with disabilities and vulnerable youth;  and
expanding its use  of innovative methodologies for impact evaluation
Disseminating and engaging
Despite disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Evaluation  Directorate continued to disseminate knowledge and engage with partners inside  and outside of the federal government in 2020 to 2021. The Directorate produced  and published 8 evaluation reports online. It also generated technical reports,  one-page summaries, lessons learned syntheses, conference presentations, and  supplemental studies. These activities spanned 3 key areas:
1. Publishing, presentations and engagement
Collaborated with  the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) to share best  practices for leveraging administrative data and using state-of-the-art  methodologies to support impact evaluations. This will assist countries wishing  to strengthen their capacity for labour market policy evaluation
Delivered a  virtual presentation to the Canadian Evaluation Society’s webinar on Technology  and Evaluation. The presentation covered the efficient use of administrative  data and machine learning for net impact evaluations
Delivered a nationwide presentation to ESDC  staff on approaches for developing qualitative information to support the  evaluation of the Foreign Credential Recognition Program
Published 3 technical reports related to  seniors benefits. This included reports on the take-up of the Guaranteed Income  Supplement, the labour market impact of a work earnings exemption on benefits  for low-income seniors, and participation in the Old Age Security Program
Collaborated with the Chief Data Office to  share more data insights across the federal government. Evaluators and  officials did this through the ESDC Data Community of Practice and the  Government of Canada Data Conference
Shared results  through social media, including on LinkedIn
2. Supporting policy analysis
Shared technical  studies and evaluations with policy developers across the Department. These  documents helped to inform policy analysis and program improvements, including in  relation to student access to post-secondary education and persistence in  education
Shared evaluation  results on labour market programs with decision makers to inform policy and  program development, and the Government’s pandemic response and recovery  measures
3. Advancing federal evaluation function
Collaborated with  TBS and other federal Heads of Evaluation via a steering committee to assess  and advance the influence of the Evaluation function
Presented 3 webinars  to the Canadian Evaluation Society
The trusted advisor role
Over the course of 2020 to 2021, the Evaluation Directorate provided  trusted advice to program officials and senior management. The advice included  information to support ESDC’s development of recovery measures in response to  COVID-19. The Directorate did this by:
providing  evaluation evidence to support labour market policy and program decisions by  providing reliable and timely impact analysis
assisting Service  Canada with a project that identified lessons learned and good practices during  the time of the Canada Emergency Response Benefit call centre operations. The  Directorate provided advice on how to conduct focus groups and key informant  interviews, how to analyze the data and synthesize results, and how to report  the findings from them. This information might be used to improve Service  Canada’s project management practices and to respond to a commitment to TBS.  The lessons learned may also be used to help Service Canada to modernize its  services in future
providing  evaluation evidence to support the development of certain measures announced in  the Speech from the Throne, as well as the Budget
supporting the EI  Commissioners for Employers and Workers in examining labour market issues. Evaluators  prepared 3 supplemental studies from the 2019 to 2020 work plan. They also  supported the work of the Monitoring Report and Advisory Committee by aiding  the coordination of the call for study proposals and their prioritization for the  2020 to 2021 work plan
collaborating  with Learning Branch on the assessment of the Canada Student Loans Program  Skills Boost Measures. Evaluators and program officials examined the impact of  the Skills Boost Measures on participants’ decision to return to school and  their studies
obtaining  thorough peer reviews for all evaluation results and evaluation methodologies  used by the Directorate. This approach represents an international best  practice for ensuring evaluation rigour
contributing to a  new Memorandum of Understanding with Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship  Canada on the Passport Program. The memorandum clarifies responsibilities  between the 2 departments for providing and evaluating the program. It  specifies that IRCC plays the lead role and ESDC is focused on work related to  service delivery
assessing the  Migrant Worker Support Network pilot administered by the Temporary Foreign  Worker Program in British Columbia. The goal of this work was to help inform  decision-making related to the protection of migrant workers. The Directorate  conducted interviews and focus groups, as well as an analysis of the pilot’s  strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and challenges. These activities helped to  assess whether the pilot achieved its expected outcomes
In response to COVID-19, Evaluation worked with partners across the  Department to efficiently generate the knowledge required to inform program  decisions and avoid duplication of work. Evaluation leveraged core evaluation  products and decades of evidence gathered through robust evaluations to inform  policy development and departmental priorities. This established body of  evaluation evidence coupled with tactical support helped senior officials  integrate the lessons from the past into their policy and service delivery  advice and proposed options. Going forward, Evaluation will continue to provide  real-time, agile, and tactical advice.
The Evaluation Directorate collaborates with the Employment Insurance  Policy Directorate to provide input and analyze data for the annual Employment  Insurance Monitoring and Assessment Report. This close collaboration fosters  the timely coordination and production of quality supplemental studies to  inform the Report. Both Directorates work together with members of the  Monitoring Report and Advisory Committee to prepare an annual work plan. The  plan includes supplemental studies and internal analysis with input and  direction from both the EI Commissioner for Employers and the EI Commissioner  for Workers. The list of studies and analyses are available in the annual
Monitoring  and Assessment Report
. Given the scale and unique objectives of each  EI benefit, the EI program is also subject to a number of evaluations.
Each year, the Evaluation  Directorate administers a questionnaire to program officials. Between 2017 to 2018  and 2020 to 2021, the percentage of respondents indicating that the evaluation  report for their respective program contained “valid, evidence-based findings  and conclusions” increased by 12 percentage points, from 75% to 87%. The  Directorate scored over 90% from respondents in 2020 to 2021 on professionalism  and responsiveness. Evaluators are working to address areas where the  Directorate rated lower. This includes providing officials with sufficient time  to prepare documentation required for the evaluation.
Innovative approaches
As a central component of ESDC’s program innovation landscape,  Evaluation uses advanced methods to develop an evidence base for program  development. In 2020 to 2021, the Directorate pursued several innovative  practices. The goal of this was to better estimate the impact of programs,  disseminate results to inform decisions, and experiment with new approaches.  These included:
further developing  the Labour Market Program Data Platform. Domestic and international observers  have recognized the Platform as an innovative best practice for labour market  performance measurement and net impact evaluation of labour market programming.  Evaluation Directorate recently transferred the Platform to ESDC’s Chief Data  Office to enable enhanced access
leveraging the Labour  Market Program Data Platform to examine the employment outcomes for  participants of the Opportunities Fund for Persons with Disabilities. Evaluators  used the Data Platform to analyze the net impact of the program’s numerous active  labour market interventions
leveraging a new  database that integrates a number of internal and external data sources to  support of the recent Canada Apprentice Loan evaluation. The Directorate used  the integrated data to better estimate the impact of the loans when apprenticeships  were completed. Going forward, evaluators can use the same database to assess  the impacts of Canada Apprentice Loans on the labour market outcomes of  recipients
collaborating  with Statistics Canada and Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada to  integrate data sources related to the Temporary Foreign Worker Program. This  included integrating program data into the Canadian Employer-Employee Dynamics  Database for the first time. Project partners also consolidated program data  and Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada’s Temporary Residents file.  The data integration will enhance ESDC’s capacity to measure the impact of the  program on the Canadian labour market
connecting data  sources so that ESDC could survey seniors who do not file income taxes. This  activity was part of the Phase 2 evaluation of the Guaranteed Income  Supplement. Non-tax filer information is not available to the program. By connecting  administrative data and CRA income tax data, evaluators created a sampling  frame of persons who may be eligible for the GIS but had not applied. The  Directorate surveyed those non tax-filing seniors regarding their reasons for  not applying for the program. Insights from the survey not only informed the  evaluation, but will also support decisions on delivering seniors programming  in the future
summarizing  results of labour market program evaluations for ease of reference and use by  decision makers. In the coming year, similar broad results mapping will be applied  to recent evaluations of Labour Market and Persons with Disabilities programs
working with  ESDC’s Innovation, Information and Technology Branch to use a pop-up survey to  inform the Foreign Credential Recognition Program evaluation
using social  media platforms to contact students during the COVID-19 pandemic to gather data  for the evaluation of the Canada Student Loans Program
advising  counterparts in other departments on streamlining processes for Management Action  Plans
Results
Through 8 evaluations  completed in 2020 to 2021, Evaluation Directorate measured results across all 5  core departmental responsibilities. Results from these evaluations include:
Simplifying and harmonizing foreign credential  recognition processes to support internationally-trained individuals in Canada
The evaluation reported that the Foreign Credential Recognition Program improved  the fairness, consistency, timeliness, and transparency of credential  recognition processes. The evaluation assessed early results from the program’s  Canadian Work Experience Pilot Project. The project’s goal is to help newcomers  to overcome barriers due to lack of Canadian professional work experience. Evaluators  found that the project helped participants to acquire Canadian experience and  job search skills. Participants reported that work placements and coaching  supports offered through the program were particularly helpful to them.
The evaluation looked at early results from the program’s Foreign  Credential Recognition Loans project. This initiative provides money and  support services to newcomers so that they can address barriers to employment. Many  internationally-trained individuals continue to face multiple barriers as they seek  to work in positions that are commensurate with their qualifications. Evaluators  found low loan default rates from the initiative and positive employment  outcomes. Moreover, two-thirds of recipients would have taken more time to  complete their credential plan in the absence of the project’s supports.
Increasing the labour market attachment of persons  with disabilities
The  Opportunities Fund for Persons with Disabilities assists persons with  disabilities to prepare for, obtain and maintain employment. The Directorate’s  evaluation found the program was responsible for producing a 38% annual  earnings increase for program participants over the 5 years after  participation. This translates to about $1,100 more in earnings for  participants than for non-participants with similar characteristics. In  addition, a cost-benefit analysis found that a $1 investment in the Opportunities Fund yields $1.70  in return over a 10-year period following the intervention. This was  particularly evident with the Skills for Employment component of the Fund. The Fund enables participants  to undertake short-duration training and develop basic to advanced skills. The  evaluation found that investing $1 in  this type of intervention yields $4.40 in return over the 10 years following  the intervention. A survey of employers partly informed the evaluation report and  provided complementary evidence to support the impact analysis.
Helping apprentices to complete their training
The evaluation  of the Canada Apprentice Loan shows that the program helps recipients complete  training. An above-average proportion of recipients who were women, Indigenous,  persons with disabilities or older in age indicated that the loans were  important or very important in covering their expenses while pursuing their  apprenticeships. Between 2015 and 2017, approximately one-third of the eligible  population used the loan. Among those people, the gender balance was roughly  even between women and men. Over that same period of time, only 4% of Canada  Apprentice Loan recipients used the loan as their only source of financial  support from the Government of Canada.
Removing barriers to seniors  receiving needed financial support
This evaluation examined  take-up and awareness of the Guaranteed Income Supplement among non-tax-paying  seniors. There is a lack of recent income tax information for this segment of  the population, which makes it difficult to assess their needs. The evaluation  found that only approximately 15% of non-tax-paying seniors who were eligible  for the Supplement actually applied for it. The evaluation found that barriers  to take-up among non-tax-filing seniors related to difficulties accessing  information about the Supplement. Seniors from all socio-economic groups  experience these barriers.
Increasing the well-being of seniors
The evaluation  found that, between 2015 and 2019, the New Horizons for Seniors Program  contributed to the well-being of seniors and their communities. For example,  57% of Community-based organizations that ESDC funded through the program  believed that their projects increased seniors’ socialization or reduced their  social isolation. Nearly half of organizations that ESDC supported through the  Pan-Canadian stream of funding indicated that their projects created social and  community connections among seniors. This reduced barriers to inclusion. The  evaluation also found that the program’s Collective Impact approach showed  promise in addressing social isolation. Collective Impact projects bring  together organizations from different sectors to produce significant changes in  their community. The evaluation found that 92% of recipients engaged in  Collective Impact projects indicated that this approach effectively solved  community challenges. The Program also contributed to increasing the capacity  of recipient organizations to support seniors’ initiatives.
Identifying the leading causes of sickness  benefit claims
The recent evaluation  of EI sickness benefits provides a practical example on how a supplementary  survey can complement administrative data. With EI sickness benefits, ESDC does  not require an individual to indicate the type of illness or injury before  providing them benefits. Rather, the individual must obtain a medical  certificate from a certified practitioner that indicates the number of weeks that  they are unable to work. Evaluation Directorate conducted a supplementary  survey to better understand the types of illnesses or injuries that are keeping  claimants from working. The survey asked EI sickness claimants questions on the  illness or injury that caused their separation from work. The survey found that,  in 2018, 38% of cases related to chronic conditions. 37% of cases related to acute  traumas, while 25% of cases related to episodic conditions. This information  will help inform policy decisions on Employment Insurance in the future.
Evaluation coverage in 2020 to 2021
The Evaluation Directorate uses a risk-based approach when deciding the  timing and order of future evaluations. This approach prioritizes mandatory  evaluations. It also prioritizes evaluations that are most likely to inform  major policy and program decisions.
In 2020 to 2021, the Evaluation Directorate completed all evaluations  that were mandatory according to the
Financial  Administration Act
and the
Policy on  Results
.
The need to respond rapidly to the COVID-19 pandemic placed exceptional  demands on the Department in 2020 to 2021. As a result, the Directorate carried  over 2 evaluations scheduled for 2020 to 2021 to the following fiscal years.  These were the Evaluation of the Canada Pension Plan Disability Benefits  (reassessment) and the Evaluation of the Employment Insurance Seasonal Claimant  Pilot.
The Directorate developed 12 evaluability  assessments and 1 evaluation strategy in 2020 to 2021. These documents outline  options for evaluating a given program or service. They contain information on  the scope, methodology and timing of an evaluation project. The Performance  Measurement and Evaluation Committee (PMEC) is responsible for reviewing and  approving these documents. Evaluators always engage with program officials  while developing evaluability assessments and strategies to obtain their input.
Table 1: Deputy Minister approved evaluation reports for 2020 to 2021
Planned Evaluation Reports
Completed (Deputy Minister Approval)
Foreign Credential Recognition Program
Completed: May 2020
Employment Insurance Sickness Benefits (Carried Over)
Completed: June 2020
Guaranteed Income Supplement Take-up – Phase 2
Completed: September 2020
Canada Apprentice Loan – Phase 1
(Carried Over)
Completed: September 2020
New Horizons for Seniors Program
Completed: December 2020
Opportunities Fund for Persons with Disabilities – Phase 2 (Carried Over)
Completed: January 2021
Job Bank (Carried Over)
Completed: March 2021
Canada Student Loans Program
Completed: April 2021
Consultations
ESDC rapidly developed a range of measures to respond  to the COVID-19 pandemic in spring and summer 2020. During this time,  evaluators engaged officials on key considerations for evaluating the  department’s response.
Officials with specialized expertise participated in  the discussions. This included internal researchers and representatives from  the Chief Data Office, Integrity Services, and Internal Audit Services.
In September 2020, PMEC discussed broad evaluation  considerations for COVID-19 measures. The considerations included the need to  focus on critical evaluations given capacity constraints, avoid duplication,  and ensure complementarity of efforts amongst players. Going forward, the  Directorate will present evaluation strategies and evaluability assessments  relating to COVID-19 measures to PMEC for approval. The proposed evaluation  approaches will include a GBA+ lens, and analysis of marginalized groups (for  example, racialized communities) when possible.
The Evaluation Directorate conducted its annual consultation  process for this plan in fall 2020. As a result of these discussions, the  Directorate has adjusted the priorities, scope, and timing of evaluations to:
re-scope ongoing  and planned evaluations to encompass COVID-19 related programming changes (for  example, Work-Sharing Program, Reaching Home: Canada’s Homelessness Strategy)
better measure  program impacts on marginalized groups, such as racialized communities
add an interim  evaluation of the Youth Employment and Skills Strategy to provide early  evidence on the impact of program adjustments. This will inform policy and  program development
minimize the  burden placed on officials when the Directorate evaluates a program.
promote  complementarity of effort across the portfolio (for example, Internal Audit  Services, Head of Performance Measurement, Chief Data Office, and research),  ensuring the efficient generation of knowledge the department needed, while  avoiding duplication
The evaluation planning process also included  consultations with TBS officials in January 2021. Topics included possible  thematic evaluations and GBA+ analysis, including evaluation and analysis of  program impacts on persons with disabilities.
Risk assessment
When assessing  the risks associated with a program, the Evaluation Directorate looks at  several factors:
program  characteristics
departmental  risks identified in the Corporate Risk Profile, and
risks specific to  the Evaluation Directorate
This multi-level  approach to risk assessment ensures that evaluators consider the perspectives  of key program partners and internal risks.
Program risks  considered in early stages of evaluation planning include:
size of the  population affected or targeted by the program
program  materiality (for example, value)
program  complexity
time elapsed  since the previous evaluation
magnitude of  change to the program since the previous evaluation
knowledge gaps  with respect to the program
The Directorate  assesses risks specific to individual evaluations when developing evaluability  assessments.
The Directorate  considers key corporate risks for the Department, including the Risk-Based Audit  Plan. In situations where audit and evaluation schedules overlap for the same  program, Evaluation Directorate may partner with Internal Audit Services to  conduct a joint audit/evaluation. This provides a means of efficiently  examining performance and outcomes. The Evaluation Directorate is also working  with departmental researchers to coordinate activities and identify  opportunities for collaboration.
Challenges and opportunities
Human resources capacity
The nature of  the Evaluation Directorate’s work requires it to recruit and develop its  highly-skilled staff on a continuous basis. The Directorate also works to retain  its employees over an extended period of time. The Directorate tasks its  evaluators to develop complex lines of evidence. Evaluators need specialized  skills to provide quality advice to program officials. These skills are  important because the Directorate supports the Department’s ambitious COVID-19  response.
Despite  disruptions caused by the pandemic, the Directorate continues to pursue  improvements to recruitment and staffing processes. The Directorate uses  flexible staffing tools to meet short-term capacity demands. These methods  include hiring students, casual employees and consultants. The Directorate also  hired a number of retired public servants with expertise in 2020 to 2021 on a  temporary basis to fill specific capacity gaps.
In 2021 to 2022, Evaluation staff will work with colleagues from other  branches to support the development of a special project to promote the hiring and  retention of persons with disabilities in ESDC. This pilot project will test  approaches and help determine what human resources and enabling activities work  best in this area.
The Evaluation Directorate promotes the professional development of its staff.  The Directorate’s approach in this area aligns with the Government of Canada’s  Beyond 2020 initiative, which envisions an agile, inclusive and equipped  workforce. The Directorate enables evaluators to build their professional  networks within the broader evaluation community. The Directorate supports the  Canadian Evaluation Society’s Emerging Evaluators Network. This is an informal  group of evaluators from across government who discuss issues of importance to  the evaluation community. The Directorate sponsors membership in the Canadian  Evaluation Society for 40 evaluators and professional accreditation for 14 of  those evaluators.
The Directorate also supports training opportunities for staff.  Evaluators regularly undertake training sessions organized within the  Directorate. This equips them to meet the challenges of their evolving  profession. After the initial outbreak of COVID-19, the Directorate moved the  sessions online so that evaluators could continue to learn while working  remotely. The Directorate organizes weekly second language practice sessions  geared towards improving the communication skills of staff in both official  languages. This is part of an overall Directorate strategy to support bilingual  capacity and advance experienced staff.
Despite COVID-19, the Directorate maintains an enriching and positive  work environment. The Directorate responded rapidly to pandemic-related office  closures in March 2020. It leveraged technology so that staff could move  forward on their projects collaboratively with peers while working remotely.  The Directorate also supported the mental and physical well-being of employees.  It organized regular online sessions so that staff could share wellness best  practices with respect to teleworking and fitness and provided flexibility to  staff that faced challenges working from home, particularly parents and  caregivers. Managers also maintained close contact with their team members  online to keep them engaged.
In addition, an employee-led team designed and piloted the Health,  Wellness and Greening of the Workplace Initiative in January 2020. The Initiative’s  objective is to engage employees to promote health, well-being and greening of  the workplace. In the context of COVID-19 and the new telework environment, the  Directorate is re-focusing the Initiative on team-based social events and  activities.
The Directorate has long supported the mental well-being of its staff. As  part of these efforts, it is helping to develop the Department’s mental health  framework. A continued focus on the mental health of employees is central to  encouraging open discussion about issues that can affect employees and  teams.
Quality of data and performance  measurement to support evaluations
Directorate  evaluations depend on timely, quality data to produce useful evidence.  Evaluators use performance measurement information to determine the relevance  of programs and services, and whether they deliver value for money.
There is a need  in the Department to improve access in keeping with the objectives of Open  Data. Better harnessing the administrative data of the department also enables  improved policy and service delivery.
The Evaluation  Directorate supports robust data collection and performance measurement  practices across the Department. Evaluators advise PMEC and program officials  on the quality of performance indicators in the Departmental Results Framework.  The Directorate collaborates with ESDC’s Head of Performance Measurement when  providing this advice. The Framework is a key means to track and communicate  the Department’s results and financial information to the public.
Evaluators also  offer advice on Performance Information Profiles. These documents outline the  performance measurement approach for each ESDC program. Program officials  develop and regularly update them. Evaluators collaborate with program officials  and the Head of Performance Measurement to ensure that each Profile contains appropriate  indicators and will be useful in supporting future evaluations.
The Evaluation  Directorate is working closely with departmental partners to address data gaps,  particularly in relation to ESDC’s COVID-19 response. This will include, in  part, the Evaluation Directorate playing an advisory role to departmental  monitoring and assessment activities on the Canada Emergency Response Benefit. Ongoing  collaboration in this area will permit the Department to develop a better  understanding of how several COVID-19 program interventions benefitted  Canadians.
Evaluators also  carefully address data issues when developing plans for program evaluations.  These evaluability assessments or evaluation strategies include a review of a  program’s performance information and the quality of data supporting the  performance indicators. When evaluators identify data gaps that could hamper an  evaluation, they will work with officials to develop approaches to mitigate  those challenges.
The Directorate is  developing the data and methodologies to conduct more refined GBA+ analysis of  how program impacts might be different for specific socio-economic groups. Some  administrative data contains information on various identity factors, for  example:
gender
age
level of education
rural/urban
families with  children
visible  minorities
Indigenous  peoples, and
persons with  disabilities
The  incorporation of GBA+ analysis into evaluations can help identify barriers to  access, systemic inequality experienced by various groups and data gaps. It can  also make evaluation findings more comprehensive by considering all relevant  population groups.
Resource allocation
The COVID-19 pandemic was a strain on existing  resources. The Directorate is working to incorporate plans for new and modified  programs into the existing allocations, while carrying on previously planned  evaluations. During the pandemic, some resources were redirected to more  timely, on-the-ground analysis of evaluation evidence to inform program and policy  development.
Non-salary expenditures remain low relative to  historic standards. However, future evaluations of COVID-19 measures may require  the Directorate to spend more on Operations and Management expenses over the  coming fiscal years.
In 2021 to 2022, Evaluation’s budget remains largely  unchanged from 2020 to 2021. The forecasted amount for salary expenditures for  fiscal year 2021 to 2022 is $6.27M, and forecasted operations and maintenance  is $1.62M. The Directorate will continue to focus on providing advice and planning  evaluations of new and modified programs in addition to undertaking previously  planned evaluations. It will manage its resources prudently in order to ensure  it is capable of handling an expected workload increase over the near term. Having  the capacity to address unexpected events in the future will necessitate the  adoption of more flexible and judicious approaches while determining evaluation  scope and approaches.
Annual directorate spending in millions ($)
Text description of figure 1
In Millions ($)
2010 to  2011
2011 to  2012
2012 to  2013
2013 to  2014
2014  to  2015
2015 to  2016
2016 to  2017
2017 to  2018
2018 to  2019
2019 to  2020
2020 to  2021
2021 to 2022
Salaries
$5.65
$5.16
$5.17
$4.72
$5.51
$5.23
$4.58
$5.32
$5.13
$5.70
$6.46
$6.27
O&M
$3.47
$4.06
$2.87
$2.55
$2.01
$1.02
$1.00
$1.13
$0.91
$1.30
$1.50
$1.62
Total Budget
$9.12
$9.22
$8.04
$7.27
$7.52
$6.25
$5.58
$6.45
$6.04
$7.00
$7.96
$7.89
Note: Figures rounded to       the nearest tenth; 2021 to 2022 is a forecast.
Going forward
Budget 2021  included numerous ESDC initiatives that will be assessed and reflected in the  next Departmental Evaluation Plan. The Directorate plans to complete 10  evaluations in 2021 to 2022 and 13 in 2022 to 2023. For  2022 to 2023, several evaluations will encompass COVID-19 measures. These  include the Work-Sharing Program and Reaching Home: Canada’s Homelessness  Strategy. The Directorate will complete an interim evaluation of the Youth  Employment and Skills Strategy. The purpose will be to develop early evidence  on the impact of new measures implemented by the program in response to  COVID-19. The Directorate will evaluate the incremental impacts of  participation in labour market programs, such as the LMDA, using net impact  analysis and machine learning techniques.
The  Directorate will assess the impact of several programs targeted towards  students. These include the Student Work Placement Program and the Canada  Education Savings Program. Evaluators will also look at the Canada Pension Plan  Disability Benefit, as well as the Employment Insurance Program’s Seasonal  Claimant Pilot. The findings of these and many other evaluations will inform  improvements to ESDC’s programming for the benefit of clients.
During this  period, Evaluation demonstrated how its body of evaluation evidence as well as  its expertise in conducting various assessment methods can be strategically  relied upon in support of the Department’s mandate. In the years ahead, the  Directorate will continue this role by collaborating with policy and program  officials to furnish timely evaluation evidence to inform decision makers.
The  Directorate will continue to incorporate innovative methods and approaches into  its operations and the services it provides to the Department and other  stakeholders. It will consider pursuing more horizontal evaluations that  investigate themes common to multiple programs or priorities. These evaluations  could also look at specific client groups that the Department serves across a  range of programs. Innovation will also be used for the dissemination of  results, to enhance ease of reference and use.
The Directorate  will engage experts in the academic community on how best to conduct  evaluations. This will ensure that ESDC’s evaluators adopt best practices from  other jurisdictions, departments and disciplines to achieve results for  Canadians. The Directorate will engage with researchers to increase the use of administrative  data. Furthermore, the Directorate will collaborate with federal counterparts  to strengthen the evaluation function across government.
This document provides an evaluation coverage table  in the attached annex (
Annex 2 – Planned Annual Coverage Table
). The table  demonstrates the Directorate will meet all coverage requirements mandated by  the Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat, the
Policy on Results
, and the
Financial Administration Act.
This is in addition to completing  discretionary evaluations the Department has designated as priorities. The Evaluation Directorate will use flexibilities provided in the
Policy on Results
to prioritize  evaluations of programs.
Programs of grants and contributions that do not have  a 5-year average actual expenditure of $5 million or greater per year are not required  to be evaluated every 5 years. These programs include:
Canadian Benefit  for Parents of Young Victims of Crime
Sustainable  Development Goals
Skilled Trades  and Apprenticeship Grants (Red Seal Program)
Accessible Canada  Initiative and,
Strategic Engagement  and Research Program
The  Evaluation Directorate will continue to support the Department in making  informed decisions. Evaluators will continue to adopt innovative approaches to better  measure the impacts of ESDC programs.
As indicated  in the 2018 Neutral Assessment of the Evaluation Function, the Directorate’s  work in these areas is valuable in supporting the mission of ESDC and reporting  on results. The Evaluation Directorate will build on the priorities that this  plan outlines in order to deliver positive results for Canadians.
Annex 1: Evaluation governance
Performance Measurement and Evaluation Committee
Composed of partners from senior ranks of ESDC, including  the Head of Evaluation.
Approves the  departmental evaluation plan
Reviews  evaluation reports, including management responses
Approves  Evaluability Assessments
Discusses  follow-up on action plans
Evaluation Advisory Committee
Composed of Stakeholders from across ESDC and/or other  departments and agencies such as TBS Program Sector and Finance Canada  (Director General level and below).
Identifies  options for evaluation scope
Discusses  preliminary findings
Provides input  for final report
Evaluation working group
Composed of partners from across ESDC (Director level and  below).
Focuses on  technical aspects
Performs data  collection and analysis
Provides input  for preliminary report
Annex 2: Planned annual coverage table
Program
Last     evaluation of the Program
Planned evaluation     in the next 5 years
Planned fiscal year of approval
Reason for evaluation
Temporary Foreign    Worker Program (TFWP)
Evaluation    of  the labour market opinion streams    of the Temporary Foreign Worker Program (2010 to 2012)
Temporary    Foreign Worker Program Evaluation
2021 to 2022
First Quarter
Commitment in TB Submission (Adjusted to 2021 to 2022    completion)
Federal Mediation and    Conciliation Service
Evaluation of the Federal    Mediation and Conciliation Service - Phase 1 (2018)
Phase 2 Evaluation of    Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service
2021 to 2022
Second Quarter
Departmental Priority
Student Work    Placement Program
Not    Applicable. New Program.
Evaluation of    Student Work Placement Program – Phase 1
2021 to 2022
Third Quarter
Commitment in TB submission (2021 to 2022 completion)
Canada    Education Savings Program
Canada    Education Savings Program: Summative Evaluation (2015)
Evaluation of    the Canada Education Savings Program (Canada Learning Bond-focused)
2021 to 2022
Third Quarter
Deputy Minister Request
Canada Pension    Plan Disability
Summative    Evaluation of the Canada Pension Plan Disability Benefit (2011)
Canada Pension    Plan Disability (CPPD) Benefits (Reassessment)
(Carried Over)
2021 to 2022 Third    Quarter
Departmental Priority
EI Program – Regular    Benefits
Evaluation of    Initiatives to Extend EI Regular Benefits (2016)
Seasonal Claimant Pilot
(Carried    Over)
2021 to 2022 Third    Quarter
Commitment in TB Submission
Union Training    and Innovation Program
Not    Applicable. New Program.
Union Training    and Innovation Program Evaluation
2021 to 2022 Fourth Quarter
Required by the FAA
Workforce    Development Agreements
Previous    evaluations conducted involving various programs (such as, Labour Market    Agreements (LMAs), Targeted Initiative for Older workers (TIOWs),    Canada-Manitoba Labour Market Agreement for Persons with Disabilities)
Evaluation of    the Workforce Development Agreements (2018 to 2023)
2021 to 2022 Fourth Quarter
Commitment in TB Submission
Enabling Fund    for Official Language Minority Communities
Enabling Fund    for Official Language Minority Communities (OLMC) (2017)
Evaluation of    Enabling Fund for Official Language Minority Communities 2022
2021 to 2022 Fourth Quarter
Required by the FAA
Wage Earner    Protection Program
Evaluation of    Wage Earner Protection Program (2014)
Evaluation of    Wage Earner Protection Program
2021 to 2022 Fourth Quarter
Commitment in TB Submission
Work-Sharing Program
Evaluation of    the Work-Sharing Program (2016)
Evaluation of the    Work-Sharing Program
2022    to 2023
Deputy Minister Request
Enabling    Accessibility Fund
Enabling    Accessibility Fund
Evaluation of    Enabling Accessibility Fund
2022 to 2023
Required by the FAA
Skilled Trades    Awareness and Readiness (STAR)
Not    Applicable. New Program.
Skilled Trades    Awareness and Readiness (STAR) Evaluation
2022 to 2023
Required by the FAA
Reaching Home:    Canada’s Homelessness Strategy
Homelessness    Partnering Strategy (HPS) 2018
Evaluation of    the Reaching Home Strategy
2022 to 2023
Required by the FAA
Literacy and Essential Skills
Literacy and Essential Skills 2017
Evaluation of Literacy and Essential Skills
022 to 2023
Required    by the FAA
Future Skills Program
Not Applicable. New Program
Evaluation of Future Skills Program
2022 to 2023
Required    by the FAA
Labour Market Development Agreements
Second Cycle Evaluation of the Labour Market Development Agreements    (2012 to 2017)
Evaluation of Labour Market Development Agreements
2022 to 2023
Commitment in TB Submission
Canada Education Savings    Program
Canada Education Savings    Program: Summative Evaluation (2015)
Canada Education Savings    Program Impact Evaluation
2022    to 2023
Deputy    Minister Request in response to an OAG report
Supports for Student Learning Programs
Pathways to Education 2018 Evaluation
Pathways to Education Canada - Evaluation
2022 to 2023
Required    by the FAA
EI Program – Special    Benefits
Summative Evaluation of
EI Parental Benefits (2005)
Evaluation of EI Parental    and Maternity Benefits
2022    to 2023
Commitment in TB Submission
Early Learning    and Childcare
Not Applicable
Evaluation of    Early Learning and Childcare
2022 to 2023
Commitment in TB Submission
Youth Employment and Skills Strategy
Summative Evaluation of the Horizontal Youth Employment Strategy, 2020
Mid-Cycle Evaluation of ESDC Youth Employment and Skills Strategy
2022 to 2023
Departmental    Needs/Risks
Labour Market Development Agreements & Opportunities Fund for    Persons with Disabilities
Not Applicable. GBA+ Evaluation not previously conducted.
GBA+ Evaluation Study
2022 to 2023
Departmental    Needs/Risks
Sectoral Initiatives Program
Evaluation of Sectoral Initiatives Program 2018
Evaluation of Sectoral Initiatives Program
2023 to 2024
Required by the FAA
Canada Pension    Plan Service Improvement Strategy
Not    Applicable. Initiative Not Previously Evaluated.
Evaluation of    Canada Pension Plan Service Improvement Strategy
2023 to 2024
Commitment in TB Submission
Canada Student Loans Program
Canada Student Loans Program
Canada Student Loans Program: Loan Repayment
2023 to 2024
Commitment in TB Submission
Canada Service Corps
Not Applicable. New Program
Canada Service Corps Evaluation
2023 to 2024
Required    by the FAA
Federal Workers Compensation Service
Evaluation of the Federal Workers' Compensation Service (2018)
Federal Workers’ Compensation Service
2023 to 2024
Departmental    Priority
Canada Disability Savings Program
Evaluation of Canada Disability Savings Program 2018
Evaluation of the Canada Disability Savings Program
2023 to 2024
Required    by the FAA
Opportunities Fund for    Persons with Disabilities
Opportunities Fund for    Persons with Disabilities – Phase 2 Evaluation (2021)
Evaluation of the    Opportunities Fund for People with Disabilities
2023    to 2024
Required    by the FAA
Indigenous    Early Learning and Child Care
Not    Applicable. New Program.
Horizontal    Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care Evaluation
2023 to 2024
Required by the FAA
Canada Student Loans Program    – Forgiveness for Doctors and Nurses
Not Applicable. New    Initiative.
Evaluation of the Canada    Student Loans Program – Forgiveness for Doctors and Nurses
2023    to 2024
Deputy    Minister Request
Employment Equity Program
Evaluation of the Employment Equity Program March 2019
Evaluation of Employment Equity Program
2023 to 2024
Required    by the FAA
Old Age Security Service Improvement Strategy
Not Applicable. Strategy Not Previously Evaluated.
Old Age Security Service Improvement Strategy Review
2023 to 2024
Commitment in TB Submission
Occupational Health and Safety (OHS)
Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) (2019)
Occupational Health and Safety (OHS)
2023 to 2024
Departmental    Priority
International Labour Affairs
Multilateral Labour Affairs (2018)
Evaluation of International Labour Affairs
2023 to 2024
Departmental Needs/Risks
Labour Standards
Labour Standards (2019)
Labour Standards
2023 to 2024
Departmental    Priority
Canada Student    Loans Program and Canada Apprentice Loans
Evaluation of    the Canada Apprenticeship Loan (2020)
Evaluation of    the Canada Apprentice Loan
2024 to 2025
Commitment in TB Submission
Skills and    Partnership Fund
Aboriginal    Skills and Employment Training Strategy and the Skills and Partnership Fund,    2020
Evaluation of    Skills and Partnership Fund
2024 to 2025
Required    by the FAA
Indigenous Skills and Employment Training Program
Aboriginal Skills and Employment Training Strategy and Skills and    Partnership Fund, 2020
Evaluation of Indigenous Skills and Employment Training Program
2024 to 2025
Required    by the FAA
Youth Employment and Skills Strategy
Summative Evaluation of the Horizontal Youth Employment Strategy, 2020
Horizontal Evaluation of Youth Employment and Skills Strategy
2024 to 2025
Required    by the FAA
Social Development Partnerships Program
Evaluation of Social Development Partnerships Program 2019
Evaluation of the Social Development Partnerships Program
2024 to 2025
Required    by the FAA
EI Program – Regular    Benefits
Not applicable
Evaluation of EI Program –    Seasonal Claimant Pilot – Phase 2
2024    to 2025
Departmental    Needs/Risks
EI Program –    Special Benefits
Not applicable
EI Extended    Parental Benefits
2024 to 2025
Departmental    Needs/Risks
Support for    Student Learning Programs – Outbound Student Mobility
Not    applicable. New Program
Evaluation of    Outbound Student Mobility Pilot – International Education Strategy
2024 to 2025
Required    by FAA
Foreign Credential    Recognition Program
Evaluation of the Foreign    Credential Recognition Program (2020)
Evaluation of the Foreign    Credential Recognition Program
2024    to 2025
Required    by the FAA
Apprenticeship    Grants
Evaluation of    the Apprenticeship Grants (2019)
Evaluation of    the Apprenticeship Grants
2024 to 2025
Required    by the FAA
Service    Delivery Partnerships
Not    applicable. New program.
Evaluation of    the Service Delivery Partnerships program
2024 to 2025
Departmental    Needs/Risks
EI Program – Special    Benefits
Evaluation of Compassionate    Care Benefit (2006)
Evaluation of EI Program -    Caregiving Benefits
2024    to 2025
Departmental    Needs/Risks
Student Work    Placement Program
Evaluation of    Student Work Placement Program – Phase 1 (2021)
Evaluation of    Student Work Placement Program – Phase 2
2024 to 2025
Departmental Needs/Risks
Old Age    Security
Guaranteed Income    Supplement Evaluation (2021)
Evaluation of    the Guaranteed Income Supplement
2025 to 2026
Departmental    Needs/Risks
EI Program – Fishing
2006 Summative Evaluation of    EI Part I
Evaluation of EI Program -    Fishing Benefits
2025    to 2026
Departmental    Priority
Passport    Program
Evaluation of    the Passport Program (2020)
Evaluation of    the Passport Program
2025 to 2026
Departmental    Priority
New Horizons    for Seniors Program
Evaluation of    the New Horizons for Seniors Program (2020)
Evaluation of    the New Horizons for Seniors Program
2025 to 2026
Required    by the FAA
Social    Innovation and Social Finance Strategy
Not    Applicable. New Program
Evaluation of    the Social Finance Fund
2025 to 2026
Commitment in TB Submission
Note:
As an evaluation for the Job Bank program  was approved in March 2021, it is not listed in the table above. Consultations  with program officials, scheduled for Fall 2021 will need to occur before it is  included in the coverage table.
The Government of Canada Telephone General Enquiries,  In-Person Points of Service, and Government of Canada Internet Presence  programs will be included in a proposed evaluation of Providing Service and  Information to Canadians in 2029 to 2030.
Footnotes
Footnote 1
Departmental  Results Report for fiscal year 2019 to 2020 - Canada.ca
Return to footnote
1
referrer
Page details
Report a problem on this page
Date modified:
2022-04-21