Horizontal evaluation of the Youth Employment Strategy - Career Focus stream - Summary
From:
Employment and Social Development Canada
On this page
About the program
Main findings
Observations
Alternate formats
Evaluation of the Youth Employment Strategy – Career Focus stream
[
PDF
- 174
KB
]
Large print, braille,
MP3
(audio), e-text and
DAISY
formats are available on demand by
ordering online
or calling 1 800 O-Canada (1-800-622-6232). If you use a teletypewriter (
TTY
), call 1-800-926-9105.
About the program
The former Horizontal Youth Employment Strategy consisted of 3 program streams: Summer Work Experience, Skills Link and Career Focus. A new and modernized Horizontal Youth Employment and Skills Strategy that came into effect in June 2019 merged these 3 streams.
Career Focus targeted youth between the ages of 15 and 30 who were completing or had completed their post-secondary education. Career Focus funded local and regional organizations from various sectors to provide youth with work experiences. These work experiences helped youth to gain employment experience and skills related to their field of study or career goal.
In 2017 and 2018:
approximately 6,300 youth participated
the government provided $93M in funding to organizations.
Main findings
Immediately after completing a Career Focus initiative, a larger share of participants still worked, compared to those who returned to school
Through Career Focus, youth enjoyed a positive and lasting impact on their labour market attachment. On average, participants earned $5,535 more per year than non-participants
Over a 10-year period, Career Focus yielded a positive return on investment for individuals and society as a whole
Observations
Youth interventions like a wage-subsidy can facilitate post-secondary graduates' entry into the labour market and foster positive long-term impacts
Youth targeted by Career Focus typically faced less barriers to employment relative to youth targeted by Skills Link
The full Evaluation of the Youth Employment Strategy – Career Focus stream is available at
Career Focus Stream
.
Page details
Report a problem on this page
Date modified:
2022-04-21