Review of the Social Security Tribunal of Canada
From:
Employment  and Social Development Canada
Official title:
Review of the Social Security Tribunal of Canada for Employment and Social  Development Canada – October 2017
On this page
Executive summary
1. Introduction  to the review
1.1. Scope,  background and review guidance
1.2. Navigating  the report
2. A  Complex system
2.1. Understanding  a complex system
2.2. Collaboration  and cooperation
3. Recommendations  and options for consideration
3.1. Overview
3.2. Recommendations  and options
3.3. Additional  comments
3.4. Considerations  for implementation planning
4. Comparison  with legacy tribunals
4.1. Overview
4.2. Overview  of changes
4.3. Client  satisfaction
4.4. Stakeholder  perspectives
5. Appeals  structure
5.1. Overview
5.2. Structural  comparison
5.3. Operating  statistics
5.4. What  we heard
6. SST  relationship with ESDC
6.1. Overview
6.2. Relationship  between the SST and ESDC
6.3. Observations
6.4. What  we heard
7. SST  relationship with ATSSC
7.1. Overview
7.2. Findings
7.3. What  we heard
8. Role  of stakeholders
8.1. Overview
8.2. What  we heard
8.3. What  we found
9. Accountability  for results
9.1. Key  accountability features of the SST and comparators
9.2. What  we heard
10. Complexity
10.1. Overview  of the SST regulations
10.2. Structural  requirements
10.3. Key  operating statistics
10.4. What  we found and heard
11. Efficiency
11.1. Overview
11.2. Findings
11.3. What  we heard
12. Client  centricity
12.1. Overview
12.2. Client  centricity leading practices
12.3. Findings
12.4. What  we heard
13. Conclusion
Annex A - Approach and methodology
Annex B -  Consultations
Annex C - Acronyms
Alternate formats
Review of the Social Security Tribunal of Canada for Employment and Social Development Canada
[
PDF
- 2 MB]
Large print, braille,
MP3
(audio), e-text and
DAISY
formats are available on demand by
ordering online
or calling 1 800 O-Canada (1-800-622-6232). If you use a teletypewriter (
TTY
), call 1-800-926-9105.
This document has been  prepared by KPMG LLP (“KPMG”) for the use of Employment and Social Development  Canada (“ESDC”) pursuant to the terms of our engagement agreement with ESDC  dated 18 April 2017 (the “Engagement Agreement”).
KPMG neither warrants nor represents  that the information contained in this document is accurate, complete,  sufficient or appropriate for use by any person or entity other than ESDC or  for any purpose other than set out in the Engagement Agreement. This document  may not be relied upon by any person or entity other than ESDC, and KPMG hereby  expressly disclaims any and all responsibility or liability to any person or  entity other than ESDC in connection with their use of this document.
KPMG’s key observations and  insights included in this report are based on interviews, workshops and  information provided to KPMG. The results depicted in the graphs and tables  within this document have been developed for the express purpose of this  engagement; being drawn from multiple sources, they should not be regarded as a  restatement of published financial statements or other reports. KPMG has relied  on ESDC and participating stakeholders for the completeness, accuracy and  reliability of the information provided. All estimates included in this document  are based on specific assumptions, sources and hypotheses outlined in the  document.
Through normal ESDC  processes, ESDC will be responsible for the assessment of KPMG’s observations  and the decisions to implement (or not) any findings and/or recommendations.  Implementation of opportunities for change will require ESDC to plan and test  any changes to help make certain that it will realize any intended outcome.  Final benefits realized from implementing any changes will be based on future  events and decisions made by ESDC and will vary from the estimates included in  this document. These variances may be material.
Executive summary
On March 7, 2017, the Honourable  Jean-Yves Duclos, Minister of Families, Children and Social Development,  announced that the Social Security Tribunal (SST or Tribunal) would undergo a  review by the end of the year to improve the SST’s processes to ensure it meets  the needs and expectations of Canadians, and to assess its fairness and  transparency.
This review was a response to a series of  reports that found the appeals process was too complex, legalistic, and took  far too long for vulnerable Canadians to be confirmed for benefits.
In Budget 2012, the federal government  introduced legislative amendments “to eliminate administrative duplication in  appeals and tribunal services by replacing the current administrative tribunal  system for major federal social security programs with a single-window decision  body.” The expectation was that a new single decision body would streamline and  simplify the appeals processes and improve decision-making. Resulting from this  modernization effort the new tribunal system once mature would realize  efficiencies and cost reductions generating $25 million in annual savings. As  part of the Budget 2012 announcement, the Government reaffirmed its commitment  to preserve an independent, objective, client-centered appeals process for  administrative decisions.
Reporting to the Minister of Employment  and Social Development Canada (ESDC), the SST was created on April 1, 2013 to  review appeals of decisions from the Canada Employment Insurance Commission  (CEIC or Commission) relating to the Employment Insurance (EI) program, and  decisions from ESDC pertaining to the Canada Pension Plan (CPP) and Old Age  Security (OAS) programs. This new administrative tribunal combined under one  structure four administrative tribunals
Footnote
1
that made quasi-judicial  decisions on appeals for the aforementioned programs. These former legacy  tribunals operated under the umbrella of the former Human Resources and Social  Development Canada (HRSDC) and CEIC.
The Government of Canada’s Open and  Accountable Government principles
Footnote
2
, combined with ESDC’s  priorities and strategic direction to design and deliver client-focused,  convenient, and secure services, provide strong guidance as to the expectations  for a client-focused tribunal function. Open and Accountable principles state  that the intent of an administrative tribunal is to operate according to a less  formal, more expedient and more accessible procedure than that of the courts.  They should enable citizens who have no legal representation to realize their  interests effectively and equally important, the independence of administrative  tribunals is not an absolute standard.
The review
This review included the full scope of  the SST’s mandate, structure, functions, performance, and relationships. SST’s  cost and operating results for the two fiscal years ending March 31, 2017 were  compared to cost and operating results of the legacy tribunals for the two  years ending March 31, 2012.
Footnote
3
We reviewed more than 300  documents provided by ESDC and the SST relevant to both the previous and  current tribunal systems, including financial, resource and performance  information, organization and process maps, legislation, regulations and  policies, previous reviews and reports of the social benefits programs, media  clippings and more.
Leading practices derived from literature  and academic papers, experience, and an environmental review informed the  review. Five tribunals were identified as external comparators against which to  examine the SST, four in Canada and one international. These tribunals have  similarities with the SST in that they provide income or benefit payments to  citizens and/or workers, and have comparable range in complexity, for example  from basic eligibility to complex medical evidence.
We also needed to hear, listen and learn  directly from those who interacted with the previous tribunals and with the SST.
We interviewed more than 30 government  officials, and held workshops with ESDC, the SST and the Administrative  Tribunals Support of Service Canada (ATSSC) officials to understand the appeals  processes and the structures, policies, and legislation that underpin them.
Online consultations were promoted on 14  government websites, and over 17,680 emails were sent to targeted audiences. Between June 28, 2017 and August 8, 2017 we conducted four surveys  of appellants, representatives, current and former tribunal members, and  employees who provide services to the SST. More than 900  responses were received. In addition, we received more  than 30 written submissions from labour and community organizations, legal  clinics and law firms, appellants and representatives, former and current SST  members, and CEIC Commissioners for Workers and Employers.
We held six focus groups across Canada  with over 60 community and labour stakeholders, members of the previous  tribunals, and a few appellants.
Through the course of the review, KPMG  heard from many stakeholders an overwhelming conclusion that the appeals  processes under the SST are not meeting expectations of timeliness, fairness,  transparency, accessibility, and efficiency. We also heard of the resource and  workload challenges the SST was faced with when it was stood up in 2013.
These perspectives were important to  listen to and understand. The perspectives informed and corroborated the  analysis of costs, operating results, and client satisfaction of the SST as  compared to the former tribunals and external comparator tribunals that hear  social benefits appeals.
All of these activities informed KPMG’s  analysis of the appeals system for social benefits under the SST and ensuing  recommendations to improve this system for Canadians.
Key findings
Overall the review found:
The SST was born of an initiative under the Deficit Reduction Action  Plan with a focus on achieving $25 million in annual savings, and was announced  in the Federal Budget without the benefit of stakeholder engagement. These two  factors, combined with poor transition planning under which the SST inherited a  large backlog of appeal cases before they had staff, systems, and processes in  place, meant for a very shaky start that many stakeholders have neither  forgiven nor forgotten.
Notwithstanding the challenges that the SST faced with transition,  the total cost of the SST is lower than the total cost of the four legacy  tribunals combined. However, the average cost per EI appeal to the SST General  Division is significantly higher than under the former Board of Referees. The  average cost per other appeals to the SST is lower than what it was under the three  other legacy tribunals.
Timelines from application to decision are longer under the General  Division for both EI and IS, and the Appeal Division for EI than under the  legacy tribunals. This extended timeline is particularly acute for EI appeals  to the General Division which take on average over five times longer than the  former Board of Referees.
The SST’s appeals processes flow from its enabling legislation enacted  in 2012 and regulations published in 2013. It is important to recognize that a  number of changes from the legacy Board of Referees to the current system  reflect leading practices and enhance the independence of the appeals system, a  fundamental requirement for an administrative tribunal. Still, the SST’s approach  to strictly apply the law comes with a cost with respect to effectiveness, efficiency,  and client orientation. Providing client-centric service while leveraging the  full flexibility of the SST’s enabling legislation and regulations is what will  better serve vulnerable Canadians.
Examination of the appeals structure and its enabling legislative  and regulatory framework found that a number of measures introduced to expedite  appeals with a reasonable chance of success have, as implemented, had the  unintended consequence of slowing down the process and frustrating clients. Further,  the SST’s processes largely reflect a “one size fits all” approach, and they do  not adequately differentiate between the short term nature of the EI benefits  program and the longer term nature of a pensions program.
The public consultations consistently identified dissatisfaction  with the accountability of the SST including public reporting, accessibility of  its processes and decisions, service standards and timelines, and financial  performance. More is required to support a transparent, accountable tribunal, aligned  with the Government of Canada’s whole of government focus on accounting for the  financial and non-financial contributions to outcomes for Canadians.
Finally, governments around the world recognize that in order to  improve social outcomes, human and social programs must be designed and  delivered with a focus on the client. The appeals system in the context of  social and human service programs must balance the principles of an independent  administrative process to review and adjudicate program decisions with the  values and principles of the program itself. While the SST continues to develop  its practices and procedures, the current system under the SST does not  incorporate many of the leading practices of a client-centric organization.
The complex environment within which the  SST operates served as an important backdrop to this review and highlighted the  importance of collaboration and cooperation across government organizations  that have roles in the appeals system.
The review and resulting analysis considered  the complexity of the system, along with a number of other areas of focus  including analysis of costs and timelines, the appeals structure, the  complexity of the processes, the relationships between government  organizations, the accountability of the SST and engagement with stakeholders,  and the client-centricity of the appeals processes and system.
Recommendations
There was unanimous concurrence among the  key stakeholders to the tribunal system that the goal of the appeals system  should be to serve vulnerable Canadians through a fair, objective, and  responsive appeals process, while respecting the Tribunal’s independence of  decision-making.
Achieving this goal will require a  resetting of the SST – a renouvellement – shifting from a primary orientation  to the law towards a greater orientation to the client, using the full  flexibility provided by the SST’s enabling legislation and regulations. This  “renouvellement” must be accompanied by a leadership ethos that is also focused  on the client and on the quality of services. The opportunities for change will  require conscious choice and trade-offs across objectives. Some changes are  within the current authority of the SST to seize; others will require  collective collaboration and cooperation of the government agencies involved in  the appeals system and meaningful and enduring engagement of the stakeholder  communities. Still others will likely require changes to legislation and/or  regulations. What is indisputable is that changes are required, beginning with  operational changes in the SST that enhance client satisfaction, supported by a  well-developed plan.
KPMG provides seven recommendations to  the Minister, each supported by a range of options presented in Section 3 of  this report. The options range from making changes within the current  governance, organization, and appeals structure to making foundational and  structural changes to the SST governance and organization. The majority of  options likely do not require legislative or regulatory changes, but will call  for a shift from a legalistic culture to a client-centric one where some of the  authorities are delegated in an effort to increase efficiency.
KPMG recommends the Minister:
Implement a suite of changes  that will shift the orientation of the SST to a client-centric model and  culture
Align the structure of the  appeals processes with the characteristics of the benefits programs they  support, while providing an appeals process that clients see as fair and  transparent
Minimize complexity to better serve  client needs, and where required, provide assistance to help clients navigate  complex interactions
Strengthen the appeals system  by formalizing engagement strategies to better involve stakeholders
Define and clarify ESDC, SST  and ATSSC roles and responsibilities with respect to how they work together to  achieve government objectives while serving clients
Make more effective use of  ATSSC employees by increasing the scope of support services and support to  members
Establish an integrated accountability  and reporting framework from reconsideration through appeals that incorporates  all parties’ contributions to an effective and efficient recourse process.
In conclusion
While the SST’s legislative and  regulatory framework that underpins its processes and operations has  significant differences from the previous tribunals, the “raison d’être”  remains the same: to secure the just, most expeditious and least expensive  determination of appeals and applications, and to conduct proceedings as  informally and quickly as the circumstances and the considerations of fairness  and natural justice permit. There are two levels of appeal for each program, as  before. The basis of appeal – eligibility against established criteria –  remains. The governing principles of providing a fair, credible and accessible  appeals process are unwavering. Economies of scale have been achieved by  consolidating administrative functions of four tribunals to one. According to  survey responses and reference documents, client satisfaction with the SST is  not high but not necessarily lower than under the previous system. Still,  legitimate complaints and strong evidence of added complexity, lengthier  timelines, and a more formal, distant, legalistic tribunal that is difficult  for the lay person to navigate, has many longing for the past and calling for  change.
In addition to the factors noted above,  other differences include the shift in the balance of power from a three-member  tribunal, seen as a “trial by peers” to a single decision-maker often in a  location distant from the appellant and his/her associated work/life context, a  process that is not seen as putting the client first, and the elimination of  tripartism in EI appeals. These factors are at the very least creating a  perception of reduced access and fairness.
The question, therefore, is less about  which tribunal, past or present, has it “right,” but rather, how to take  concrete measures to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the SST’s structures  and processes, leverage the full flexibility of its enabling legislation and  regulations, and foster a client-centric culture that places the client at the  heart of the appeals process.
In conclusion, we strongly encourage the  Minister to take the required time to complete the due diligence necessary to  evaluate the recommendations and options available. These will require  conscious choice and trade-offs across multiple objectives and require further  analysis and assessment to ensure that the changes achieve positive results for  clients in the short, medium, and longer term. Learning from the past, the go-forward  strategy should include engagement with the stakeholder communities, and  include a multi-year plan designed to deliver operational changes in the short  term, followed by more fundamental changes, including changes to legislation  and regulations, in the medium to long term. The plan should be updated  annually, accompanied by regular public reporting on results. The changes  implemented should be designed to achieve desired outcomes for accessibility,  fairness, and transparency, that collectively  continue to improve the SST’s appeals processes and the overall benefits system  for vulnerable Canadians.
1. Introduction to the review
1.1. Scope, background and review guidance
1.1.1. Scope
Employment and Social Development Canada  (ESDC), under the direction of the Minister of Families, Children and Social  Development, engaged KPMG LLP (KPMG) to design and undertake a review of the  Social Security Tribunal of Canada (SST) to assess and make recommendations  regarding its efficiency, timeliness, and effectiveness.
The review included the full scope of the  SST’s mandate, structure, functions, performance, and relationships. SST’s cost  and operating results for the two fiscal years ending March 31, 2017 were compared  to cost and operating results of the legacy tribunals for the two years ending  March 31, 2012.
Footnote
4
An environmental review was conducted of  the differences and similarities between the SST and five administrative  tribunal business models with similar functions or mandate, including operating  results and measures of client satisfaction based on publicly available  information.
Critical to the review has been obtaining  and leveraging input and perspectives from a variety of internal and external  stakeholders and interested parties.
Although considered, the scope of the  review did not include reviewing the Administrative Tribunals Support Service  of Canada (ATSSC) and the reconsideration process (as explained below).
The SST receives support services and  facilities from the ATSSC and by its nature an assessment of the efficiency and  effectiveness of the SST invariably considered the support and services  received from the ATSSC. The assessment and findings should not however be  interpreted to be reflective of the ATSSC organization as a whole.
Before appealing to the SST, an  individual must first request Service Canada reconsider the disallowed claim  for Employment Insurance, Canada Pension Plan, and Old Age Security benefits. This  process is part of the overall recourse process and is often not distinguished  from the appeals process by the appellant, and as such observations and  relevant information to the SST appeals process is included.
1.1.2. Background to this review
On April 1, 2013, the SST was created to  review appeals of decisions from the Canada Employment Insurance Commission  (CEIC) relating to the Employment Insurance (EI) program, and decisions from  the Department of Employment and Social Development Canada pertaining to the  Canada Pension Plan (CPP) and Old Age Security (OAS) programs.
On June 15, 2016, the Standing Committee  on Human Resources, Skills and Social Development and the Status of Persons  with Disabilities (HUMA) tabled its report, Exploring the Impact of Recent  Changes to Employment Insurance and Ways to Improve Access to the Program.  Specifically, Recommendation #13 in that report proposed that ESDC undertake a  review of the new SST that focuses on costs, efficiency, client satisfaction,  transparency, form of hearing, and timeliness of decisions. The concerns  expressed from witnesses before the Committee related to:
The far lower number of appeals  heard under the new system compared with the previous system
The time it takes claimants to  have their appeal heard because of the lack of SST staff/members and the lack  of a time limit to issue decisions
The use of video conferences or  telephone hearings instead of in-person hearings, which causes problems for  some appellants
The seemingly reduced transparency  of the new system, which no longer makes all of its decisions public and  accessible.
Footnote
5
On March 7, 2017, the Honourable  Jean-Yves Duclos, Minister of Families, Children and Social Development,  announced that the Social Security Tribunal (SST) would undergo a review by the  end of the year to improve the SST’s processes to ensure it meets the needs and  expectations of Canadians, and to assess its fairness and transparency.
1.1.3. Review guidance
KPMG’s assessment was guided by the  following:
The rationale for the creation  of the SST was to streamline and simplify appeals and to improve decision-making
Footnote
6
The intent of an administrative  tribunal is to operate according to a less formal, more expedient and more  accessible procedure than that of the courts, which should enable citizens who  have no legal representation to realize their interests effectively
Footnote
7
Core principles set out in Open  and Accountable Government regarding a range of administrative, procedural and  institutional matters on Canada’s system of government, including  administrative tribunals
Footnote
8
In response to the HUMA report,  the Government committed to providing a quick, effective and efficient system  of appeals that will ensure that Canadians get the support they need when they  need it most
Footnote
9
The SST has committed to  quality and timely decisions, and improving the tribunal’s efficiency,  transparency and access to justice as established in the SST’s 2013 to 2016  Achievements Report
All key stakeholders emphasized  the importance of a client-focused review.
1.2. Navigating the report
1.2.1. Statement of work
The review was based on the requirements  established by the Statement of Work (SOW). The following table maps the SOW  requirements from the relevant report sections
Statement of work requirement
Where to find it
Scope
Review    materials previously developed by ESDC, the SST and other sources on the    topic of its statutory programs and recourse processes
Materials    provided by ESDC, Commissioners for Workers and Employers, the SST, the ATSSC,    and our literature review served as the basis for KPMG’s review and analysis
Review    the SST’s governance and organizational structure and as required identify    options for alternative models
References    to SST governance and organizational structure and options for alternative    models are incorporated in Section 6 SST Relationship with ESDC, Section 7 SST    Relationship with ATSSC, Section 8 Role of Stakeholders, and Section 9    Accountability for Results
Conduct    an environmental review of the differences and similarities between different    appropriate metrics, for the purposes of providing a comparison, with    particular focus on these organization’s business models, service standards    and resultant client satisfaction, if available
Section    5 Appeals Structure
Section    7 SST Relationship with ATSSC
Section    9 Accountability for Results
Section    10 Complexity
Section    11 Efficiency
Section    12 Client Centricity
Review    the current legislation and regulations governing the SST and its operations    to determine whether they impact the flexibility of the Tribunal to implement    changes that will improve the overall process. The review of the legislation    and regulations (and supplier proposed legislative/regulatory changes) on    operations and outcomes should include providing an analysis and assessment of    how efficiencies can be gained in terms of hearing scheduling, forms of    hearings, length of time to render decisions, length and complexity of    decisions, access to justice, timeliness, operational guidance and direction etc.
A    legislative review served as a key element to all aspects of the review, and    legislation is specifically referenced in Section 4 Comparison with Legacy Tribunals,    Section 5 Appeals Structure, Section 9 Accountability for Results, and    Section 10 Complexity
The Supplier    will conduct a series of public consultations. No less than four (4) group    (in-person) consultations in locations across Canada will be designed,    organized and fully conducted by the Supplier so as to ensure a cross    representation of Canadian constituents
Annex    B Consultations
The    Supplier will provide various options for other means of consultations with    stakeholders
Annex    B Consultations
Perform    a total cost level comparison between the current operations of the SST and    the former tribunals (Board of Referees, Umpire, Review Tribunal and Pension    Appeals Board)
Section    4 Comparison with Legacy Tribunals
Annex A    Approach and Methodology
Analyze    the efficiency and outcomes of decision-making by the SST including, but not    necessarily limited to, speed of service, claimant success rates and    subsequent overturn rates, and compare to that of the former tribunals on the    basis of efficiency, speed of service, client satisfaction, fairness and    transparency, taking into account the different legislative and regulatory    requirements under which they operated
Section    4 Comparison with Legacy Tribunals
Section    11 Efficiency
Identify    any potential options to further improve the efficiency, timeliness,    effectiveness of the SST’s operations and decision-making functions which    would be possible within the current legislative and regulatory framework. In    addition, outline any policy, legislative or regulatory changes that would be    required in order to improve the SST’s operations, transparency and    decision-making functions with the view of reducing administrative burden and    wait times
Section    3 Recommendations and Options for Consideration
Identify    the impacts of setting limits on the amount of time the SST takes to issue    decisions
Section    3 Recommendations and Options for Consideration
Assess    the impact (effectiveness, cost, overturn rate, client satisfaction, etc.) of    facilitating hearings in-person, via video conference or via teleconference,    by question and answer or on the record, in both General and Appeal Divisions
Section    12 Client Centricity
Key activities    and deliverables
Review    of SST’s governance structure
References    to SST governance and organizational structure and options for alternative    models are incorporated into Section 6 SST Relationship with ESDC, Section 7 SST    Relationship with ATSSC, Section 8 Role of Stakeholders, and Section 9    Accountability for Results
Cost    comparison between current and previous system
Section    4 Comparison with Legacy Tribunals
Annex A    Approach and Methodology
Efficiency    comparison between current and previous system
Section    4 Comparison with Legacy Tribunals
Client    satisfaction comparison between current and previous system
Section    4 Comparison with Legacy Tribunals
Observations    and recommendations on improving SST fairness and transparency
Section    3 Recommendations and Options for Consideration
Conduct    environmental review of the business models of other similar recourse    processes
Comparator    information is presented in Section 5 Appeals Structure, Section 6 SST    Relationship with ESDC, Section 7 SST Relationship with ATSSC, Section 10    Complexity, Section 11 Efficiency, Section 12 Client Centricity
Design    and conduct a series of public consultations and perform a review of the SST
Annex B    Consultations
Recommend    appropriate resourcing levels for SST
Section    3 Recommendations and Options for Consideration
Assess    changes on the way facilitating hearings could have at first and second    appeal stages
Section    4 Comparison with Legacy Tribunals
Section    12 Client Centricity
Assess    impacts of setting a time limit on decisions
Section    3 Recommendations and Options for Consideration
Provide    options to improve efficiency, timeliness and effectiveness of the SST
Section    3 Recommendations and Options for Consideration
1.2.2. Organization of the report
The report that follows presents the  results of KPMG’s review, including the underlying analysis and supporting  evidence, and provides recommendations and options for consideration to improve  the SST’s efficiency, timeliness, and effectiveness. The report is organized as  follows:
Section
Description
Section    2 Complex system
Provides    an overview of the system of social benefits in which the SST operates
Section    3 Recommendations and options for consideration
Provides    recommendations resulting from the analysis presented in subsequent sections    and options for considerations
Section    4 Comparison with legacy tribunals
Compares    the SST with the legacy tribunals including a comparison of total and unit    costs
Section    5 Appeals structure
Provides    an analysis of the structure of the appeals process, including the levels of    appeal and outcomes
Section    6 SST relationship with ESDC
Section    7 SST relationship with ATSSC
Examines    the relationships between the SST and these other parts of Government through    the lens of serving clients and an efficient and timely tribunal operation
Section    8 Role of stakeholders
Examines    the role of labour and community groups in the appeals process and their    relationship with the SST
Section    9 Accountability for results
Considers    the accountability structure and reporting of the SST
Section    10 Complexity
Analyzes,    from an appellant perspective, the complexity of interaction with the SST and    the support provided
Section    11 Efficiency
Considers    the efficiency of the SST
Section    12 Client centricity
Analyzes    the orientation of the SST relative to client-centric principles
Annex    A Approach and methodology
Provides    an overview of the approach and underlying methodologies for the review
Annex    B Consultations
Provides    supporting information summarizing the consultations conducted with ESDC, the    SST and ATSSC,  the focus groups,    surveys, and written submissions
Annex    C Acronyms
Provides a list of acronyms
1.2.3. Survey and consultation results
Survey results are presented throughout  this report. The online surveys, including the online written submission form,  were available from June 28, 2017 to August 8, 2017. Approximately 6,000 visits  were recorded, and 905 responses were received.
Appellants, representatives, Tribunal members  and employees past and present were asked to provide their views on a range of  topics related to the SST. The survey presented a positive statement such that  agreement would represent a favourable opinion and disagreement an unfavourable  opinion. For example: “Overall I was satisfied with the Tribunal process.”
Results are presented either in terms of percentage that selected each choice from strongly disagree to strongly agree,  or as the average response for each question.
The views of stakeholders are also  presented through the use of quotes from the consultations. They are reflected  throughout the report and reflect the opinions of those that participated in  the consultations and not KPMG.
Further details can be found in Annex B  Consultations.
1.2.4. Legacy tribunals and SST comparison
The previous administrative tribunal  system consisted of four tribunals, the Board of Referees (BOR) and the Office  of the Umpire (OU) for Employment Insurance (EI), and the Office of the Commissioner  of the Review Tribunals (OCRT) and the Pension Appeals Board (PAB) for Income  Security (IS) benefits. The legacy tribunals were replaced by the SST with a  General Division with two sections, and an Appeal Division. The EI  reconsideration process was an informal review that was conducted at the same time  as an appeal was made to the Board of Referees. The following illustrates the  comparable legacy tribunals to the SST divisions.
Figure 1- Legacy tribunals
Text description for Figure 1
Figure 1 presents the recourse structure under the previous appeal system. The Legacy Tribunals consisted of four tribunals, the Board of Referees (BOR) and the Office of the Umpire (OU) for Employment Insurance (EI) and the Office of the Commissioner of Review Tribunals (OCRT) and the Pension Appeals Board (PAB) for Income Security (IS) benefits. The initial EI decisions were subject to informal reconsideration while the initial OAS/CPP decisions followed mandatory reconsideration prior to being appealed to next levels, namely the BOR and next recourse at the Umpire for EI, and the OCRT and on to next recourse at the PAB for OAS/CPP. The Umpire and PAB quasi-judicial decisions were reviewable under the Federal Courts Act.
Figure 2 – The SST
Text description for Figure 2
Figure 2 presents the recourse structure under the Social Security Tribunal (SST) appeal system. The Tribunal comprises a General Division and an Appeal Division. The General Division has an Employment Insurance Section and an Income Security Section. The General Division – Employment Insurance Section hears and makes decisions on appeals of reconsideration decisions that were made by the Canada Employment Insurance Commission. The General Division – Income Security Section hears and makes decisions on appeals of reconsideration decisions that were made by the Minister of Employment and Social Development Canada regarding the Canada Pension Plan and the Old Age Security Act. The Appeal Division decides matters on appeal from the General Division.  SST Appeal Division quasi-judicial decisions are reviewable under the Federal Courts Act.
Further details on the comparison of the  legacy and SST appeals structures and processes are provided in Section 4.
1.2.5. External comparators
The scope of the review included an  environmental review of the business models of five other similar recourse  processes. The basis for selection of comparators as agreed with ESDC is that  they should be:
Related to income or social  benefit programs
The underlying program should  target the citizen as opposed to businesses or specialists
Have comparable complexity of  appeals as the SST, for example the requirement for medical evidence
A quasi-judicial administrative  tribunal.
The five tribunals selected for the  environmental review and used as a basis for developing common and leading  practices presented through this report are:
The Ontario Social Benefits  Tribunal (OSB): The Social Benefits Tribunal hears appeals from people who have  either been refused social assistance or who receive social assistance but  disagree with a decision that affects the assistance they receive. This  tribunal provides recourse decisions from the Ontario Works and Ontario  Disability Support programs. The OSB is a portfolio tribunal of Social Justice  Tribunals Ontario (SJTO), a group of eight adjudicative tribunals in Ontario
Administrative Appeals Tribunal,  Australia (AAT): The Administrative Appeals Tribunal is an independent body  established to provide independent review of administrative decisions made by  the Australian Government and some non-government bodies. Within the AAT, the  Social Services and Child Support Division reviews decisions in relation to  social security, family assistance and student assistance entitlements, child  support, and paid parental leave
Appeals Commission for Alberta  Workers’ Compensation (AC): The Appeals Commission for Alberta Workers’  Compensation is a quasi-judicial tribunal operating under the authority of the  Workers’ Compensation Act as the final level of appeal for decisions made by  the Workers’ Compensation Board. The Workers’ Compensation system is funded by  employers, offering a parallel to the EI system which is funded by employers  and employees
Veterans Review and Appeal  Board (VRAB): The Veterans Review and Appeal Board provides the recourse  process for disability benefits decisions made by Veterans Affairs Canada
Tribunal Administratif du  Québec (TAQ): The TAQ reviews administrative decisions made within Quebec,  grouped according to categories of social affairs, real estate affairs,  economic affairs as well as territory and environment. The Tribunal decides on  appeals filed by citizens against decisions taken by the Public Administration.
These external comparators provide useful  insights on practices used in the social security recourse space, including  disability cases. Relevant appeal structure comparisons are presented in  Section 5.2.
1.2.5.1. A complex system
Figure 3 – Illustration of the SST and stakeholder interactions
Text description for Figure 3
Figure 3 is an organizational chart which presents the relationships between the different stakeholders involved in the recourse process for social benefits programs within the Government of Canada. The stakeholders include Employment and Social Development Canada, the Social Security Tribunal, the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada, the Canada Employment Insurance Commission and the Minister of Families, Children and Social Development, and the Minister of Justice.
2. A complex system
This section of the report presents contextual  and background information to understand the complexity of the broader system  that the SST operates within, an overview of the governance, and other guidance  considered in this review.
As illustrated, the SST as an  administrative tribunal forms part of a broader and complex system to deliver  on the federal government’s policy objectives for employment insurance and  income security to Canadians.
2.1. Understanding a complex system
2.1.1. Legislative framework
Part 5 of the Department of Employment  and Social Development Act (DESD Act) establishes the SST and the legal basis  for its structure and decision-making powers. The SST Regulations form the  basis of the Tribunal rules and procedures and are supplemented by the  Tribunal’s practice directives.
2.1.2. Governance
Governance and oversight of the system of  employment insurance and social benefits is complex.
The SST falls within the portfolio of the  Minister of Families, Children and Social Development.
The Canada Employment Insurance  Commission represents government, workers and employers and plays a key role in  overseeing the EI program, including a legislated mandate to annually monitor  and report on the EI program.
ESDC and Service Canada carry out the  administration of the EI program on behalf of the Commission, and administer  the CPP and OAS programs.
The Administrative Tribunals Support Service  of Canada provides administrative support to the SST under the authority of the  Minister of Justice.
As set out in Open and Accountable  Government principles, Ministers will have varying authority and oversight over  organizations within their portfolio. The integrity and coherence of government  activities depend strongly upon a Minister’s ability to coordinate the  respective portfolio in an integrated way while respecting any necessary  degrees of independence.
Further, the role of the Deputy Minister  is to advise the Minister on all matters under the Minister’s   responsibility and authority. While the Deputy  Minister does not have direct authority over non-departmental bodies in the  portfolio, they play a key role in promoting appropriate policy coordination  across the portfolio and building coherence in the activities and reporting of  the portfolio bodies, consistent with government priorities and policy goals,  while respecting any accountability requirements and mandates set out by  legislation.
In turn, agency heads, while maintaining  necessary arms-length relationship and managerial autonomy, should seek out  opportunities to contribute to the overall functioning of the portfolio, and  support an environment for mutual understanding and collaboration.
2.1.3. Administrative tribunals
Guidance provided by Open and Accountable  Government Annex H4 Portfolio Organizations informed the analysis of the  governance and organization of SST of which key principles related to  administrative tribunals are summarized below.
The purpose of an administrative tribunal  is to make decisions at arms-length from government, often referred to as  quasi-judicial decisions. These decisions often concern individual rights or  interests, are technical in nature, and may be considered sensitive and vulnerable  to political interference.
They however are not courts and do not  occupy the same constitutional role as a court; they operate as part of the  executive branch of government. Further the degree of independence can vary and  is determined by enabling statutes.
The principle of independence - that  Ministers should not intervene with administrative or “quasi-judicial”  tribunals on any matter that requires a decision in their quasi-judicial capacity -  is subject to a number of nuances:
The principle does not apply to  every aspect of the organization’s work, but specifically to decisions made in  a quasi-judicial capacity
The extent to which the  quasi-judicial decision-making process is insulated from ministerial  involvement is largely determined by the constituent legislation
Whatever the degree of  independence of an administrative tribunal, the responsible Minister is at some  level accountable for the effective functioning of all portfolio organizations,  including tribunals. Hence, it is important that tribunals be attuned to the  broader context in which the government operates.
Footnote
10
There needs to be a clear understanding  of roles that the Minister and the Deputy Minister will have with respect to  the tribunal within the portfolio. Although the Deputy Minister does not have  direct authority over an administrative tribunal, the portfolio deputy is the  Minister’s principal source of public service advice and support on managing  relationships with administrative tribunals. In turn the head of the tribunal  has a responsibility to work cooperatively with the Minister and the Deputy  Minister to the full extent consistent with their statutory independence.
The guidance identifies the importance of  maintaining an ongoing open dialogue to discuss matters of general relevance to  both parties, such as administration and budgeting, the tribunal’s mandate and  enabling legislation, and the Minister’s responsibility to answer for the  tribunal in Parliament. Key practical considerations are outlined:
Administrative or “quasi-judicial”  tribunals are part of the executive branch of government under the mandate of  Parliament. The responsible Minister is ultimately accountable for the  effective functioning of the tribunal and must answer questions in Parliament for  all matters pertaining to it
The independence of  administrative tribunals is not an absolute standard arising from a  constitutional separation of powers. An administrative tribunal’s independence,  in both quasi-judicial and non-quasi-judicial functions, is determined by its  enabling statute
Ministers must not intervene,  or appear to intervene, with tribunals on any matter requiring a decision in  their quasi-judicial capacity, except as permitted by statute
In all cases, even where the  Minister or Governor in Council has authorities to send back or overturn  decisions once made, it is inappropriate to attempt to influence the outcome of  a specific decision of a quasi-judicial nature.
2.1.4. Government objectives and priorities
Overarching goals and priorities of the  government are set out in a number of communications, including ministerial  mandate letters. Common and consistent direction includes accountability,  openness and transparency, and collaboration.
The priorities outlined in the Minister’s  mandate letter and the goals of ESDC also helped guide the review. For example,  the Minister’s mandate letter  from the Prime Minister identifies the:
Overarching goal to increase Canadians’ economic and social security  and lists the improvement of the EI system as a top priority
Footnote
11
Importance of constructive dialogue with Canadians, civil society,  and stakeholders, including business and organized labour
Commitment to set a higher bar for openness and transparency
Setting of transparent service standards in cooperation with the  Minister of Public Services and Procurement so that Canadians get timely access  to the benefits to which they are entitled
Expectation that work be informed by performance measurement,  evidence, and feedback from Canadians.
ESDC’s departmental plan 2017 to 2018  identifies as a strategic direction the design and delivery of client-focused, convenient and secure services and  the associated initiative to simplify service delivery  and provide client-centric services through Benefits Delivery Modernization.
2.2. Collaboration and cooperation
It is important to note that through the  course of the review KPMG heard unanimous commitment from key stakeholders that  the goal of the appeals system should be to serve vulnerable Canadians through  a fair, objective, and responsive appeals process, while respecting the tribunal’s  independence of
decision-making
.
The SST was established quickly, and it  was clear from the review that the SST has made changes and continues to make  changes to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the tribunal function.  It was also evident that there is operational coordination between key  stakeholders.
However it was also clear that there are fundamental  differences as to the flexibility and the application of the existing legal  framework, what was intended, the objectives of the new system, and the roles and  accountabilities of key stakeholders in the appeals process. These differences  are highlighted throughout this report.
In a 2011 Congressional Research Service  Report, Frederick Kaiser wrote about the importance of interagency  collaboration among federal agencies with overlapping jurisdictions with  objectives ranging from reducing policy fragmentation and mitigating  competition among agencies, to enhancing efficiency and effectiveness, changing  organizational and administrative cultures, and streamlining and improving  executive oversight. Such cooperation and collaboration is clearly called for  in the delivery of social security appeals, while respecting respective roles  and mandates.
Operationalizing the recommendations and  options presented in Section 3 will require collective collaboration and  cooperation of the government agencies involved, strong leadership, a clearly  articulated mandate, and meaningful and enduring engagement of the stakeholder  communities.
3. Recommendations and options for  consideration
3.1. Overview
Through the course of the review, KPMG  heard from many stakeholders an overwhelming conclusion that the appeals  processes under the SST are not meeting expectations of fairness, transparency,  accessibility, and efficiency. Many expressed a strong desire to return to the  previous system, or at least to restore elements of the previous system.  Further, varying perspectives were presented by the four government  organizations that support the appeals system on respective roles, responsibilities,  and relationships and on whether the appeals system has met the expectations of  reduced costs, improved efficiency, and client satisfaction.
There is an easy temptation to lay all  blame on the SST; however, it is important to remember that the SST’s appeals  processes flow from its enabling legislation and regulations which are  different from what existed for the legacy tribunals. This is not an excuse,  nor a defence, but an important consideration in the quest for meaningful  change. Still, the SST has not taken full advantage of the flexibility that  many stakeholders maintained the Regulations afford, and that the principles of  informality and expediency of proceedings have become subordinate to the  application of the prescriptive elements of the SST Regulations.
There was unanimous concurrence among the  key stakeholders to the tribunal system that the goal of the appeals system  should be to serve vulnerable Canadians through a fair, objective, and  responsive appeals process, while respecting the Tribunal’s independence of  decision-making.
Achieving this goal will require a  resetting of the SST – a renouvellement – shifting from a primary orientation  to the law towards an orientation to the client, using the full flexibility  provided by the SST’s enabling legislation and regulations. This  renouvellement must be accompanied by a leadership ethos that is also focused  on the client and on the quality of service.
KPMG provides seven recommendations to  the Minister, each supported by a range of options presented below. The  recommendations and options look to reinstate some of what was lost in the  creation of the SST, but as well to retain and enhance the positive changes and  practices required for an effective and independent administrative tribunal. The  options will require conscious choice and trade-offs across multiple objectives.  Some changes are within the authority of the SST, others will require  collective collaboration and cooperation of the government agencies involved in  the appeals system, and meaningful and enduring engagement of the stakeholder  communities. Still others likely will require changes to legislation and/or  regulations that can accelerate the reorientation to the client and facilitate  greater efficiency and effectiveness.
What is indisputable is that changes are  required, beginning with operational changes in the SST, followed by legislative  and regulatory changes, supported by a well-developed plan that enhances client  satisfaction.
The changes implemented should be  designed to achieve desired outcomes for accessibility, fairness, and  transparency that collectively continue to improve the SST’s appeals processes  and the overall benefits system for vulnerable Canadians.
KPMG’s recommendations to the Minister are  therefore to:
Implement a suite of changes that will shift the orientation of the  SST to a client-centric model and culture
Align the structure of the appeals processes with the  characteristics of the benefits programs they support, while providing an appeals  process that clients see as fair and transparent
Minimize complexity to better serve client needs, and where  required, provide assistance to help clients navigate complex interactions
Strengthen the appeals system by formalizing engagement strategies  to better involve stakeholders
Define and clarify ESDC and SST and ATSSC roles and  responsibilities, with respect to how they work together to achieve government  objectives while serving clients
Make more effective use of ATSSC employees by increasing the scope  of support services and support to members
Establish an integrated accountability and reporting framework from  reconsideration through appeals that incorporates all parties’ contributions to  an effective and efficient recourse process.
3.2. Recommendations and  options
Following each recommendation are options  for consideration. A number of options apply to more than one recommendation  but are not repeated for ease of reading. These recommendations and options  will require time for consideration and assessment in the context of the  analysis contained in this Report, followed by the development of a go-forward  strategy and detailed implementation plan.
Implement a suite of  changes that will shift the orientation of the SST to a client-centric model  and culture
1.1 Articulate core SST values and principles that guide all actions and  processes of the Tribunal. These value statements should focus on the client,  for example respect, inclusion, courtesy, diversity, and dignity
1.2 Develop a Client Service Charter modeled after the Board of Referees  Service Pledge, elements of the Veterans Bill of Rights, and the AAT Service  Charter that sets out the SST’s commitment to service principles
1.3 Adopt a “tell us once” approach that doesn’t require clients to  submit information that the government already has
1.4 ESDC and the SST should collaborate to enable the use of a single electronic  case file that is created and maintained throughout the application for  benefits and recourse continuum, accessible to the client, and that facilitates  the electronic exchange of information, thereby reducing the burden and time  delays on clients. Clients would have ready access to their information and the  state of their appeal through My Service Canada Account
1.5 Regularly measure and report upon client experience and satisfaction
1.6 Adjust member recruitment and training processes to emphasize both lived  and specialized experience and greater client-orientation, particularly at the  first level
1.7 Adjust SST executive recruitment and selection processes to  emphasize leadership values towards client-orientation and performance, in  addition to specialized skills and experience
1.8 Further develop Tribunal direction regarding language used in  decisions, explaining how the law and facts are applied in plain language
1.9 Increase the number of SST decisions or decision extracts published in  a searchable manner with any information that could be used to identify anyone  involved in the appeal removed, for example names of individuals, specific employers  and doctors
1.10 Redesign the Tribunal website to better serve client needs and make  it much more user-friendly, for example pictorial home page, Service Charter, more  extensive use of lay language, addition of frequently asked questions, links to  sources of representation/support, addition of videos or graphic-novel type  depictions of the process
Align the structure of the  appeals processes with the characteristics of the benefits programs they  support, while providing an appeals process that clients see as fair and  transparent
For all appeals
2.1 Make greater use of the flexibility provided in the SST Regulations
2.2 Give choice of form of hearing to clients, with due consideration of  the implications for timeliness and cost
2.3 Provide for more than one member to hear and adjudicate an appeal,  as is the case for all comparators. This could be designed based on  pre-established criteria and/or appellant choice
2.4 Eliminate the provision for summary dismissal at the first level and  require the SST to take decisions on the merits of the appeal
2.5 Reduce the administrative burden on clients and associated time  delays by providing greater flexibility for the SST to support clients in  submitting complete applications, for example online applications that automatically  draw available tombstone data when the client enters an identifier, and/or  revising the SST Regulations to simplify the requirements for appeal  applications
2.6 Conduct immediate client satisfaction surveys similar to that  employed by VRAB, which allows for rapid feedback
For all appeals at the second level
2.7 Eliminate leave to appeal to provide simpler and more timely access  to justice for the client, and to better optimize member resources to decide  appeals at the second level
2.8 Limit, if not eliminate, the ability of the Appeal Division to refer  appeals back to the General Division
For EI appeals at the first level
2.9 Reorient the first level of EI appeals such that it is hospitable to  appellants who are not represented by counsel, procedures are straightforward  and limited in number, and decisions are rendered more quickly. Such a model could  leverage elements of the former Board of Referees such as more than one member  hearing the appeal, and the  “tell your story” approach
2.10 Take concrete measures to streamline the process, for example eliminate  unnecessary delays by initiating the appeal process while appeal application  information is being completed; enable the SST to draw the case file from ESDC/  Service Canada; automatically add the employer as a party at the onset of the  process
For IS appeals at the first level
2.11 Remove the notice of readiness requirement and extend the deadline  to appeal at first level to allow appellants more time to gather the necessary  information to include with their appeal
2.12 Take concrete measures to streamline the process, for example eliminate  unnecessary delays by initiating the appeal process while appeal application  information is being completed; enable the SST to draw the case file from ESDC/  Service Canada
Other
2.13 Within the agenda of service transformation initiatives under ESDC,  undertake a review of the end-to-end recourse process with a view to eliminate  or reduce duplication and low value steps, improve coordination and information-sharing  between ESDC/Service Canada and the SST, and assure a more client-centric  benefits system
2.14 Maintain the mandatory requirement for reconsideration by Service  Canada as a proven mechanism that resolves a great proportion of complaints  quickly that may otherwise proceed to appeal. Conduct immediate client  satisfaction surveys which allow for rapid feedback
2.15 Provide clients with ready access to their files via My Service Canada  Account throughout the application-recourse-appeal continuum
2.16 Conduct a review to determine the reasons for GD-EI decisions  overturned by the Appeal Division, and AD-IS decisions overturned by the  Federal Court
Minimize complexity to  better serve client needs, and where required, provide assistance to help  clients navigate complex interactions
3.1 The SST and ESDC to collaborate on considerations for legislative  and regulatory changes to streamline and simply processes
3.2 Consider providing facilitated access to representatives for all appeals.  At a minimum the SST should provide links on its website to sources of support
3.3 The SST to clarify that representatives do not have to be members of  provincial or territorial law societies
3.4 Provide documents and decisions in plain language and in a timely  manner. This extends to include the full benefits application-to-appeal  continuum by providing clients with ready access to their files via a My Service  Canada Account
3.5 Service Canada to provide clients with more rationale for EI  reconsideration decisions
3.6 The SST to provide a range of services to support appellants such as  checklists and resources, a consistent case officer, and verbal explanations of  decisions similar to what is provided by Service Canada for reconsideration  decisions.
Strengthen the appeals  system by formalizing engagement strategies to better involve stakeholders
4.1 The SST, in coordination with ESDC, should develop a formal  engagement strategy that is inclusive and tailored to the interests and needs  of the various communities
4.2 The SST, in coordination with ESDC, should strengthen its practice  to actively consult stakeholders to continuously improve its processes and  results for clients, including the setting of service standards.
Define and clarify ESDC, SST,  and ATSSC roles and responsibilities, with respect to how they work together to  achieve government objectives while serving clients
5.1 Develop a formal mandate letter from the Minister to the SST Chairperson  outlining shared goals, expected outcomes, respective roles and  responsibilities, and oversight of the development and achievement of service  standards
5.2 The SST, ATSSC and ESDC to establish formal planning, engagement and  coordinating mechanisms at the policy, program, and operation levels.
Make more effective use of ATSSC  employees by increasing the scope of support services and support to members
6.1 Make more effective use of ATSSC employees by increasing the scope  of support services and support to members, including delegating administrative  decisions
6.2 Adopt a model in which the SST specifies outcomes for ATSSC to  achieve, giving ATSSC the flexibility to adjust its processes.
Establish an integrated  accountability and reporting framework from reconsideration through appeals  that incorporates all parties’ contributions to an effective and efficient  recourse process
7.1 Evolve the SST’s Achievements Report to a mandated or legislated  requirement to table annually to the Minister the SST’s performance and  priorities report, outlining results against commitments and resources. This  report should be shared with the CEIC given its role to monitor and assess the  effectiveness of the EI program
7.2 Expand service standards beyond timelines to include client  satisfaction, access and quality, and monitor and report annually
7.3 Develop an integrated reporting framework that comprises the full  recourse process from reconsideration to final appeal.
Implementation of some or all of the  above options are intended to support the shift to a more client-centred  culture that permeates all aspects of the SST, reduce complexity, improve  accessibility, fairness and transparency, and strengthen accountability for  results across the recourse process. In some cases the options may have  resource implications, and in many cases the implementation of the options will  require some level of investment to facilitate the change.
Many of these recommendations and options  can be implemented within the current policy and legislative framework; others  may require legislative and/or regulatory changes that can accelerate the  reorientation to the client and facilitate greater efficiency and effectiveness.  Some options would need to be developed at the portfolio level and in  cooperation with the ATSSC.
3.3. Additional comments
In addition to the above recommendations  and options for consideration, a number of questions were raised either through  the statement of work for this review, or through the public consultation. The  following observations are offered with respect to these questions. In all  cases they need to be considered in context of the recommendations and options  and choices made for change moving forward.
3.3.1. Setting time limits
Time limits that establish the time from  appeal application to hearing, and from hearing to decision, are an important  tool to help appellants prepare, manage expectations, and measure performance. Setting  time limits in the SST Regulations would be reflective of the commitment to  conduct appeals as expediently as possible; however, the SST does not control  all the levers, for example allocation of resources by ESDC and/or the Department of  Justice (for ATSSC), member appointment by the Governor in Council. Setting  time limits in legislation was not identified as a practice by comparators,  although similar to the SST, service standards are established and reported  against.
While enshrining time limits in  the SST legislation is not recommended for the aforementioned reasons, there  can and should be more oversight in the establishment, monitoring, and  reporting of service standards. Further, it is timely to examine the SST’s  service standards and accountability to meet them, in the context of program  objectives (EI and IS), client expectations, and the findings and  recommendations in this report.
3.3.2. Resourcing levels
The SST undertook a detailed review of  resourcing levels based on an assessment of caseloads and complexity within the  current legislative and operational framework. Their review calls for  additional resources based on the current operational model.
Such a request should be reviewed in the context  of this review including a thorough cost analysis of the options offered - some  of which may increase costs, others may decrease costs. Consideration should be  given to funding models that can best support variable demand, link resources  to expected results, and ensure the SST is resourced appropriately.
3.3.3. Structural changes
Overall, the structure of the SST is  consistent with that of modern tribunals, for example the executive, members and  support services, and distinct divisions for each benefit program. That said,  as demonstrated throughout this report, although the total cost of the appeals  process is lower than it was, the expected synergies have not materialized,  most notably for the EI appeals. Stakeholders therefore questioned whether  appeals for the two benefits programs of Employment Insurance and Income  Security can and should be administered by one tribunal.
The construct of an umbrella organization  to support many tribunal functions is not uncommon and is increasingly being  adopted by governments in Canada and abroad. Three of the external tribunal  comparators selected for review each sit within a portfolio of appeals  programs, enabled by common administrative supports. The underlying programs  range from income and disability benefits, to economic and property decisions. Done  well, consolidating appeal systems for varying government programs, supported  by common services and administrative and management oversight, can deliver  efficiencies. Equally important is recognizing the differences and therefore  unique requirements of the respective government programs and designing the  associated appeals processes accordingly.
Finally, while many stakeholders  expressed a desire to return to the previous system, this would be neither  practical nor recommended. The recommendations and options presented in this  review are specific to the EI and IS tribunal appeal processes; there is no  practical reason they cannot be accommodated within a single tribunal, allowing  for the distinct needs of each. Further, the options provide the opportunity to  reinstate certain elements of the previous system that promoted  client-centricity, while recognizing the importance of reinforcing the elements  of the SST that reflect a modern independent tribunal.
Structural changes to return to the past,  including splitting the EI and IS tribunal functions into separate  organizations, is therefore not recommended.
3.4. Considerations for  implementation planning
Finally, it is recommended that the  Minister take the required time to complete the due diligence necessary to evaluate  the many recommendations and options available. These will require conscious  choices and trade-offs across multiple objectives and require further analysis  and assessment to ensure that the changes achieve positive results for clients  in the short, medium, and longer term. Learning from the past, the development  of the go-forward strategy should include engagement with the stakeholder  communities and development of a multi-year plan designed to deliver  operational changes in the short term, followed by more fundamental changes,  including changes to legislation and regulations, in the medium to long term.  The plan should be updated annually, accompanied by regular public reporting on  results. The changes implemented should be designed to achieve desired outcomes  for accessibility, fairness, and transparency that collectively continue to  improve the SST’s appeals processes and the overall benefits system for  vulnerable Canadians.
4. Comparison with legacy tribunals
The HUMA Committee recommended that ESDC  undertake a review of the SST to determine how it compares to the previous  system in terms of cost, efficiency, and client satisfaction, including a cost  level comparison between the current operations of the SST and former  tribunals.
4.1. Overview
In Budget 2012, the Minister of Human  Resources and Social Development Canada (HRSDC) introduced legislative  amendments “to eliminate administrative duplication in appeals and tribunal  services by replacing the current administrative tribunal system for major  federal social security programs with a
single-window
decision body.”
Footnote
12
The expectation was that  a new single decision body would streamline and simplify the appeals processes  and improve
decision-making
. Resulting from this modernization effort the new  tribunal system once mature would realize efficiencies and cost reductions  generating $25 million in annual savings. Equally important, as part of the  Budget 2012 announcement, the Government reaffirmed its commitment to preserve  an independent, objective, client-centered appeals process.
The previous administrative tribunal  system consisted of four tribunals, the Board of Referees (BOR) and the Office  of the Umpire (OU) for Employment Insurance (EI), and the Office of  Commissioner of the Review Tribunals (OCRT) and the Pension Appeals Board (PAB)  for Income Security (IS) benefits. The four legacy tribunals were  administrative tribunals that made quasi-judicial decisions, although they varied  considerably in structure and the degree of formality in procedures and  hearings.
The Board of Referees and the Office of  Commissioner of the Review Tribunals both acted as administrative tribunals, hearing  each side and rendering a decision based on the facts of the particular case  and the law, in accordance with the principles of natural justice. Hearings  were conducted in person by three members. Members were expected to act  independently regardless of their background. In contrast, appeals to the Pension  Appeals Board and the Office of the Umpire were heard by judges and were more judicial  in nature.
Two government agencies had  responsibilities under the legacy system - the Canada Employment Insurance  Commission (the Commission) and HRSDC (now ESDC). With the creation of the SST  and the ATSSC, four government agencies now have key roles in the appeals  system for EI and IS benefits. KPMG heard from the Commissioners for Workers  and Employers and external stakeholders a desire to return to the previous  system, or at least to restore elements of the previous system. Further,  varying perspectives were presented by the four government agencies that  support the appeals system on the roles, responsibilities, and relationships of  the agencies and whether the appeals system has met the expectations of reduced  costs, improved efficiency, and client satisfaction.
KPMG compared the SST to the previous  system as recommended by the HUMA Committee. The total cost of the new appeals  system is lower than the legacy system by approximately $22.6 million before  taking into account additional costs incurred by ESDC for changes to the EI  reconsideration process.
Footnote
13
This reduction in total  cost of the previous system to the SST is however largely a reflection of the  reduction in the number of EI appeals proceeding to the SST.
Looking at the average cost per case, the  cost per EI appeal to the General Division increased significantly over the Board  of Referees. In contrast, the cost per case for all other appeals decreased.  The increased cost per case for EI appeals to the General Division results from  both higher operating and higher member costs per case. Operating costs for the  GD-EI relatively the same as before, although the number of cases per year fell  dramatically. The increased member cost per case is largely attributed to the  increase in member time per case.
With the exception of IS appeals at the  second level, the average time from appeal application to final decision is  longer for the SST in comparison with previous tribunals, most notably for EI  appeals to the General Division. The average time for an appeal to the SST is  227 days at first level and 309 days at second level, compared to 44 days under  the Board of Referees and 180 days under the Office of the Umpire.
While there is evidence to support that client  satisfaction is low with the SST, evidence from surveys conducted for this  review and reference documents also suggest that client satisfaction with the  legacy tribunals was not necessarily better.
The following section provides:
An overview of the changes between the legacy tribunals and the  current system as a result of the creation of the SST
How the changes impacted the roles and responsibilities of the  Commission and ESDC
The comparison of case volume, costs and timelines between the  legacy tribunals and the SST
The perspectives of stakeholders in moving from four tribunals to  four government agencies to support one Tribunal
The impact and change in client satisfaction between the legacy  tribunals and the SST.
4.2. Overview of changes
A number of changes were introduced that  were meant to streamline and modernize the appeals system:
Reduction in number of members hearing an appeal
Replacement of part-time members dispersed geographically with  predominately full time members working remotely
Change in professional requirements of members for both the first  and second levels of appeal
Change in the timing of the reconsideration review and a reduction  in the timelines to appeal an EI decision at the second level
Introduction of a number of interlocutory decisions
Footnote
14
such as summary  dismissals and leave to appeal to optimize member time hearing complete and  valid appeals
Reduction of in-person hearings through the introduction of member  choice over form of hearing
Changes to when new information can be introduced (de novo), and the  introduction of a requirement for notice of readiness to improve timely  resolution for IS appeals.
These changes, although meant to  streamline the appeals system, introduced complexity into what appeared to many  stakeholders to be a simpler and more transparent and fair process previously.
For comparison to the legacy tribunals,  the GD-EI is compared to the Board or Referees, AD-EI is compared to the Office  of the Umpire, GD-IS is compared to the Office of the Commissioner of the  Review Tribunal, and AD-IS is compared to the Pension Appeals Board. Although  as reflected below there are some significant differences in the underlying  regulatory frameworks, these comparisons reflect the similar levels in the  recourse process.
The impact of these changes on the  Commission, ESDC, ATSSC, case levels, form of hearing, client satisfaction, and  the perspectives of the stakeholders follows the table.
Factor
Employment Insurance
Income Security
Appeals previously heard by three    members now heard by one member
For the first level of appeal the    three-member Board of Referees was replaced with a single member to review    and hear the appeal. A single member to hear appeals at the second level is    consistent with the previous Office of the Umpire.
For both the first and second    levels of appeal, the three-member Office of the Commissioner of the Review    Tribunal and the Pension Appeals Board were each replaced with a single    member to review and hear the appeal.
Member requirements for the SST    are no longer subject to the same considerations or professional requirements    as was the case for the Board of Referees and the Office of the Commissioner    of Review Tribunals
The Board of Referees    chairpersons were appointed by the Governor in Council, on the recommendation    of the Minister of Human Resources and Skills Development Canada.
Other board members were appointed    by the Canada Employment Insurance Commissioners for Workers and Employers    respectively, following consultation with labour groups and employer    organizations. There were some 1,000 part-time Board members in Canada    sitting in approximately 80 towns and cities.
Under the SST, full-time and    part-time members are appointed by the Governor in Council based on the    recommendation of the Minister and following a selection process.
For EI members, the Minister    consults a committee composed of the Chairperson of the SST and the    Commissioners for Workers and Employers before recommending any appointments    to the EI section of the Tribunal. The selection criteria for EI members    include experience working on labour or employer issues.
Members of the SST’s General    Division and the Appeal Division are located across Canada and work remotely.
The Governor in Council appointed    a panel to review appeals to the Office of the Commissioner for Review    Tribunals. The panel consisted of between one and four hundred members of    which at least 25% were members of a provincial bar, at least 25   % were qualified to practice medicine or related profession, and    members of the panel were from across Canada.
Each appeal was reviewed by three    persons chosen by the Commissioner of the Review Tribunals from among the    panel, of which the Chairperson was a member of a provincial bar and, in    cases of disability benefits one member was qualified to practice medicine or    a prescribed related profession. These requirements were replaced with legal    and medical advice being available to SST members.
The panel was replaced with    full-time and part-time members appointed by the Governor in Council based on    the recommendations of the Minister, following an open selection process and    consultation with the Chairperson of the SST.
Members of the SST’s General    Division and the Appeal Division are located across Canada and work remotely.
The tripartite element of the BOR    was significantly dismantled for EI appeals under the SST
BOR panels comprised a neutral    Chair appointed by the government, a member appointed by the Commissioner for    Workers, and a member appointed by the Commissioner for Employers.
For the SST, all members are    appointed by the Governor in Council following consultation with the    Commissioners for Workers and Employers and the Chairperson of the SST. The    selection criteria include experience working on labour or employer issues.
n/a
Reduced    formality and member requirements for cases at the second level of appeal
Cases    are no longer heard by judges at the second level of appeal. Formerly, a    single Umpire heard appeals to the Office of the Umpire. The review was    judicial in nature.
Cases    are no longer heard by judges at the second level of appeal for CPP and OAS.    Pension Appeals Boards were composed of a panel of three federal or superior    court judges and was a judicial hearing.
Second    level of appeal introduced for all appeals
A    second level for EI appeals existed under the legacy system.
A second    level of appeal was introduced for OAS appeals.
A    second level for CPP appeals existed under the legacy system.
Mandatory    reconsideration introduced prior to an appeal
A    mandatory reconsideration was introduced prior to an appellant proceeding to    make an appeal to the SST. Under the BOR, informal but full reconsideration    was conducted as part of the first level appeal.
No    change as mandatory reconsideration was already required prior to the first    level of an IS appeal.
Summary    dismissal introduced
The    introduction to summarily dismiss appeals made to General Division.
The    introduction to summarily dismiss appeals made to General Division.
Leave    to Appeal introduced for the second level of appeal
The    introduction of a leave to appeal to proceed to the second level of EI    appeals (Appeal Division).
The    extension of the leave to appeal provision under the Pension Appeals Board to    the second level of Old Age Security appeals (Appeal Division).
The    SST was designed to be more electronic, with the SST Regulations providing for    more options for form of hearing, with choice made  by SST member
Hearings    at both levels were previously held mostly in person, often in the community    or region of appellant residence.
Currently    appellants are asked their preference, but do not have a choice.
Hearings    at both levels were previously mostly in person, often in the community or    region of appellant residence.
Currently    appellants are asked their preference, but do not have a choice.
Time    to make an appeal reduced for second level of EI appeals
A    reduction from 60 days to 30 days to make an appeal to the Appeal Division.
No    change to the previous 90 day limitation.
De novo    hearings eliminated for second level IS appeals
Continued    application of the de novo restriction at second level, as was the case under    the EI Umpire.
Hearings    for CPP appeals at second level are no longer de novo.
Notice    of readiness process introduced for IS cases
The    notice of readiness process only applies to IS appeals.
Under    the SST Regulations, parties to IS appeals at the General Division have 365    days to file documents and indicate they have no further documents to file,    after which the GD/IS must make a decision or schedule a hearing and make a    decision.
Other changes were expected to support  the simplification and efficiency objectives including:
Provision of a single window  for appealing Employment Insurance and Income Security (CPP and OAS) decisions
The use of written submissions  and video conferencing to conduct hearings thereby reducing the number of  in-person hearings
Introduction of dispute  resolution and case management tools to reduce the number of hearings and make  hearings more efficient
Availability of electronic  submission of documents and access to electronic tools for filing requirements  and communications to and from the SST
Reduction in administrative  infrastructure.
Further to the above changes, on November  1, 2014 the ATSSC was established which now provides most of the administrative  support to the SST.
Combined, these changes had a significant  impact on the responsibilities and roles of the Commission and ESDC, responsible  for the oversight and delivery of the appeals system. At the same time the SST  and ATSSC, both new organizations themselves, were focused on establishing the  policies and processes to support their responsibilities and roles in the  appeals system in accordance with the new legislative framework.
4.2.1. Change in role - The Commission
The Commission has the legislated mandate  to monitor and assess the EI program and as such has an important role and  interest in the well-functioning of the entire life cycle of the EI program  from policy, effectiveness of the program, and program delivery (including  effectiveness of the recourse process).
The Commission has four members, three of  whom are voting members representing the interests of workers, employers, and  government. Two Commissioners represent the Government (currently the Deputy  Minister, ESDC and the Senior Associate Deputy Minister of ESDC and Chief Operating  Officer of Service Canada), and two Commissioners represent the interests of  workers and employers. This structure reflects the “tripartite” or  business-labour-government relationship associated with employment insurance.
The Deputy Minister of ESDC acts as the  Chairperson of the Commission. Under the Department of Employment and Social Development  Act (DESD Act), the Minister must consult a committee composed of the  Chairperson of the Tribunal and the Commissioners for Workers and Employers  before recommending to the Governor in Council any person to be appointed as a  member of the Tribunal who may hear matters in the Employment Insurance  Section.
The Commission reports to Parliament  through the Minister of ESDC. Although much of the day-to-day duties of the  Commission have been delegated to ESDC officials, the main statutory function  of the Commission is to administer the Employment Insurance Act by:
Making regulations with the  approval of the Governor in Council
Reviewing policies related to  EI program administration and delivery
Monitoring and reporting on  program effectiveness through the annual EI Monitoring and Assessment Report,  which must be tabled in Parliament
Setting the annual EI premium  rate
Preparing a summary of the EI  Chief Actuary’s reports on premium rate setting; both the summary and the  report are tabled in Parliament
Providing advice on which EI  appeal decisions be submitted for review by the Federal Court of Appeal.
Footnote
15
What changed for the Commission
Under the legacy system, the  Commissioners for Workers and Employers were actively engaged in the recourse  process for EI. They selected members of the Board of Referees and participated  in their training; they had full access to the Board of Referees, and they had  access to cost and performance information of the EI recourse process.
With the creation of the SST, the role of  the Commissioners representing Workers and Employers has diminished, for example  their input to member selection occurs once candidates have been shortlisted; they  do not provide input to member training; there is less of a relationship with  the SST than what existed with the BOR; and less information is available to  them on the cost and performance of EI appeals under the SST – important as  part of their mandate regarding overall effectiveness of the EI program. In  short, the tripartite element prevalent in the former Board of Referees has  been severely diminished in the interest of an independent arms-length  administrative tribunal.
4.2.2. Change in role - ESDC
The Employment Insurance program  operations are carried out, on behalf of the Commission, by ESDC and Service  Canada. ESDC/Service Canada is also responsible for delivering benefits  directly to individuals and organizations for other Government of Canada  programs and services such as Old Age Security and the Canada Pension Plan.
Service Canada’s delivery of benefits  involves answering program queries through specialized call centres, online  through the web and at in-person points of service; receiving and processing  applications; issuing payments; monitoring of claims for accuracy;  administering requests for reconsideration of a decision; client authentication  and identification; and preventing, detecting and deterring fraud and abuse.
What changed for ESDC/Service  Canada
ESDC provided administrative support to  the legacy tribunals and was responsible for the reconsideration of decisions. The  introduction of mandatory reconsideration of all EI decisions did not require  significant operational changes for ESDC/Service Canada as the practice under  the BOR included an informal reconsideration. There were however three important  factors that changed the EI appeals process. First, under the legacy system the  appeal process to the BOR triggered the informal reconsideration process in  which Service Canada officials would review an appeal application to determine if  benefits should be granted. To the appellant there was no interim step before their  appeal. All appeals, unless the original decision was reversed through  reconsideration, proceeded to the BOR. The shift to a formal reconsideration  process under the new system has made the reconsideration decision visible to  the appellant. Second, this change was accompanied by a new policy requirement  for Service Canada officials to contact clients by telephone to explain the  reconsideration decision which informs their decision to proceed or not to  appeal. Third, the establishment of the SST as a separate independent  organization from ESDC, coupled with the move of tribunal support staff from  ESDC to the ATSSC (which reports to the Minister of Justice), provided a clearer  distinction of  ESDC’s role as a party,  on behalf of CEIC, and full independence of the appeals process. This structural  separation has made more formal the way in which ESDC/Service Canada  participates in the appeals process. For example, under the SST Regulations,  CEIC (in the case of EI appeals) and ESDC/Service Canada (in the case of IS  appeals) have specified timelines in which to file relevant documents in their  possession.
4.2.3. Administrative Tribunals Support of Service Canada
The ATSSC was established on November  2014 to provide support services and facilities to eleven federal  administrative tribunals by way of a single, integrated organization. The ATSSC  provides specialized services tailored to and required by each tribunal (for example  registry, research and analysis, legal and other mandate or case activities  specific to each tribunal), as well as common and shared internal services  (for example human resources, financial services, information management and  technology, accommodations, security, planning and communications).
With some exceptions (for example information  technology services), ESDC’s overall responsibility to provide support to the  four legacy tribunals was transferred to the ATSSC to provide support to the  SST.
4.2.4. Change in applications and member  caseloads
Appeal volumes are measured in a number  of different ways depending on the objective of the measurement. Common  measurements include the number of applications or appeals received and the  number of concluded cases. The number of applications provides an indication of  the overall recourse system and decisions made at each level in the process,  including the original decision. Cases concluded by member is an indicator of member  productivity and is used to compare cost per appeal.
Applications
While the applications for appeal to the GD-EI  were expected to be lower than the BOR, the actual experience is considerably  lower than forecast when the SST was first established. Contributing factors include  the introduction of mandatory reconsideration by Service Canada of its initial  decision to deny benefits, coupled with an explanatory telephone call to each  applicant providing the rationale for the reconsideration decision. Stakeholders  and government officials reported that the addition of the obligatory telephone  call to the client provides a more fulsome and personal explanation of the  reconsideration decision, such that the client has more and better information  to decide whether to proceed to appeal. The complexity of the new processes was  identified as a factor by appellants and representatives that may deter  appellants from proceeding to the SST (refer Section 10.4). It should be noted  however, that approximately 46% of reconsideration cases are either  rescinded or modified.
Also of note is that the proportion of IS  reconsideration cases that proceed to a first level IS appeal remained constant  both in absolute volume and percentage. Although not directly related to the EI  appeals process, the mandatory reconsideration process did exist for IS appeals  previously which lends some credence to the suggestion that the introduction of  the formal reconsideration process along with the verbal explanation may have  contributed to a decrease in appeals proceeding to the GD-EI.
The table that follows shows these  changes in the annual average number of applications received by the SST and  the legacy tribunals.
Annual average number of applications received by the SST and legacy  tribunals
Tribunal
Reconsideration cases (ESDC)
1st level appeals
Footnote
16
general division
Percent of reconsideration cases
2nd level appeals
Footnote
16
appeal division
Percent of the 1st level
Legacy EI
53,930
24,040
45%
2,210
9%
SST-EI
56,720*
3,790
7%
380
10%
Legacy IS
Footnote
17
13,660
3,670
27%
680
18%
SST - IS
15,670
3,890
25%
650
17%
* Note: 46%    of EI reconsideration cases are either rescinded or modified
Member caseload
Member caseload is calculated as all  appeals concluded by members in the fiscal year. This calculation excludes  cases concluded through an agreement between ESDC or CEIC and the appellant,  and also counts group appeals as one case.
Agreements
When the SST was created, it inherited a  large backlog of IS appeals. To address the backlog of IS appeals, many were  resolved through agreement between ESDC/CEIC and the appellant, which required  limited to no member time. As such, agreements were not included in member  caseloads.
Group Appeals
A group appeal occurs when more than one  individual appeals for the same or similar situation. This occurs for example  when multiple individuals lose their employment under similar or identical  circumstances. Although group appeals will tend to be more complex, the member  is able to review and conclude the cases on the collective issues. As such,  group appeals were counted as one case.
The caseload volumes will also vary from appeal  applications as not all cases are concluded in the same fiscal year as the  application is made.
The table that follows shows applications  and member caseloads for both the legacy tribunals and the SST. The GD-EI  caseload is considerably lower than the legacy system. The reduction in  caseload is consistent with the reduced appeal applications. The rationale for  the higher rate of GD-IS caseload was identified as being related to the  backlog inherited by the SST.
Applications and member caseloads for the SST  and legacy tribunals
Tribunal
First level
Footnote
16
Second level
Footnote
16
Application
Member caseload
Application
Member caseload
Legacy EI
24,040
23,790
2,210
2,260
SST-EI
3,790
3,390
380
530
Legacy IS
Footnote
16
3,670
3,670
680
680
SST - IS
3,890
4,990
650
390
4.2.5. Change in costs
Summary
The total cost and cost per case of the  SST was compared to the legacy tribunals. The member caseload was used as the  measure of number of cases for purposes of comparing cost per case/appeal.
Footnote
18
The establishment of the SST and the  ATSSC created a significantly different operating model from what existed  previously. The legacy appeals processes were embedded within ESDC operations  and were not subject to the same regulatory framework as the SST.
Overall costs of the SST are lower than  those under the previous system, albeit not to the degree expected. The average  annual cost of the SST was $21.2 million for the two fiscal years ending March  31, 2017. The comparative average annual cost of the four legacy tribunals combined  was $43.8 million for the two fiscal years ending March 31, 2012. Not reflected  in the cost comparison is the additional cost associated with the mandatory  reconsideration process for EI which ESDC incurs and estimates to be $5.7  million annually.
Footnote
19
The average cost per EI appeal to the  General Division increased from $780 per appeal to the Board of Referees to $2,040  under the SST. This increased cost results from both a substantially higher  operating cost per appeal and a higher member cost per appeal.
Operating costs have not changed  substantially between the Board of Referees and the operating costs for the GD-EI.  The number of cases however dropped significantly from approximately 24,000 per  year to less than 4,000 proceeding to GD-EI thus increasing the operating cost  per appeal. The increase in the GD-EI member cost per appeal over the legacy  system is largely attributed to the member taking substantially more time than the  three members took to review an appeal under the legacy tribunal. This  increased time by member includes time spent on interlocutory and procedural  decisions but also includes a general increase in the time members are taking to  consider the merits of the case.
In contrast the cost per appeal for all  other divisions decreased. The average cost per EI appeal to the Appeal  Division has decreased from $1,430 per appeal under the Office of the Umpire to  $1,050 under the SST. The reduction is primarily a result of lower operating  costs. The average cost of IS appeals decreased over the legacy tribunals, from  $4,830 to $2,450 for appeals to the General Division and from $6,090 to $4,040  to the Appeal Division. These decreases are largely a reflection of the  reduction in members hearing an appeal from three to one, and lower operating  costs than the legacy tribunals incurred.
Further details on the costs are provided  below.
Cost
The cost of the SST comprises member and employee  salaries and benefits
Footnote
20
plus an allocation of corporate  and Operations and Maintenance (O&M) costs incurred by ESDC and the ATSSC.
In comparing the cost of the SST to the  cost of the legacy tribunals, it is important to note the SST incurs additional  costs that either were not incurred by the legacy tribunals or were absorbed  within ESDC operations as a result of the different operating models. In  addition, certain support services were and continue to be provided by  ESDC/Service Canada and are not included in the costs of either the SST or  legacy tribunals.
The following table summarizes the costs  included in the total cost comparison, the primary differences between the SST  and the legacy tribunals, and the costs not reflected in both the SST and  legacy ‘level cost comparison’.
Cost comparison for the SST and legacy tribunals
Cost category
SST
Legacy
Translation
Translation    costs relating to publishing of decisions are included in SST costs
The    BOR did not publish decisions and therefore there were no equivalent    translation costs
The OU    did publish decisions and the relevant translation costs are included
Call centre
The    costs related to the call centre are included in SST costs
No    equivalent activity/costs are reflected in the legacy tribunals
Corporate
ATSSC    corporate costs are allocated and reflected in the SST costs
Some    portion of corporate costs incurred by ESDC are reflected in the legacy    tribunal costs, although not to same extent as the ATSSC corporate costs    charged to the SST
Additional    ESDC corporate support
Not    included
Not    included
Booking    and hosting
Not    included
Not    Included
Information    Management and Information Technology
Not    included
Not    included
Reconsideration
Not    included
Not    included
Recognizing that differences in the operating  models noted above would have increased the cost structure of the SST, the  level cost comparison of the SST still reflects an overall lower cost than the  cost of the legacy tribunals.
Average annual cost
The average annual cost of the SST was $21.2  million for the two fiscal years ending March 31, 2017. The comparative average  annual cost of the four legacy tribunals was $43.8 million for the two fiscal  years ending March 31, 2012. Not reflected in the cost comparison is the  additional cost associated with the mandatory reconsideration process for EI  which ESDC incurs and estimates to be $5.7 million.
The following table and graphs show the average  annual tribunal cost between EI and IS for both the SST and the legacy  tribunals. All dollars are rounded to the nearest thousand.
Cost comparison (in thousands)
Tribunal
EI
IS
Total
SST
$7,469
$13,777
$21,246
Legacy
$22,012
$21,833
$43,845
Difference
$14,543
$8,056
$22,599*
*Excludes the additional cost incurred by  ESDC related to the mandatory EI reconsideration process
The total costs split by category type are  shown below. The difference in the GD-EI costs compared to the BOR is largely  attributable to member costs and reflects the significantly reduced caseload  that the GD-EI processes. The GD-IS costs are lower primarily due to lower  operating costs
Footnote
21
as reflected in the illustrations that follow.
Figure 4 - SST average annual costs (in thousands based on two years ending March 31, 2017)
Text description for Figure 4
Tribunal
Employment Insurance
Income Security
($000s with inflation based on 2    years)
SST Staff and Operations plus Member/Chair salary average total cost
$7,469
$13,777
SST Staff and Operations plus Member/Chair salary General Division    average total cost
$6,913
$12,203
SST Staff and Operations plus Member/Chair salary Appeal Division    average total cost
$556
$1,574
Figure 5 -  Legacy tribunals average annual costs (in thousands based on two years ending March 31, 2012)
Text description for Figure 5
Legacy tribunals
Employment Insurance
Income Security
(average    total costs ($000s) with inflation)
Staff and Operations and Member/Chair salary total average
$22,012
$21,833
Staff and Operations and Member/Chair salary average    for Board of Referees
$18,775
n/a
Staff and Operations and Member/Chair salary average    for the Office of the Umpire
$3,236
n/a
Staff and Operations and Member/Chair salary average    for Office of the Commissioner for Review Tribunals
n/a
$17,690
Staff and Operations and Member/Chair salary average    for Pension Appeals Board
n/a
$4,143
Cost per case
As a measure of relative productivity and  efficiency, the cost per case was compared to the legacy tribunals. The two  most notable differences in the cost per case were an increase in the cost per  case for GD-EI cases from the BOR and a reduction in cost per case for GD-IS  cases from the OCRT.
Employment Insurance
The increase in the cost per GD-EI case results  from increases in both member cost and operating cost per case. The increased  member cost is attributed to the additional member time for interlocutory and  procedural decisions, and the time members are taking to consider the merits of  the case. Operating costs have not changed substantially over the legacy system;  however, the number of cases has dropped significantly as presented earlier. The  increase in member time is further reflected in timelines discussed under Section  4.2.6.
Figure 6 – EI cost per case comparison to the legacy tribunals
Text description for Figure 6
Tribunal
Employment Insurance
(average    unit cost with inflation)*
SST Staff and Operations and Member Salary for GD-EI
$2,040
Staff and Operations and Member Salary for Board of Referees
$780
SST Staff and Operations and Member Salary for AD-EI
$1,050
Staff and Operations and Member Salary for Office of    the Umpire
$1,430
*FY  2016 to 2017 dollars
Income Security
In contrast to EI, the GD-IS unit cost  per case decreased 49% under the SST as compared to the OCRT. This is largely  attributed to the reduction in number of members from three to one while the  appeal structure did not change significantly from the legacy system. This is  supported by the smallerpercentage increase in timelines in GD-IS compared to  GD-EI discussed in Section 4.2.6.
Figure 7 – IS cost per case comparison to the legacy tribunals*
Text description for Figure 7
Tribunal
Income Security
(average    unit cost with inflation*)
SST    Staff and Operations and Member Salary for GD-IS
$2,450
Staff    and Operations and Member Salary for OCRT
$4,830
SST    Staff and Operations and Member Salary for AD-IS
$4,040
Staff    and Operations and Member Salary for PAB
$6,090
*FY 2016 to 2017 dollars
4.2.6. Timelines
The increase in time to resolve General  Division appeals has increased, most notably for EI
The time to resolve an appeal, or  throughput time, is defined by the SST as the time from receipt of an appeal application  until the client receives a decision.
Timelines from application to decision  have generally increased under the SST. EI appeals to the General Division  increased over five times from what they were previously. Timelines are also  longer under the SST for EI appeals to the Appeal Division and IS appeals to  the General Division although not to the degree found in GD-EI. Timelines for  IS appeals to the Appeal Division did in fact decrease.
There are a number of factors that impact  timelines outside the control of the SST such as caseload volumes, member  complement, and complexity of the appeal itself. There are however a number of  factors that are within the control of the SST including the complexity of the  process (recognizing that some requirements are driven by the legislative  framework), member performance, and the optimization of support from  administrative staff that could reduce both timelines and the related costs.
Figure 8 – Comparison of Tribunal timelines
Text description for Figure 8
Tribunal
Timelines
    (in days)
Board of Referees
44
SST general division EI
227
Office of the Umpire
180
SST Appeal Division EI
309
Office of the Commissioner of Review Tribunals
439
SST General Division IS
517
Pension Appeals Board
212
SST Appeal Division IS
152
*Only 2010 to 2011 data was available for the  OCRT and PAB
As mentioned above, the throughput time  for an appeal hinges on a variety of contributing factors, for example caseload  volumes, complexity of the process, member complement, member performance, and  complexity of the appeal itself. Complexity of the process is discussed in Section  10 and member productivity in Section 11. Regarding the caseload volumes, the  SST states that the introduction of mandatory reconsideration by Service Canada  as a precursor to appeals has meant that generally only the most complex  appeals proceed to the Tribunal. Under the legacy system, reconsideration was  mandatory for CPPD cases (the majority of IS cases), and informal  reconsideration of EI decisions was conducted concurrent with the application  for appeal to the Board of Referees. In addition, the eligibility criteria for  benefits have not substantially changed since the SST was created, nor have the  top six reasons for EI appeals.
Footnote
22
Member complement fluctuated during the  review period; however, that is a constant for all tribunals and appeals boards  subject to formal appointment processes.
The following further illustrates the  major steps in the end-to-end appeals process for EI and IS and the  corresponding average throughput times and provides supporting rationale for  the increased times.
Employment Insurance
Figure 9 – Illustration of major steps in the appeals process for EI
Text description for Figure 9
Legacy    tribunal appeals
Processes
# of days
Processes
# of days
EI    Reconsideration (informal)
44
Umpire
180
Board of    Referees
Appeal filed    to decision
Appeal filed    to decision
SST Appeals
IE    Reconsideration (mandatory)
31
Appeal    Division
309
General    Division
227
Time for    incomplete     appeal before the    General Division to become complete
36
Time for    incomplete     appeal before the Appeal    Division to become complete
37
Appeal filed    to hearing
203*
Appeal filed    to hearing
277**
Hearing to    decision
24
Hearing to    decision
32
Other    Procedural Decisions:
Late appeals
Summary dismissal
Added parties
n/a
Other    Procedural Decisions:
Leave to appeal
n/a
* incl. time for completion of appeal of 36  days
**  incl. time for completion of appeal of 37 days
The shift to increased time to conclude  EI appeals is misaligned with the more static nature of EI cases, the less  complex eligibility criteria for EI benefits, the short term nature of this  benefit, and the principle of expeditious determination of appeals as outlined  in the SST Regulations. To highlight the significance of the misalignment, the  average time of 227 days to conclude an EI appeal at the first level and 309  days at the second level
Footnote
23
comes close to the  maximum number of weeks of EI regular benefits payable at 45 weeks or 315 days.  As the chart above demonstrates, the majority of EI appeal duration is the  period from application to hearing.
Factors contributing to longer timelines  for GD-EI cases include:
Delays of an average of 30-50  days when appeal applications do not include all information required under the  SST Regulations, currently one-third of all applications
The provision in the DESD Act  of the requirement for the SST to summarily dismiss an appeal that has no  reasonable chance of success was intended as an efficiency measure but in fact  adds time to the process due to the requirement under the SST Regulations to  give notice in writing to the appellant and allow the appellant a reasonable  period of time to make further submissions before making and documenting the  decision. While consistent with the principle of natural justice, the low rate  of summary dismissals (refer Section 5.3.1) indicates this time could be better  used to decide the appeal on its merits
An increase from 30 days to 90  days as the service standard to process an EI appeal at the first level
Footnote
24
The formal process under the  SST to add parties resulting in an additional 45 days, when this was done  automatically by the Board of Referees
The time required by SST  members to make interlocutory decisions, for example time extensions, late appeals,  and adjournments, all of which are carefully documented with rationale.
Income Security
Figure 10 – Illustration of major steps in the appeals process for IS
Footnote
25
Text description for Figure 10
Legacy    tribunal appeals
Processes
# of days
Processes
# of days
IS    Reconsideration (mandatory)
439
Pension    Appeals Board
212
Office of the    Commissioner of Review Tribunals
SST appeals
IS    Reconsideration (mandatory)
96
Appeal    Division
152
General    Division
517
Time for    incomplete     appeal before the    General Division to become complete
53
Time for incomplete    appeal before the Appeal Division to become complete
41
Appeal filed    to hearing
492*
Appeal filed    to hearing
100**
Hearing to    decision
25
Hearing to    decision
52
Other    Process Steps for Member Consideration:
Notice of readiness
Summary dismissal
n/a
Other Process    Steps for Member Consideration:
Leave to appeal
n/a
*  incl. time for completion of appeal of 53 days
**  incl. time for completion of appeal of 41 days
The longer GD-IS throughput time than  that of the OCRT may be explained by the introduction of summary dismissal and  the Notice of Readiness under the DESD Act, the latter which provides parties  with up to 365 days to file documents and/or indicate readiness to proceed.  While intended to constrain numerous adjournments of such cases in the past, it  was reported by SST and ESDC officials and representatives that the Notice of  Readiness has had the unintended consequence of providing parties with more  time. The AD-IS delivers judgement faster than the legacy tribunal, although  these numbers are likely more volatile year over year due to a smaller case  volume.
There was wide recognition throughout the  review of the length of time required for CPPD cases due to the changing nature  of disability, time required to obtain medical evidence, etc. There was general  agreement that this interest could be met by eliminating the Notice of  Readiness combined with extending the deadline to appeal while still providing  adequate time to gather the necessary information, facts, and evidence before  deciding the appeal.
4.2.7. Form of hearings
The legacy tribunal hearings were mostly  held in person, although some would have been conducted by telephone and in cases  of a no-show, appeals would have been decided on the basis of the information  on the record. The SST Regulations provide for various forms of hearings, with  decision by the member, although the SST does invite appellants to indicate  their preference.
Both sections of the General Division  provide appellants an opportunity to participate in the hearing, although more  often it is by telephone which is the predominant method for both EI and IS, as  well as by video conference and in person.
A comparison of EI and IS General Division  sections shows that significantly more IS appeals are concluded without a  hearing than EI appeals (47% and 15% respectively). There are  significantly more appeals concluded without a hearing at the Appeal Division  for both EI and IS cases.
Footnote
26
The format of hearings by EI and IS is based  on case volume (refer Section 4.2.4) and is reflected below.
Figure 11 – Format of hearings - SST
Text description for Figure 11
Format    of hearing
General    Division
Appeal    Division
EI
IS
EI
IS
%
Appeals concluded without a hearing
15
47
46
68
On the record
1
6
16
24
Teleconference hearings
67
20
36
1
Written Q and A hearings
Nil
2
Nil
Nil
In-person hearings
9
11
1
1
Video-conference hearings
8
14
1
6
While the form of hearing has changed to  favour alternate forms of hearings, survey results do not suggest that fewer  in-person hearings have an impact on client satisfaction. For example, 67%  of EI appellants were satisfied with video conference hearings, slightly lower  than those with an in-person hearing (72%); CPPD appellants showed a  strong preference for video conference hearings at 82%, likely as this  form provides more flexibility and accommodation for persons with disabilities,  while preserving the face-to-face interaction.
Appellants who had no hearing (on-the  record) did, however, showed lower satisfaction illustrated by survey results  that follow.
Figure 12 – Appellant and representative agreement with the question “I was satisfied with the method in which my appeal was heard”
Text description for Figure 12
Employment    Insurance type of hearing
Level of agreement
In-person
Teleconference
Videoconference
No    hearing
Representatives
%
Strongly    disagree
14
16
17
50
20
Disagree
14
14
17
13
14
Neutral
29
9
Nil
13
9
Agree
43
39
50
13
46
Strongly    agree
Nil
23
17
13
11
Average    on scale of 5 where 5 is strongly agree
3.0
3.4
3.3
2.3
3.1
Number of responses
7
44
6
8
35
CPP/Disability    type of hearing
Level of agreement
In-person
Teleconference
Videoconference
No    hearing
Representatives
%
Strongly    disagree
40
24
Nil
50
20
Disagree
20
18
n/a
25
30
Neutral
10
24
n/a
13
n/a
Agree
20
18
55
13
27
Strongly    agree
10
18
27
Nil
17
Average    on scale of 5 where 5 is strongly agree
2.4
2.9
4.0
1.9
2.9
Number of responses
10
17
11
8
30
Representative perspectives overall were  not very different from those of appellants, with 57% of those  representing EI appellants and 44% of those representing CPPD appellants  satisfied with the form of hearing. Responses from representatives cover the  range of hearings in which they would have participated so are not broken down  by hearing type.
The SST provided data on selected  preference for form of hearing at the time of application to appeal.
Footnote
27
This differs from the  satisfaction with the actual form of hearing reported above in the surveys conducted,  and is also based on appeal applications between April and June 2017. Based on 687  appeal applications submitted between April and June 2017, 65% of  appellants had no stated preference for form of hearing; ten% selected  in person as their preference; eight% selected telephone hearing, and no  appellants selected video conference. Although these results provide a different  perspective from what the survey asked, it does support that the form of  hearing is not a factor for many appellants. The chart below provides further  data on stated preferences; data is not available regarding actual form of  hearing selected by the member, or the associated client satisfaction rate.
Preferred form of hearing at time of application to appeal – In percentage
Footnote
28
Form of hearing
Appellants (667)
Lawyers (53)
Other reps (70)
No preference
65%
30%
41%
Multiple forms
6%
17%
4%
Blank
10%
6%
13%
In person only
10%
24%
27%
By telecom only
8%
17%
10%
By video only
0%
6%
1%
Qs and As only
2%
0%
3%
4.3. Client satisfaction
The following key themes in relation to  client satisfaction emerged from the consultations:
The extra steps required to have an  appeal heard by the SST compared to the legacy tribunals (summary dismissal,  leave to appeal) coupled with the removal of choice of hearing diminish the  ability for appellants’ voices to be heard.
One written submission highlighted that  “a right to appeal is meaningless if the claimant cannot navigate the appeal  process.”
There is a common perception that with  the addition of extra steps throughout the appeal process, (that is, reconsideration,  leave to appeal, summary dismissal), there are now several obstacles for  appellants to go through and overcome. Additionally, multiple stakeholders  consulted felt that the summary dismissal and leave to appeal processes  violated the appellant’s right to be heard and were counter to natural justice.
A common theme that emerged from the  focus groups was format of hearings, specifically around the lack of choice of  hearing by an appellant. While appeal hearings were conducted in person in the  legacy tribunals, under the current system, SST members have the discretion to  choose between several modes of hearings. In-person hearings are perceived to  allow appellants to more adequately present facts and circumstances of their  case without any barriers including access to technology (that is phone or  computer), or communication/literacy and language. While in-person hearings  were noted as being an optimal forum for hearings, according to a number of  community and labour groups, the underlying theme was that selecting the format  of hearings should be client-driven and determined based on what the appellant  needs or wants.
“…overall complication of the process,  particularly of the appeal division, took the worst from the Umpire and Pension  Appeals Board and mashed them together - should be the best of both worlds-  should be a massive simplification of the process.”
The SST has become more complex than the  legacy tribunals.
A repeated sentiment was that “SST  operations are based on economic principles not based on elements of natural  justice.”
The SST process is seen as lengthier and  more complex with an increased number of steps, a greater level of formality, and  a shift to a more judicial Tribunal, in particular between the BOR and the  GD-EI. Coupled with appellant challenges with language, literacy, and  socio-economic status, it was felt that this added complexity increases  probability of failure for appellants, adds costs and time, and reduces access  to justice. While acknowledging the value of a more legalistic second level of  appeal, stakeholders called for the first level to be “accessible, simple (pas  simpliste), juste, et équitable.”
The SST requires appellants to submit  information that, from a client perspective, the government already has, including  for example the reconsideration decision, Social Insurance Number or business  number. The absence of what should be basic information already on file leads  to delays in progressing the appeal, and causes frustration and an additional  administrative burden on appellants. Stakeholders indicated missing information  under the previous system was obtained more quickly and informally by the case  officer. Calls were repeatedly made for more open and early access to the  client file to support case preparation. A key irritant was the requirement to  request information through Info Source, rather than ESDC/Service Canada making  the reconsideration file readily accessible to clients.
Wait time for hearings and decisions for  both EI and IS are longer than before and are too long to serve appellants.
There was strong feedback that the  timelines of the EI recourse process had increased significantly relative to  that under the BOR, and were too long for appellants in need of benefits. There  were strong comments that the service standard of 90 days for EI appeals at the  first level was unsuitable for those with low incomes waiting for benefits, and  that the timelines were contributing to poverty. For example, “The lack of  timeliness in the appeals processes has negative consequences on the personal  lives of appellants. Sometimes, they become homeless while waiting for a  decision from the SST.” Others emphasized the need for CPPD decisions to take  the time required. Many called for the appeal process to be commensurate with  the associated benefit – shorter timelines for short-term benefits (EI); longer  timelines for long-term benefits (CPPD).
With respect to the IS recourse process,  it was felt that timelines were not designed with clients in mind. For example,  a community group indicated that “The one year limitation period for making an  application to the General Division is unfair for CPPD claims; it sets a  limitation bar for disabled appellants.”
Those giving feedback also felt that the lack  of timeliness of the SST undermined confidence in it and diminished appellants’  right to appeal: “The delays discourage appellants to defend their right to  benefits because the process costs a lot in time and energy.”
The SST is less accountable to clients.
The change away from the locally-based,  tripartite hearing format of the BOR was felt to reduce accountability: “People  on the SST have no lived experience with the workplace and are only accountable  to meeting performance requirements of the SST. The BOR was accountable to the  union and business groups that nominated them.”
Related to accountability is public  confidence. It was felt that public confidence in the SST has been undermined:
“Public confidence in the SST is critical  to its success and can only be fostered when it has a culture of transparency  and accountability. Efforts to increase transparency have been recognized and  are appreciated, however steps need to be taken proactively and not in response  to complaints from the public – that is it took a substantial amount of work to  convince SST to publish decisions and preserve access to decision databases  from previous tribunals.”
Comments were made regarding member -  client interaction, including members conducting video conference hearings from  their homes and technical problems with remote hearings that reduced  perceptions of professionalism. It was also felt that reduced input from  stakeholders, especially with regards to the role of the Commissioners for  Workers and Employers, had reduced public confidence in the SST.
4.3.1. Client satisfaction in comparison  to the legacy tribunals
Based on appellants and representatives who  responded to the survey, client satisfaction was not rated high for either the  SST or the previous tribunals. Further, although survey data on the legacy  tribunals was not available, media reports and an Auditor General report on EI  in 2003
Footnote
29
would suggest that  changes to the legacy systems were warranted.
Appellants
Of the SST appellants surveyed, those that  had also appealed under the legacy system were asked to respond to questions  concerning their experience with both tribunals. A small sample of 34  appellants had interacted with both systems: 11 EI and 23 IS. Further, of the  34 appellants, nine had their appeal allowed and 25 had their appeal denied.  Because of the small sample size, it is inappropriate to analyze the data by  sub-group (for example by EI or IS). The skew towards IS appellants and  appellants who were not successful in their appeals makes the absolute value of  the responses biased. However, it is possible to compare how this group  responded to questions regarding the SST versus previous tribunals to gauge how  satisfaction changed between the two.
Satisfaction rates for appellants under both  systems were strikingly similar, with overall satisfaction rates exactly the  same and low. Only three elements scored slightly above a neutral response: sufficient  time to complete the appeal application (SST), sufficient time to respond to  tribunal requests for information (both), and being treated with respect (SST).  The lowest responses were in three areas: fair treatment by the tribunal  (former system), understanding the tribunal decision (SST), and timeliness of  the process (SST). Average appellant responses are summarized below.
Figure 13 – Comparison of appellant survey responses, SST and legacy tribunals
Text description for Figure 13
Survey questions to
appellants
Strongly disagree
Disagree
Neutral
Legacy
SST
Legacy
SST
Legacy
SST
The SST/Tribunal responded to my inquiries in a timely manner
n/a
n/a
x
x
n/a
n/a
Communications (other than the decision) I received from the    SST/Tribunal were understandable
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
I was given sufficient opportunity to provide the facts of my case at the    Tribunal
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
During the hearing the Tribunal Members (decision makers) were    respectful
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
During the hearing the Tribunal Members (decision makers) listened to    what I had to say
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
During the hearing the Tribunal Members understood my position in the    appeal
n/a
n/a
x
n/a
n/a
x
The decision explained how the law and the rules were applied to the    facts of my case
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
n/a
I understood the decision issued by the Tribunal and the  reasoning behind the decision
n/a
n/a
x
x
n/a
n/a
Overall, my appeal was processed in a timely manner
n/a
n/a
x
x
n/a
n/a
Overall, I was satisfied with the Tribunal’s appeal process
n/a
n/a
x
x
n/a
n/a
Representatives
A total of 42 representatives who had  worked with the current and legacy tribunals responded, 18 with EI experience  and 24 with IS. Similar to the appellant numbers, the responses for this group  are suitable for comparison between the SST and previous tribunals.
Representatives generally reported higher  rates of satisfaction than appellants. Overall satisfaction rates were higher  for appeals under the former tribunals. The highest score for both was having  the legal knowledge to present the case. The SST scored lowest in timeliness. The  former tribunals consistently scored positively in all areas. Average  representative responses are summarized in the figure below.
Figure 14 – Comparison of representative survey responses, SST and legacy tribunals
Text description for Figure 14
Survey questions to
    representatives
Disagree
Neutral
Agree
Legacy
SST
Legacy
SST
Legacy
SST
Tribunal responded to my inquiries in a timely    manner
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
n/a
Communications (other than the decision) I received    from the  SST/Tribunal were    understandable
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
I was given sufficient opportunity to provide facts of    my case at Tribunal
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
During the hearing Tribunal Members (decision    makers) were respectful
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
During hearing the Tribunal Members (decision makers)    listened to what I had to say
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
During the hearing the Tribunal Members understood    my position in the appeal
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
The decision explained how the law and the rules were    applied to the facts of my case
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
I understood the decision issued by Tribunal and    reasoning behind the decision
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
Overall, my appeal was processed in a timely manner
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
n/a
Overall, I was satisfied with the Tribunal’s appeal    process
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
n/a
4.4. Stakeholder perspectives
4.4.1. Social Security Tribunal
In its 2013 to 2016 Achievements Report, the  SST stated that after three years in operation, the Tribunal had established a  solid foundation to deliver on its mandate. Highlights that the SST has accomplished  follow:
Published on its website tools  and step-by-step guidance for appellants and representatives to navigate the  process
Established service standards in  2015
Footnote
30
Publishes all decisions at the  second level and a select number at first level searchable by key word
Invites feedback from parties, stakeholders,  and the general public.
The SST also reports publicly on its  caseload on a quarterly basis, including timelines from appeal hearings to  decisions. For members, the SST provides formal training, and it has published  its practice directions and guidelines and a Code of Conduct.
The SST cautions against comparing the  SST to the former system given the difference in levels of maturity of the  tribunals – “There is a premium for new organizations” – and the very different  legislative framework within which it operates. The SST also emphasizes that  the Tribunal is a creature of statute and therefore has no authority beyond  what is bestowed upon it by the DESD Act and the SST Regulations, and that its  practices and procedures must align with the current requirements of those  instruments.
Footnote
31
The SST raises a fair point: one should  not expect a new tribunal, underpinned by a different legislative and  regulatory framework, to operate in the same manner as the previous system. However,  the SST’s statements capture what has been reflected repeatedly by ESDC officials  and external stakeholders – “the SST has been captured by the law.” The General  Principle found in the SST Regulations – that the Regulations be interpreted to  secure the just, most expeditious and least expensive determination of appeals  and applications – is indicative of the government’s intent that the SST’s  legislative and regulatory framework be considered as enabling, rather than  prescriptive. This framework encompasses rules that support attributes of a  modern tribunal, while other elements provide flexibility to enable the SST to  align its processes to meet the needs of the clients.
4.4.2. Employment and Social Development Canada
ESDC contends that the SST’s processes  are complex, burdensome, and focused on the law, in stark contrast with the  original vision of a streamlined and simplified process, and that the  legislation is sufficiently flexible to support that vision.
Both ESDC and SST officials spoke of the  need for interdependence amongst the agencies, while respecting the  independence of the Tribunal and its decision-making. For example, legal teams  from each organization have developed thoughtful proposals for legislative and  process improvements, but we could find no evidence of inter-agency cooperation  to move these proposals forward. Similarly, the issue of redaction of documents  for reasons of privacy which causes delays and constrains information sharing is  long-standing and remains unresolved between the two organizations.
4.4.3. Commissioners for workers and  for employers
Commissioners presented the BOR as the  “yardstick of success,” acknowledging it wasn’t perfect but did what is was  supposed to do: timely, close to people, user-friendly, transparent, truly  independent with three members with life experience – “not bureaucrats or  lawyers. The old system was rooted in the community.”  Commissioners questioned the wisdom of  bringing together EI and IS appeals – “artificially combined” - as they are  quite different. They believe the current system does not have the qualities of  the previous system, nor is it delivering on the administrative efficiencies. They  also expressed concerns that employees and employers are footing the EI bill  under the SST/ATSSC with insufficient insight on how the funds are being spent.
4.4.4. External stakeholders
Similar to the HUMA report, June 2016,  and the Service Quality Review (SQR), 2017, we also heard strong views from  external stakeholders, ranging from representatives and community  organizations, that the SST had failed in its mandate, emerging as a  legalistic, bureaucratic organization through which appellants are not better  served; the process is more complex and difficult, if not impossible for the  average appellant to navigate; the time to receive a decision is significantly  longer; and the SST is not accountable to clients, stakeholders, and the  government.
Many also argued it was a mistake to  amalgamate Employment Insurance and Income Security appeals under one tribunal  – “they are vastly different.”  Regarding  the Appeal Division, some felt “they took the worst from the Umpire and Pension  Appeals Board and mashed them together – the SST should be the best of both  worlds – there should be a massive simplification of the process.”
Most telling is the assertion that  “appellants have lost the right to be heard,” with many calling for a return to  the previous system, seen as a place “where people could tell their story.”
Footnote
32
As did the SQR Panel, we consistently heard  that the problems do not fall solely on the SST: “the high overturn rate of  initial benefits decisions at the mandatory reconsideration stage within ESDC/Service  Canada begs a thorough review.”
Footnote
33
The topic of overturn  rates is discussed in Section 5.3.1.
5. Appeals structure
5.1. Overview
Today’s appeals system under the SST  reflects elements of appeals system design outlined by Patrice Garant, Doctor  of Laws (Paris), member of The Royal Society of Canada, and professor at Laval  University, in his paper of 2002, A Canadian Social  Security Tribunal:
The "external review" be preceded by an "internal  review," namely a recourse by reconsideration before the decision-maker
The nature of the appeal – a review whereby an administrative  decision of the government is reviewed "on the merits" affirming,  varying or setting aside the original decision
A single or several levels of appeals, with a two-tier appeal  system justifiable with programs involving numerous decisions, such as  Employment Insurance and the Canada Pension Plan
Limit the right of  appeal at the second level by subjecting it to authorization or permission based  on strict tests
Whether the appeal will be de novo; in plain language this allows  the appellant to provide new information for consideration.
Footnote
34
In addition to the original design considerations outlined  above, key structural elements of the SST were evaluated against comparators.
Key findings from the review of  structural elements identified the following differences between the SST and  external comparators
The summary dismissal is not consistent with comparator  tribunals, resulting in additional member time and does not provide substantive  value to the process, contrary to the intent under the DESD Act to restrict consideration  of appeals to those with a reasonable chance of success
Decisions made by SST members include matters such as  adjournments, time extensions, summary dismissal, and leave to appeal and  represent between 26 and 42% of the decisions that SST members make,  reducing time available for deciding appeals on their merits. Direct comparison  of non-merit decisions to external comparators was not available. However based  on discussions with the VRAB, certain non-merit decisions (adjournments and  time extensions) are not made by members but rather by the administrative  support function
New information can be provided in an appeal to the General  Division and not the Appeal Division. For those comparators with two levels of  appeal this is not consistent with some comparators
The leave to appeal mechanism appears to be effective in  reducing the number of appeals at second level by limiting only those that meet  the requirements to progress to a hearing; however, approximately 17% of EI appeals and 13% of  IS appeals  are referred back to the  General Division because of the de novo restriction
Footnote
35
, further extending the process for appellants
The SST asks appellants their preference for form of hearing  (for example in person, telephone, video conference) but members decide the type of  hearing, in contrast to all comparators which provide appellants the choice in  type of hearing and in contrast to legacy tribunals which heard appeals almost  exclusively in person
Unlike the SST, there are typically at least two members in  attendance for all hearings by the comparators; further, depending on the  nature of the appeal, specific experience/background is required by at least  one of the members
None of the comparators requires a notice of readiness by all  parties. For veterans, appellants and their representatives signal readiness to  proceed when they select a hearing date on the published VRAB schedule.
Other elements of the SST appeals  structure align to comparators although with some variations:
The requirement for mandatory reconsideration varied amongst  comparators, although there is at least an informal reconsideration required by  all comparators prior to proceeding to appeal, similar to the legacy Board of  Referees
Similar to the SST, two levels of appeal are provided by three comparators;  alternative mechanisms are generally available prior to proceeding to a court  where only one level of appeal is provided, such as access to report a  complaint to an ombudsman
The recruitment and selection of members is consistent with all  comparators.
The design and implementation of the  structural elements by their nature typically require trade-offs between  efficiency and effectiveness of the tribunal operations, transparency and  perceived fairness of the appeals process, and client satisfaction.
This review found that the SST’s appeals  structure favours ensuring that only appeals with a reasonable chance of  success go to a hearing over enabling the tribunal to conduct its business as  informally and as quickly as warranted by the circumstances. Further the  appeals structure of the SST does not provide clients with the same level of  transparency, perceived fairness, access and support through the process as the  comparators as evidenced by the following results.
The following section of this report  provides:
The evaluation of the structural  similarities and differences between SST and external comparators
A review of key operating statistics  related to speed of service, claimant success rates, and overturn rates against  both external and legacy comparators where available
The  experience and views from key stakeholders, appellants, and representatives on  the appeals structure collected  through the consultations.
5.2. Structural  comparison
5.2.1. Key structural element  comparison
The key structural elements of the SST  and comparators are provided in the following table.
Structural element
SST
Comparators
Findings
Reconsideration
Prior    to proceeding with an appeal to the SST, a mandatory reconsideration is    required for both EI and IS decisions by Service Canada
Three    of the five comparators require a mandatory review by the program department    prior to proceeding to appeal to the respective tribunal
The    remaining two of the five comparators have a broader mandate than the SST and    do not specify the requirement for a mandatory review
The    mandatory reconsideration for EI and IS decisions is consistent with    comparators and literature review of leading practices
Gates    in the appeals process
At the    General Division level a review of the case by the member is conducted to    determine whether the appeal has sufficient merit and should proceed to a    hearing and if not it is summarily dismissed
At the    Appeal Division the member reviews the case to ensure it meets the    requirements for appeal at the second level and to grant or not leave to    appeal
Four    of the five comparators do not have a summary dismissal at the first level of    appeal
One    comparator incorporates an early resolution option where a phone meeting is    conducted between the parties to the appeal, moderated by a resolution    officer, to look for opportunities to resolve without an appeal
Comparators    with a second level do not have a leave to appeal process
The    use of summary dismissal and leave to appeal is not consistent with the    majority of the comparators
Levels    of appeal
The    SST provides two levels of appeal.
The    first level of appeal allows for all applications with a reasonable chance of    success
The    second level of appeal only allows appeals on prescribed grounds
Three    of the five comparators provide one level of appeal; both VRAB and the OSB    provide two levels
Two    levels of appeal under the SST is not inconsistent with two of the    comparators
Size    of adjudication panel
One    member reviews and hears the appeal
Four    of the five comparators require more than one member to hear the appeal
One    comparator varied the size of the panel dependent on a number of criteria
Comparator    review combined with other literature review indicates that leading practices    suggest at least two members to review and hear the appeal
Appointment,    background and experience of the members
Members    are recruited and recommended based on merit and relevant experience related    to the program
The    Minister must consult a committee composed of the Chairperson of the SST and    the Commissioners for Workers and Employers before recommendation to the    Governor in Council of any person to be appointed to the Employment Insurance    Section of the Tribunal
All    members are appointed by Governor in Council
For    all comparators, members are recruited and recommended based on merit and    relevant experience related to the program
All    members are appointed by the respective legislative authority (for example    Order in Council)
Comparator    review combined with literature review indicate that members have a    combination of experience and knowledge reflective of the nature of the    program and nature of appeals
If    there is a second level of appeal, the second level of appeal is focused on    the application of the law and therefore members generally have a legal    background
Form    of participation of the appellant in the hearings
The    SST Regulations state that the choice of hearing is determined by the member
For    all comparators, the appellant has choice of hearing including in person
Decision    on form of SST hearings is not consistent with comparators
De    novo
New    information can only be introduced at the General Division (first level of    appeal)
All comparators    allow for new information to be introduced at the first level of appeals
Two    comparators with a second level (VRAB and OSB) allow for the introduction of    new information at both levels
The    SST is not consistent with those with two levels of appeal regarding the    acceptance of new information at the second level
Notice    of readiness (NOR)
Under    the SST Regulations parties to IS appeals at the General Division have 365    days to file documents and indicate readiness to proceed, after which the    GD-IS must make a decision, or schedule a hearing and make a decision
No    comparator tribunal has such a legislated provision
The    SST Regulations are not consistent with comparators and unintentionally offer    potential for further delays – the very issue the NOR was intended to address
5.2.2. External comparators
To provide a reasonable comparison  between tribunals, the different appeals structures need to be considered.  Based on the above analysis, the following shows the relevant comparative  external tribunals applied to this review.
SST
AC
TAQ
VRAB
AAT
OSB
Reconsideration    or equivalent departmental review
√
n/a
n/a
n/a
√
First    level of review – General    Division
1st    level of appeal conducted by the Decision Review Body within the WCB
√
√
√
√
Second    level of appeal – Appeal    Division
√
n/a
n/a
√
√
5.3. Operating  statistics
The following available operating  statistics were identified to measure the impact or effect that the SST appeals  structure has on efficiency, transparency and client satisfaction:
Number of applications for appeal that proceed to formal hearing
Percentage of overturned decisions by successive levels of  appeal
Timelines from application to decision
Number of member decisions - both merit decisions (denial or  allowance of an appeal) and procedural decisions (for example allowances of late  appeals, summary dismissals, and leave to appeal).
It  is noted that these measures provide directional evidence of effect of the  appeals structure and need to be considered  in context of other information including the perspectives and experience of  stakeholders.
5.3.1. Number of applications that  proceed to formal hearing
The analysis of progression from total  applications through hearings, subsequent applications for leave to the Appeal  Division, actual Appeal Division hearings, and final Tribunal decisions  challenged in Federal Court shows:
Of the average annual cases concluded less withdrawals and  concessions, approximately four% of EI cases and 13 % of IS cases to the General Division were  summarily dismissed
Of the average annual cases concluded less withdrawals, approximately  41% of EI cases and 61% of IS cases are denied leave to appeal at  the Appeal Division.
These results suggest that the summary  dismissal is not providing the value anticipated when this measure was included  in the legislation. Given the low numbers, the time to process a summary  dismissal, and the perceived denial of natural justice when an appeal is  dismissed, the SST’s resources may be better applied to deciding the case on  its merits.
The high rate of denial of leave to  appeal, particularly for IS appeals (the majority of which are CPPD appeals),  while consistent with the intent to resolve the majority of cases at the first  level, raises the question of whether this provision is consistent with the  principles of informality, fairness, and natural justice outlined in the SST  Regulations, section 3(1)(a): “The Tribunal must conduct proceedings as informally and quickly as the  circumstances and the considerations of fairness and natural justice permit.” In these cases the Appeal Division is often  returning the appeal to the General Division, taking valuable member time to  document the rationale for the denial, and creating what was described as an  endless loop for clients (refer Section 5.4.2). In some instances appellants  are seeking to have information considered that they did not submit to the  first level, either through ignorance of the process or the fact that new  information relevant to their appeal only became available after the first  level decision, for example medical information.
The following illustrates the number of  appeals that do not proceed to hearing as a result of the summary dismissal at  General Division and leave to appeal denied at Appeal Division. The charts  begin by showing the total member cases concluded, adjusting for withdrawals,  late appeals, and other reasons an appeal is not heard, and then showing the  drop in cases due to summary dismissals and leave to appeal (LTA). This is  repeated for both divisions.
Figure 15 - Volumes at each step – EI
Text description for Figure 15
EI steps
# of cases
Member cases    concluded
3,390
Less withdrawals,    concessions, other
2,900
Less summary    dismissal
2,790
AD member cases    concluded
530
Less withdrawals,    concessions, other
490
Less LTA denied
290
Federal court
16
The majority of EI cases concluded shown  above are not summarily dismissed and result in hearings. A larger proportion of  leave applications are denied.
Figure 16 - Volumes at each step – IS
Text description for Figure 16
IS steps
# of Cases
Member cases    concluded
4,990
Less withdrawals,    concessions, other
4,460
Less summary    dismissal
3,900
AD member cases    concluded
390
Less withdrawals,    concessions, other
360
Less LTA denied
140
Federal court
27
Compared with EI appeals, a larger number  of IS applications are summarily dismissed and do not proceed to hearings. Over  half of IS leave to appeal applications are denied and do not result in a  hearing.
Percentage of decisions  overturned
Overturn rates (thepercentage of  decisions made at a lower level that are overturned on appeal)   provide  an indication of the effectiveness of the appeals structure in limiting only  valid appeals to proceed to hearings and the overall effectiveness of the decision-making.  Only hearing valid appeals would be expected to increase overturn rates, while  effective decision-making at a lower level would be expected to reduce overturn  rates. Comparator overturn rates range from 10% to just under 60%.  The GD-EI has an overturn rate of about 20%. This is at the low range of  comparators. A higher number, 40%, of decisions are overturned at the  AD-EI level, followed by a low overturn rate for appeals to the Federal Court.  The overturn rate in AD-EI is consistent with that of VRAB.
With respect to the IS tribunals, the  GD-IS overturns about 30% of ESDC reconsideration decisions, and the  AD-IS overturns about 20% of General Division decisions. These numbers  are within the low end of the comparator range. At the Federal Court, a higher percentage of IS appeals are overturned, suggesting cases should be examined to  determine why the overturn rates at the Federal Court are as high as they are.
As shown in the figures below:
GD-EI overturn rates are lower than most comparators and  consistent with the Board of Referees, indicating better decision-making at the  reconsideration stage
The AD-EI rate of overturn is higher than the Office of the  Umpire which is consistent with the higher rate of appeals being upheld by the  Federal Court than was the legacy experience
GD-IS and AD-IS overturn rates are lower than the legacy  tribunals and comparators.
Figure 17 - Percentage of cases where the previous decision was overturned versus comparators – EI
Text description for Figure 17
Level
Tribunal
% of overturned decisions vs comparators - EI
First level appeals
GD-EI
23%
BOR
22%
Second level appeals
AD-EI
38%
OU
10%
Comparators
OSB (OW)
21%
OSB (ODSP)
54%
VRAB review (First level)
52%
VRAB appeal (Second level)
39%
Note - OSB results are reported for the  Ontario Works (OW) and Ontario Disability Support Program (ODSP)
Figure 18 - Percentage of cases where the previous decision was overturned versus comparators – IS
Text description for Figure 18
Level
Tribunal
% of overturned decisions vs comparators - IS
First level appeals
GD-IS
33%
OCRT
38%
Second level appeals
AD-IS
19%
PAB
52%
Comparators
OSB (OW)
21%
OSB (ODSP)
54%
VRAB review (first level)
52%
VRAB appeal (second level)
39%
Note - OSB results are reported for the  Ontario Works (OW) and Ontario Disability Support Program (ODSP)
Percentage of decisions  overturned in Federal Court
The number of Appeal Division decisions  that are appealed to the Federal Court, and the number of those that are upheld  speak to the effectiveness of the Tribunal at delivering decisions that reflect  the law and facts, and at reducing unnecessary burden on the Federal Court  system. Over 90% of AD-EI decisions were upheld by the Federal Court  suggesting soundness of decisions. This is above the rate for comparators which  were in the 80 to 90% range. At the AD-IS, only about 55% of  decisions were upheld which is lower than both the legacy tribunal and comparators.
Footnote
36
The chart below shows thepercentage of  appeals upheld by a higher court for EI and IS relative to legacy tribunals and  comparators. The AD-EI has the highest rate of appeals upheld among  comparators, compared to the Office of the Umpire which was at the low end of  the range.
Figure 19 - Percentage of appeals upheld in higher court
Text description for Figure 19
Appeal division and comparators
Tribunal
% of appeals upheld in higher court - EI and IS
AD-EI and legacy tribunal
AD-EI
94%
OU
65%
AD-IS and legacy tribunal
AD-IS
56%
PAB
69%
Comparators
VRAB
80%
AC
90%
AAT
91%
*The SST rates reflected in the chart  above is based on fiscal year 2016 to 2017 information
Overall
Thepercentage of EI decisions being  overturned at the AD-EI level warrants a review of the reasons that GD-EI  decisions are not being upheld.  For IS  decisions, the lowerpercentages of overturned decisions at the first and  second levels of appeal compared to the legacy tribunals and the higher rate overturned  by the Federal Court warrant a more detailed review of appeals before the AD-IS  and reasons for overturn at the higher court.
5.3.2. Timelines from application to decision
Timelines between the external tribunals and the SST are difficult to compare directly due to differences  in the basis for reporting timelines.
Footnote
37
More relevant to this  review was the comparison of timelines for the legacy tribunals reflected in Section  4.2.6.
5.3.3. Number of decisions that are  not merit decisions
Merit decisions under the SST  predominately result in the denial or allowance of an appeal. Other decisions  made through the process include interlocutory or procedural decisions such as  allowances of late appeals, time extensions, adjournments, granting leave to  appeal, etc. As shown below, for the two-year period under review, between 26 % and 42% of member decisions were related to other decisions and  not merit decisions. In contrast, the legacy tribunals convened a hearing based  on available information; there was limited member time spent on other  decisions prior to the hearing.
Figure 20 – Merit decisions and interlocutory decisions (decisions related to group appeals counted as a single decision)
Text description for Figure 20
Tribunal
Average # of decisions
Total # of merit decisions and other    decisions
Other decisions %
EI
GD
4,081
26
AD
861
42
IS
GD
5,316
34
AD
625
32
At the General Division level, the most  common interlocutory decisions were for time extensions, late appeals, and  adjournments. At the Appeal Division level, the majority of interlocutory  decisions were for leaves to appeal granted.
In addition, because new information  cannot be introduced at the Appeal Division, for the two-year period under  review, an annual average of 133 EI appeals and 85 IS appeals were referred  back to the General Division to consider new information. This is compared to 285  EI and 134 IS merit decisions made by the Appeal Division in the same period.  This suggests that while the appeals structure and processes are providing  appellants an option to introduce new information, it adds additional time and  steps in the process.
5.4. What  we heard
Through the public consultation we heard  from appellants, representatives including community and labour groups, and tribunal  members.
Overall, whether in regards to the EI or  the IS programs, significant concerns were raised with respect to the access  and timeliness of the tribunal system. Stakeholders consistently identified the  following contributing factors that impede access and add time to the SST  appeals processes:
Incomplete applications
Document sharing between ESDC, SST, and the appellant
Summary dismissal
Leave to appeal
Notice of readiness
Rulings from the Canada Revenue Agency and the Tax Court of  Canada
Refer to Sections 5 and 10 for discussion of these processes
5.4.1. Survey responses
Appellants and representatives were asked  through the survey to comment on the degree to which they agreed that the  overall appeal was processed in a timely manner and if the decision was sent in  a timely manner.
Responses were generally neutral in regards  to the time between the hearing and receipt of the decision, but were low in  relation to the overall timeliness of the appeal processing. This result is  consistent with findings reported throughout this review, specifically in the  review of the major steps in the end-to-end appeals processes for both EI and  IS, which identified the increased wait times from when an appeal is filed to  the hearing, as well as the number of other procedural decisions that take  place throughout this period. Time from hearing to decision is relatively  consistent with VRAB as an example, but other steps are adding significant time  to the appeals process.
Figure 21 – Appellant and representative responses on timeliness
Text description for Figure 21
Responses on    timeliness
Disagree
Neutral
Agree
Appellant
Representative
Appellant
Representative
Appellant
Representative
(average response)
Overall, my appeal was processed in a timely manner
EI
n/a
n/a
x
x
n/a
n/a
CPPD
x
n/a
n/a
x
n/a
n/a
CPP/OAS
x
n/a
n/a
x
n/a
n/a
The decision was sent to me in a timely manner after    the hearing
EI
n/a
n/a
x
x
n/a
n/a
CPPD
n/a
n/a
x
n/a
n/a
x
CPP/OAS
n/a
n/a
x
n/a
n/a
x
Members and employees were also asked to  rate whether they agreed the appeals process minimized the elapsed time from  application to decision and if they agreed that they were able to conduct  proceedings informally and quickly within considerations of fairness and  natural justice. Both members and employees generally reflected a low level of  agreement with respect to the processes minimizing the time. Members reported  more positive responses than employees for both questions and notably quite  positive as it relates to the second question. The difference in how members  and employees view the informality within considerations of fairness and  natural justice should be further explored when evaluating the potential  options presented in Section 3.
Figure 22 – Employee and member responses on timeliness
Text description for Figure 22
Responses on timeliness
Disagree
Neutral
Agree
Member
Employee
Member
Employee
Member
Employee
(average response)
The appeals processes minimize the elapsed time from application to    the time of decision
EI
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
n/a
IS
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
n/a
Appeals are/were conducted informally and quickly, within the    considerations of fairness and natural justice
EI
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
n/a
IS
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
5.4.2. Focus groups and written submissions
Through focus group sessions and written  submissions, community and labour groups and representatives expressed the  following observations and concerns.
Three levels of recourse,  embedded with multiple stages, each requiring decisions.
Consistent input was received by  stakeholders for both EI and IS appeals. From an appellant’s perspective, the  appeals process begins with reconsideration. The full end-to-end recourse process  is complex and hard to navigate, such that there is at least in perception a  common view that clients are discouraged and overwhelmed by the process and  often give up without appeal.
“The service standard to resolve 85 % of (EI) cases within 90 days of when an appeal is filed
Footnote
38
is too long for someone to be unemployed, especially for those  with low income.”
Footnote
39
In comparison to legacy tribunals the  following comments were heard repeatedly:
The addition of extra steps/processes within the appeals  processes (for example reconsideration (EI), summary dismissal (all), and request to  appeal to the Appeal Division (EI and OAS)) have created several obstacles for  appellants
A one size fits all approach does not work; EI and IS appeals cannot  be assessed using the same timelines and processes
Under the previous legacy tribunals for EI and OAS, there was no  need to request permission to appeal to the Appeal Division; an appellant had  the automatic right to appeal; this once again   negates the right to be heard
The Notice of Readiness for IS appeals is complex, confusing and  frustrating for appellants and representatives. For example, appellants file  notice of readiness within three months, but other parties can take up to 180  days to respond, thereby delaying the process and decision for the appellant.
Historically, the leave to appeal already  existed in the legacy tribunals for CPP, but the second level of appeal could  rehear an entire case, and did not limit itself to the current three grounds to  appeal under the SST. The current leave to appeal provision significantly  lengthens the process and can result in subsequent applications for leave to  appeal, referred to by some as “the endless loop.” Concerns were raised regarding  other restrictions that limit time, potentially to the detriment of the  appellant. The example of the 45-day limit to send submissions regarding the  appeal after leave to appeal is granted by the Appeal Division was identified  as too short, as the appellant is often required to find help from a  representative/lawyer because of the complexity of this step.
A common recommendation identified by  stakeholders to remove unnecessary delays in the appeal process, is to  eliminate the need to obtain leave to appeal from the Appeal Division and  empower Tribunal members to hear appeals and receive new evidence so that  appeals can be resolved without referring the matter back to the General  Division.
The introduction of mandatory reconsideration  of EI decisions prior to appeal was consistently identified as a concern: the  requirement to apply first for reconsideration and then again for appeal to the  SST  was seen to add time to the recourse  process; the high rate of allowed decisions questioned the efficacy of the  initial decision-making process under Service Canada; and there were  conflicting views on whether the mandatory communications to clients to explain  the rationale for the reconsideration decision helped clients understand the  decision and therefore choose not to appeal, or intimidated clients from  appealing to the SST. Absent in the current process are mechanisms to alleviate  and/or identify such concerns quickly. This includes for instance immediate client  satisfaction surveys similar to that employed by VRAB, which allows for rapid  feedback.
A one size fits all approach is not  effective and does not reflect the short term nature of the EI benefits program  and the longer term nature of a pensions program.
Stakeholders representing both EI and IS,  in particular CPPD, strongly voiced that a one size fits all approach does not  reflect the unique characteristics of the two benefits programs. Given the relatively  straightforward eligibility criteria and short term nature of EI benefits, EI processes  should be lighter and faster. Conversely, IS processes should take longer due  to the more complex nature of the appeal and the weight of a decision that has  a much longer tenure.
6. Social Security Tribunal relationship with Employment and Social Development Canada
6.1. Overview
The establishment of the SST as a  separate independent organization from ESDC, coupled with the move of tribunal  support staff from ESDC to the ATSSC (under the Department of Justice), created  a more formal separation between ESDC and the appeals process.
More specifically the separation of  administrative support to the Tribunal, and the autonomy of the SST to  establish policy and process, changed the way in which ESDC participates in the  appeals process. As outlined in Open and Accountable Government, clarity of  roles and accountabilities, and maintaining an ongoing open dialogue in support  of the Minister’s responsibility to answer for the Tribunal in Parliament, is  essential.
The review identified that although there  is ongoing sharing of information at an operational level between the SST and  ESDC, formal articulation of roles, expectations, and accountabilities are  lacking. Further, there are no formal and ongoing mechanisms between the two  organizations to promote appropriate policy coordination, and to build coherence  in the recourse activities and reporting of the SST.
The following section of this report  provides:
An overview of the ways in which the SST  and ESDC interact and  practices of  comparators
What we heard from stakeholders.
6.2. Relationship between the Social Security Tribunal and Employment and Social Development Canada
Under the legacy tribunals, Memoranda of  Understanding (MOU) were in place between the benefits programs and the BOR and  the OCRT. Further, as the tribunals were administered by ESDC, case information  was shared directly between the benefits programs and appeals tribunals.
The following table provides an overview  of the relationship that now exists between the SST and ESDC.
Element of relationship
SST
Clarity    of expectations, roles and responsibilities
Although    ESDC has MOUs with the ATSSC, there is no MOU between ESDC and the SST, or    mandate letter from the Minister to the SST
Executive    Communications
There    are regular communications between the Chair of the SST and the Associate Deputy    Minister of ESDC and the Corporate Secretary.
Information    sharing
EI files    are shared between ESDC and the SST over a shared drive; IS files are scanned    and sent to the SST. Lack of a fully electronic information-sharing mechanism    constrains efficiencies
Planning/forecasting    case volumes and business cycles
No    formal mechanism
Resolving    operational issues
A    caseload interface committee of the SST and ESDC meets monthly. SST    representation includes legal services, operations and case management. ESDC    representation includes legal services, appeals services, and program    staff
Feedback    on decision quality
No    formal mechanism
Feedback    to legislation and regulations
No    formal mechanism
Participation    in hearings
CEIC/ESDC    rarely participates as a party to hearings before the General Division or at    pre-hearing conferences
Footnote
40
6.3. Observations
Documented expectations from the  Minister to the SST, and formal and ongoing mechanisms promoting appropriate  policy coordination, planning, and accountabilities are needed to strengthen  overall governance of the SST and the recourse process
In recognition of the importance of  portfolio coordination of policy matters that extend beyond the purview of one  particular organization, the document Open and Accountable Government makes  reference to such mechanisms as mandate letters from the Minister to the  organization, and regular meetings with the deputy head to promote appropriate  policy coordination. The short-lived SST-ESDC forum, now defunct, was a  preliminary step in the right direction, if overly focused on more operational  matters such as the efficient and effective management of resources, caseloads,  and hearings.
Footnote
41
The model of the MOU between the Attorney  General of Ontario and the Executive  Chair of Social Justice Tribunals Ontario (SJTO) is instructive, setting  out the accountability relationship between the Minister and the Executive  Chair, including the expectations for information exchange and working  relationships that support the accountability and governance requirements  within a framework that recognizes the independence of SJTO and its constituent  tribunals. Specifically, this MOU establishes:
The accountability and  governance framework between the Ministry and SJTO
The roles and responsibilities  of the Minister the Executive Chair, SJTO, the Deputy Minister, and the  Executive Lead, SJTO
The expectations for the  operational, administrative, financial, auditing and reporting arrangements  between SJTO and the Ministry of the Attorney General.
Footnote
42
Document sharing practices are  not in line with leading comparators
Delays were reported in relation to the  exchange of documents between ESDC and the SST, and disagreement regarding  which documents are relevant and which information is appropriate to redact for  privacy reasons. This disagreement is long-standing and according to some,  intractable, contributing to mistrust between the respective organizations.
VRAB uses a common case management system  with Veterans Affairs Canada (VAC) for processing appeals of VAC decisions.  This gives VRAB direct and unfettered access to appellant information contained  in a shareable case file that it can pull directly from the system of record to  avoid the need for delays of coordination with VAC.
There are precedents related to the open  court principle (Lukacs 2015 FCA 140) that all documents on the record should  be provided when requested by a party; however, there are also precedents on  the obligation to protect sensitive personal information. Agreement on  interpretation of the applicability of this principle, in the context of  obligations under the Privacy Act and the DESD Act, is required between the SST  and ESDC.
6.4. What we heard
There is a shared history between the  personnel making up the SST and their counterparts within ESDC. Both groups  have deep connections to the legacy tribunals and the inception of the SST, and  strong opinions of the legacy tribunals, the design of the SST, and the way the  SST runs now. There is not a consistent view of how the SST was intended to  operate, what were and are its priorities, and if these are being addressed in  its operation. This should be borne in mind when considering the perspectives  below.
The Tribunal’s legislative and regulatory  framework, coupled with an organizational culture that is focused on the law,  is not in line with the originating intent of streamlining and simplifying the appeals  process.
While there is no question about the  Tribunal maintaining its independence, opinions differ over the application of  tribunal independence, both with regard to institutional independence and  independence of decision-making. There is a common view held by stakeholders,  and supported by the evidence referenced throughout this report, that strict  adherence to independence comes with a cost to effectiveness and client orientation.
Coordination issues between the two  organizations impede effectiveness and service to clients. For example, there  is no formal mechanism to facilitate joint planning of business cycles to  prepare for fluctuating appeal volumes.
Lack of ESDC participation in pre-hearing  conferences can be a lost opportunity to increase effectiveness. Such hearings  allow for better understanding of the issues in complex appeals and the  potential to resolve the appeal more rapidly.
Opinions differ between the SST and ESDC  over the extent of redaction of documents and relevance of documents for  sharing, combined with varying approaches across ESDC regions regarding  redaction.
SST members and ATSSC employees reported  agreement that information on appeals was readily available and shared with  parties in a timely manner. The survey responses are shown below:
Figure 23 – Employee and member responses regarding information sharing
Text description for Figure 23
Both, members and employees of the two programs, EI and IS, agreed with the following two statements: 1) Relevant information on an appeal is/was readily available to all parties involved and 2) Information is/was shared between all parties in a timely manner.
7. SST relationship with ATSSC
7.1. Overview
As an administrative tribunal, the SST  exercises delegated statutory powers and performs a variety of functions that  can be seen as “spanning the constitutional divide between the executive and  judicial branches of government.”
Footnote
43
The SST falls along a  continuum that ranges from those that perform administrative functions on one  end to those that operate in a court-like manner on the other. Positioning on  this continuum influences all aspects of a tribunal’s operation, including the  way in which a tribunal leverages administrative staff in support of its  operations. For the SST, a consequence of its emphasis on the law and its  mandate to make quasi-judicial decisions has extended to considering  administrative decisions as quasi-judicial and therefore the exclusive purview  of members.
The Administrative Tribunals Support  Service of Canada (ATSSC) was established in November 2014 to provide support  services and facilities to eleven federal administrative tribunals by way of a  single, integrated organization. The ATSSC provides specialized services  tailored to and required by each tribunal (for example registry, research and  analysis, legal and other mandate or case activities specific to each  tribunal), as well as common and shared internal services (for example human  resources, financial services, information management and technology,  accommodations, security, planning and communications).
ESDC continues to provide some limited services  to the SST (for example services related to information technology); however,  the ATSSC provides the majority of the administrative support for SST.
As outlined in its 2017 to 2018 departmental  report, the ATSSC is committed to providing efficient and effective support for  the administrative tribunals it serves, while maximizing service delivery  through strengthened capacity and modernized approaches that meet the needs of  the tribunals and improve access to justice. To this end, the ATSSC continues  to focus on increasing its capacity to address changing demands that respond to  business needs through efficient and agile internal systems and services and a  commitment to service excellence.
The ATSSC employees working in support of  the Tribunal are responsive to the Chairperson of the SST through the Executive  Director. This relationship is shown in the SST’s organization chart below.
Figure 24 – Relationship between the SST and the ATSSC
Text description for Figure 24
Figure 24 presents the organizational structure of the Social Security Tribunal (SST) of Canada and the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada (ATSSC), as well as the relationship between both organizations, through the Executive Director of the ATSSC. The SST is composed of Members for the General Division for EI and IS and Members for the Appeal Division, reporting to the Vice Chairs for EI and IS General Division and Appeal Division respectively, coming under the Chairperson. The ATSSC is composed of a Member Secretariat, Special Advisor to the Chairperson, Executive Director, Business Management, Registry Operation and Tribunal Services and Legal Services reporting to the Chief Administrator.
As described in the ATSSC Act, the Chief  Administrator is the chief executive officer of the ATSSC, and is responsible  for the provision of the support services and the facilities that are needed by  each of the administrative tribunals to exercise its powers and perform its  duties and functions in accordance with the rules that apply to its work. The  Chief Administrator has all the powers necessary to perform his or her duties  and functions under this or any other Act of Parliament. Section 12 of the Act  specifies that “the Chief Administrator’s powers, duties and functions do not  extend to any of the powers, duties and functions conferred by law on any  administrative tribunal or on any of its members.” Section 14 clarifies that  the chairperson of each administrative tribunal served by the ATSSC continues  to have supervision over and direction of the work of the tribunal.
The SST/ATSSC relationship is a similar  model to the Courts Administration Service’s (CAS) relationship with the four  courts it serves: the Federal Court of Appeal, the Federal Court, the Court  Martial Appeal Court of Canada, and the Tax Court of Canada. In this comparator  relationship, a Chief Administrator acts as the Chief Executive Officer for CAS,  and has all the powers necessary to:
Provide effective and  efficient management and administration of court services, including court  facilities, libraries, corporate services and staffing
Structure registry  operations and prepare budgets, in consultation with the Chief Justices of the  four courts, for the requirements of those courts and the related needs of CAS.
As with the ATSSC, the Chief  Administrator of CAS is responsive to the Chief Justices of the courts served,  and his or her powers are restricted not to include matters assigned by law to  the judiciary, and subject to direction by the Chief Justices.
This model for tribunal support, where  one shared services provider supports many independent tribunals, is not shared  with external comparators examined during this review. Comparators either have  their own support services, or are part of an umbrella tribunal (AAT and TAQ)  with common services.
Beyond common functions, the ATSSC does  not share specialized services between tribunals, and each tribunal including  the SST has dedicated staff following tribunal-specific processes. In the case  of the SST, the processes implemented by ATSSC staff are under the direction of  the SST Chair, restricting opportunities to optimize processes internally at  the ATSSC.
Consistent with SST direction, the ATSSC  performs registry, legal and other administrative services (for example human  resources, financial services, accommodations, among others. The SST does not  require the ATSSC to assist members with most aspects of the cases or  decisions. In other tribunals, it is common for staff to provide advisory  services to members, including research tasks, decision review for consistency,  assembling the facts of the case for member review, scheduling hearings, and  making routine decisions on behalf of members, for example simple adjournments.
The SST Chair expressed a position that a  great number of decisions are required to be performed by members in accordance  with the legislative framework that was designed to preserve the independence  of decision-making of the Tribunal. Such decisions include accepting  applications to appeal as complete, determining the form of hearing and when it  will be heard, deciding on adjournments, among others. In addition, the SST contends  that this approach is more cost-effective as the members have the necessary  training for these tasks and turnover of administrative staff is higher. Interviews  with a comparator tribunal indicated that they did not share this belief, and  as long as members were ‘unfettered’ in their decision-making on the appeal,  there was no issue with employees fulfilling these tasks.
The results of the analysis suggest that  there is scope to expand the role of the ATSSC to support the tribunal function,  provide advice to tribunal members, and be delegated to make procedural  decisions without compromising member independence in quasi-judicial decision-making.
The following section of this report  provides:
A comparison of the relationship between members and employees to  external comparators and legacy tribunals where information was available
What we heard from stakeholders.
7.2. Findings
Ratio of employees to members is  consistent with comparators.
The SST ratio of support to members is generally  in line with external comparators, although VRAB in particular does have a  greater ratio of employees to members. This reflects the greater support  provided to appellants as explained later.
The legacy tribunals could not be  compared as only headcount of part-time members was available.
Finally, only the first levels of appeals  are shown in the comparison; the small number of members in the Appeal Division,  and the different nature of the division does not support a fair comparison  with external tribunals.
Figure 25 - Ratio of employees to members – First level of appeal
Text description for Figure 25
Tribunal - First level of appeal
Employees
Members
(number of employees and members)
GD-EI
41
29
GD-IS
85
42
TAQ
174
93
AAT
530
223
VRAB
74
23
* The number of members / employees is indicated in white, the  bar heights representpercentage
Member time use is in line with VRAB.
The figure below shows the breakdown of  member time use for VRAB and the SST. SST data was recorded as part of the  member survey, and the VRAB data was provided by that tribunal. Data at this  level of detail was not available from other tribunals. The results are very  similar between these two tribunals. VRAB indicated that they spend less time  assessing facts, applying the law, and writing the decisions, while they spend  more time on administrative work and reviewing files. The difference in  administrative work may be due to the travel requirements for VRAB members as  almost all hearings are in person. The lowerpercentage of time spent by VRAB  members on assessing facts, applying the law, and writing the decision may be  due to the support provided by administrative staff in assembling the facts of  the case for members, scheduling hearings, and providing input to drafting  decisions.
Figure 26 - Member time use comparison
Text description for Figure 26
Member time use
SST
VRAB
(%)
Participate in member training
6
5
Conduct administrative duties
10
17
Review files and documents to confirm issues of the case
21
26
Attend and conduct case hearing
15
13
Assess facts, apply law, and write decision
49
39
Division of work between employees and  members will vary between tribunals.
Based on the scope of the review,  detailed time tracking of SST member duties was not conducted. However, the VRAB  model was explored, whereby members are responsible for independently making  decisions, but are supported and advised closely by staff. In the case of VRAB,  staff prepare an evidence package for each case containing all the relevant  material and decisions from previous levels of adjudication, often accompanied  by a list of issues and analysis. Members may also request legal opinions,  legal research, other decisions, precedents, jurisprudence, and other types of  information/research pertinent to the case or a more detailed analysis of  complex files. Staff schedule hearings, following which all decisions are  reviewed by staff against a checklist to support quality decisions.
VRAB indicated that avoidance of  fettering members is always at the forefront of assistance provided to members.  Decisions are the members own, but staff are there to advise and support.
Members conclude fewer appeals per year  than most comparators.
As shown below, in the General Division  the average number of annual appeals concluded per member was 120 for both EI  and IS.
Footnote
44
One would expect a higher  average number for EI appeals as they are known to be less complex than CPPD  appeals. Also, these numbers are below those for the majority of comparators.  Factors that may be responsible for the difference between the SST and  comparators include time associated with additional steps in the appeals  process under the SST, for example summary dismissal and leave to appeal, time spent  by members both on interlocutory decisions such as adjournments, and time spent  on research and decision-writing.
At 230 appeals concluded per member, the  AD-EI is above most comparators.
Footnote
45
The AD-IS has a much  lower number of appeals concluded per member which is reflective of the more  complex nature of CPPD appeals which comprise the majority of the IS caseload. Still,  VRAB appeals would also deal with complex and long-standing medical conditions  yet has a higher rate of average appeals concluded.
Figure 27 - Annual case volume per member
Text description for Figure 27
Tribunal
Case volume    per member
(per year)
SST AD-IS
70
SST GD-IS
120
SST GD-EI
120
TAQ
130
VRAB
150
AAT
170
SST AD-EI
230
OSB
300
7.3. What we heard
Members’ time is spent on administrative  tasks and decisions.  The SST was  initially established with the capacity for support staff to directly support  members in the administrative aspects of researching and drafting input to decisions,  scheduling hearings, and more, but this facility is not being fully used.
The SST does not avail itself of the  potential services of the ATSSC, for example scheduling hearings, preparing appeal cases,  making minor decisions (routine adjournments), drafting input to decisions,  medical expertise, etc., citing interpretation of the regulations, independence  of member decision-making, and the level of training that would be required for  ATSSC staff when members are already trained. None of these reasons is a show stopper:  the SST can delegate routine administrative decisions and/or task input to member  decision-making while retaining accountability, and the investment in training  would be more than offset by the increased time available to members to decide  appeals in a more timely manner.
There is a perception that the functional  reporting structure to the SST does not permit the ATSSC to independently  optimize or refine its processes; however, this goes more to the nature of the  ATSSC’s business model which provides responsive and tailored services to each  tribunal.
Stakeholders commented that members do  not adequately access medical expertise available in the ATSSC, although this  is not borne out in survey responses presented below.
7.3.1. Survey responses
Members and employees were asked about  factors related to the SST/ESDC relationship, such as the division of  responsibilities between the SST and ATSSC, and whether appeal cases were  informed by legal and medical advice. Employees rated these factors lower than  members. Additionally, member responses overall were lower in relation to  efficiency and time use, and were higher in provision of supporting services  and independence. The highest ratings for both members and employees were for  the application of legal advice to inform appeal cases, indicative of the prominence  of the legal lens under the SST reported throughout this review. Contrary to  what we heard from stakeholders, members agreed that appeal cases were informed  by medical advice.
Figure 28 – Member and employee ratings of factors related to ATSSC / SST relationship
Text description for Figure 28
Factors related to    ATSSC/SST relationship
Neutral
Agree
Strongly Agree
Member
Employee
Member
Employee
Member
Employee
The division of
      responsibilities between
      Tribunal members and
      ATSSC employees
      contribute/contributed to
      efficient appeals
      processes
EI
n/a
x
x
n/a
n/a
n/a
IS
n/a
x
x
n/a
n/a
n/a
Appeal cases are/were
      informed by legal advice
EI
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
n/a
IS
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
n/a
Appeal cases are/were
      informed by medical
      advice
EI
n/a
x
x
n/a
n/a
n/a
IS
n/a
n/a
x
x
n/a
n/a
8. Role of stakeholders
8.1. Overview
Together with openness, accountability,  effectiveness and coherence, participation is recognized as one of the five  principles of good governance.
Footnote
46
While the origins of the SST preceded its  creation by many years (Garant 2002), a variety of stakeholders, for example the  Commissioners for Workers and for Employers, community groups, labour  organizations, advocates, counsel, and more, lament their lack of involvement  and engagement in its design and its processes. Of particular concern is the  loss of voice of business and labour, often referred to as the tri-partite  element of the former appeals system for Employment Insurance, whereby tribunals  under the Board of Referees comprised a Chair appointed by the government, a  member appointed by the Commissioner for Workers, and a member appointed by the  Commissioner for Employers.
A large measure of the input received  through this review called for government to restore this tripartite element of  EI appeals. In his paper, A Canadian Social Security Tribunal, Patrice Garant of the University of Laval wrote about  the concept of “equal representation” which provides for participation by both  employers and employees in the tribunal, stating: “nothing prevents it from  being retained in one of the sections of the future Tribunal. Furthermore,  equal representation is not incompatible with a recruitment and selection plan  based on skills and qualifications as opposed to patronage or favouritism,  whether it be political, managerial or union-related.”
Footnote
47
In a recent paper published by the Mowat  Centre, Donna Wood argues that business and labour involvement in Employment  Insurance is important for a number of reasons, most significantly because as a  social insurance program, contributions from their members finance most of the  program costs through a dedicated payroll tax. Their advice can improve  performance. A place at the table is also a requirement of international  conventions and agreements that Canada has signed on to.
Footnote
48
Community groups and advocates for CPPD  also expressed concerns of not being able to participate effectively in the  appeals process but in addition, also feel that their concerns are often  overshadowed by the EI community or at least are not being heard to the same  degree.
The above is not to say that the SST has  not engaged with stakeholders. In fact the SST has met with a variety of  stakeholders since its inception and provided examples of benefits of their  engagement, such as the redesign of its notice of appeal forms and its online  feedback form. “The Chair’s door is always open,” reported one stakeholder. However,  based on the consistent responses from all stakeholder groups, more formal and ongoing  engagement mechanisms are expected.
Although one might question the  appropriateness of stakeholder involvement in an independent arms-length  administrative tribunal it must be remembered that the appeals process is an  important component of the broader social security/insurance system. Stakeholder  participation in the total system, including the appeals process, can and  should contribute to its effectiveness in achieving desired government policy  outcomes for Canadians, consistent with the Minister’s mandate letter from the  Prime Minister: “As Minister,  you will be held accountable for our commitment to bring a different style of  leadership to government. This will include constructive dialogue with  Canadians, civil society, and stakeholders, including business, organized  labour…”
Footnote
49
Based on the analysis completed there is  a need for a formal stakeholder engagement strategy that sets out a  comprehensive approach for stakeholder participation, aligned with the broader  stakeholder strategy for social benefits programs.
The analysis completed for purposes of this  section included:
Review of government intent regarding stakeholder engagement
The experience and views from key stakeholders and representatives  collected through the consultation
Review of stakeholder involvement in the SST and comparator  tribunals.
8.2. What we heard
Labour, employers, and the Commissioners  for Workers and for Employers are an integral part of the EI system, yet felt  they were not consulted when the tribunal system was changed, and now feel left  out of the process, including the move away from a tripartite hearing mechanism  and minimal input in selection of new members.
A weakened position of labour as an actor with respect to EI has  created a broken link between EI Commissioners for Workers and Employers and EI  appeals. Labour needs to be a stakeholder in the system and the role of labour  and business needs to be restored
Commissioners do not have adequate access, input to the system. They  no longer appoint members to the tribunal, they are excluded from activities  and operations of the SST, for example training of new members; and they have  limited access to performance and financial information of the SST
The Government should restore stakeholder input into the system and  return to tripartite tribunals that provide for inclusion of the community  perspective with knowledge of the local labour market and social services and a  worker-friendly process which is accountable to taxpayers and benefits  contributors. The choice of the members of the SST should be made taking into  consideration the recommendations of the affected/related parties
“The community perspective has been lost with the change to one  professional adjudicator, a three member panel had knowledge of local labour  market and social services.”
Representatives of CPPD clients expressed  desire for greater participation in the appeals process, and concerns that  their voices are overshadowed by the EI community when advocating for change to  address the unique needs of their clients.
Community groups and organizations spoke of the complexity and long  duration of the process which vulnerable clients, many of whom suffer both  physical and mental health challenges, struggle to navigate
Representatives expressed a fundamental need for assistance to  clients and cautioned against a drive for more timely decisions at the expense  of taking the time to consider all the factors
Some members of the CPPD Client Roundtable want to see improvements  to the adjudication process that precedes and informs appeals.
Advocates, community groups, and labour  organizations are challenged in supporting appellants through the appeals  process.
There is an interest across community groups and organizations for  training of community members and advocates to better support clients in  navigating the process
Websites, including those for Service Canada and the SST, should  publish contact information of existing and relevant groups and organizations  (community, legal, and labour groups) that are able to provide support and  assistance to appellants
Community groups and organizations spoke of the benefit to clients  of establishing networks across communities and cities to share information,  tools, and resources
Community groups and organizations could better support clients with  government funding.
8.3. What we found
The SST has met with a variety of  stakeholders since its inception and provided examples of benefits of their  engagement such as the redesign of its notice of appeal forms and its online  feedback form.
An examination of external comparators  revealed a range of mechanisms and practices regarding stakeholder involvement  and participation in the appeals process. Examples are the inclusion of  effective stakeholder relationships and partnerships as strategic priorities in  annual plans, formal mechanisms such as councils and advisory bodies, public  consultations on potential reforms, and participation by tribunals in  stakeholder events.
Designing stakeholder participation
Instruments for stakeholder  involvement/participation can take a variety of forms, such as roundtables,  councils, advisory groups, and networks, among others. One such example of a  potential relevant roundtable is the CPPD Client Roundtable which serves as a  forum for discussion between ESDC and individuals from the community who have  direct experience with the program.
Ultimately a comprehensive approach to  designing meaningful, active and enduring stakeholder participation could  include but not be limited to:
Explicit statement of desired effects and goals
Identification of the stakeholder communities
Planned scope of participation and any constraints
Level(s) of involvement/participation, ranging from passive  (feedback) to active (design/ redesign).
Footnote
50
9. Accountability for results
Open  and Accountable Government sets out the fundamental  principles of the federal government’s system of responsible government, with application to administrative  tribunals.
Footnote
51
It speaks of individual accountability, that is carrying out responsibilities  assigned, and collective accountability in support of the ministry team and  decisions of Cabinet.
Although created by government through  enabling legislation, administrative tribunals, once established, exercise decision-making  responsibilities at arm’s length from government. There is a natural and  healthy tension between the public accountability of administrative tribunals  and their independent decision-making role.
Footnote
52
Lorne Sossin, Dean of Osgoode Hall Law  School, York University, proposes “transparency” as the bridge between  accountability and independence: the government can impose its policy choices  on the tribunal through the transparency of the legislative process, and make  the appointment process transparent, with selection criteria consistent with  the goals of the legislation. For its part, the tribunal too has an obligation  for transparency:
Publication of decisions and its positions on issues related to its  mandate
Publication and dissemination in accessible formats of tribunal  rules, structure, and relevant timelines or administrative requirements to  access its process
Spending tribunal resources as a matter of public record
Provision of rationale for all its decisions.
“Independence creates the need for  greater accountability, and greater accountability creates the conditions for  strengthened independence. The goal of this mutually reinforcing approach to  independence and accountability is not just to sort out effective, efficient  and appropriate institutional relationships, but ultimately to enhance public  confidence.”
Footnote
53
As an instrument of government, the SST  is accountable to the Minister of ESDC for providing fair, impartial and efficient appeal processes for  Canadians. The ultimate outcome of effective tribunal  accountability is public confidence in and trust of the SST by government,  parties involved, stakeholders, and the public, in part when:
Strategic direction and goals and priorities are defined and clearly  articulated throughout the organization
Decisions are made based on relevant and complete information,  reflecting the rules of natural justice
The public is properly informed of tribunal processes, proceedings  and decisions.
It needs to be recognized that the SST  has accomplished much since it was first created. The SST meets many criteria  of accountability and continues to enhance and improve all aspects of the  tribunal functions in this regard. At the same time in contrast to more mature  tribunals the following accountability measures are not in place or are still  developing for the SST:
Formal agreement between the Minister and the Chair of the SST that  outlines roles, responsibilities, expected outcomes, and accountabilities
Formal reporting of financial performance and key operating  statistics
Reporting of results against priorities, goals, and service standards
Reporting on client satisfaction
Publication of decisions and greater ease of access to them  (searchable data base).
Through the public consultations, we  heard from appellants, representatives including community and labour groups,  members and employees. Overall, significant concerns were raised with respect  to the accountability of the SST as it related to public reporting,  accessibility of its processes and decisions, service standards and timelines,  and financial performance. These concerns were also heightened for EI  stakeholders who believe the requirement for accountability to rate payers is  unmet.
Based on the analysis more is required to  support a transparent, accountable tribunal, aligned with the government of  Canada’s whole of Government focus on accounting for the financial and  non-financial contributions to outcomes for Canadians.
Notwithstanding the principle of  independence of the Tribunal, the absence of an integrated reporting framework  from reconsideration through appeals that incorporates all parties’  contributions to an effective and efficient recourse process makes it difficult  to assess the impact on client outcomes such as accessibility, fairness, and  transparency.
The remainder of this section provides an  overview of the analysis completed. In assessing the effectiveness of the  Tribunal’s accountability, our analysis included:
Review of the SST Regulations, Chairperson Guidelines and Directives  and those of comparators
Review of the SST’s Achievements Report 2013-2016
Footnote
54
and the annual plans and reports of comparators
Review of Tribunal information available on its website and on those  of its comparators
The experience and views from key stakeholders.
9.1. Key accountability features of  the SST and comparators
The chart that follows provides a summary  of accountability features of the SST and comparators
SST
Comparators
Findings
Annual plans and reports
The SST published its first    Achievements report 2013-2016 that highlighted caseloads, appeal outcomes,    and priorities for the year ahead
Four of five comparators publish    an annual plan (TAQ has a three-year plan) and all publish annual reports;    elements include caseloads, appeal outcomes against service standards, client    satisfaction results, priorities
After almost five years in    operation, the SST can improve its planning and reporting in a more    comprehensive and public manner
Financial statements
The    SST does not publish financial or operating information. The ATSSC publishes    financial information but the data is aggregated across all tribunals it    supports
Four    of five comparators publish their financial statements in either or both    annual plans and reports
The    SST should publish its financial and operating statements
Service standards and reports
The    SST publishes service standards on timelines for hearings and decisions, and    reports on overturn rates at the judicial level
Comparators    publish and report on service standards, client satisfaction data, and a    variety of performance indicators, for example fairness, overturn rate at judicial    level
The    SST should report against service standards, client satisfaction levels, and    performance expectations for example fairness
Decisions and positions on key    aspects
The    SST publishes all Appeal Division decisions and a selection of General Division    decisions with search tools
Comparators    publish decisions but only one publishes all decisions
The    SST’s practice is aligned to that of comparators; however, stakeholders call    for all decisions to be published in a searchable index
Strategic goals and priorities
The    SST outlines its priorities in its Achievements Report
All    comparators publish and report on goals and priorities and results achieved
The    SST can strengthen its practice in this area by more comprehensive annual    reporting against plans
Processes and guidelines
The    SST publishes on its website its appeals processes, and guidelines and    directives for its members
Comparators    publish information on processes and guidelines for both applicants and its    members, some with videos depicting the process (VRAB and AAT)
The    SST can enhance its information for applicants by orienting information to    the applicant
Accountability mechanism with    host department
There    is no MOU between the SST and ESDC. There is an MOU between ESDC and the    ATSSC
Two    comparators have an MOU with its minister/host department that sets out the    accountability and governance framework, respective roles and    accountabilities of each party, and expectations for the operational,    administrative, financial, auditing,     and reporting arrangements
Footnote
55
There    should be a published document that outlines the accountability and    governance framework within which the SST operates
Other
The    SST’s Code of Conduct for members is published on its website. The SST also    provides an online feedback mechanism with associated commitments and    service standards
Some    tribunals publish their hearing schedules, client satisfaction data
VRAB    adheres to the Veterans Bill of Rights
The    SST can increase transparency by adopting and publishing a performance framework    aligned with the Treasury Board Policy on Results
9.2. What we heard
Through the public consultations, we  heard from appellants, representatives including community and labour groups,  and members.
Overall, significant concerns were raised  with respect to the accountability of the SST as it related to public  reporting, accessibility of its processes and decisions, service standards and  timelines, and financial performance. These concerns were heightened for EI  stakeholders who believe the requirement for accountability to rate payers is  unmet.
Surveys
Appellants and representatives were asked  through the survey to comment on the degree to which decisions were based on  the law and the facts of their case, and the independence of the appeals  process and decisions ‘vis a vis’ the reconsideration process.
Appellant respondents for EI and IS appeals  at the first level were satisfied that the decisions were based on the law and  the facts, and that decisions explained how the law and the rules were applied  to their case. Appellant respondents at the second level reported much lower  levels of satisfaction on both of these measures. Agreement levels were lower  regarding the independence of the SST process and its decisions from the  reconsideration process, and considerably lower at the second level for both EI  and IS respondents. Representative respondents reported satisfaction with all  three dimensions at both appeal levels.
Figure 29 – Appellant and representative views regarding their appeal
Text description for Figure 29
Appellant and representative    views regarding their appeal
Neutral
Agree
Appellant
Representative
Appellant
Representative
I believe    my appeal was decided based upon the law and the facts
EI
x
n/a
n/a
x
CPPD
x
n/a
n/a
x
CPP/OAS
x
n/a
n/a
x
The    decision explained how the law and the rules were applied to the facts of my    case
EI
x
n/a
n/a
x
CPPD
x
n/a
n/a
x
CPP/OAS
x
n/a
n/a
x
I believe    the SST’s processes and decisions regarding my case were independent of the    reconsideration process
EI
x
x
n/a
n/a
CPPD
x
n/a
n/a
x
CPP/OAS
x
n/a
n/a
x
Members were asked to comment on the level  of training received, clarity of roles and responsibilities, performance  expectations, and independence of
decision-making
. Member respondents reported  high levels of agreement on all dimensions.
Figure 30 – Member perspectives
Text description for Figure 30
Member perspectives
Agree
Strongly Agree
Member EI
Member IS
Member EI
Member Is
(average    response)
I am/was provided sufficient and relevant training    to perform my duties
x
x
n/a
n/a
My    role and responsibilities as a member are/were clearly articulated
n/a
n/a
x
x
I    understand/ understood what decisions I can/could make
n/a
n/a
x
x
Performance    standards are/were defined and communicated
x
x
n/a
n/a
I    am/was able to act independently of other tribunal members (including    Executive Members)
n/a
n/a
x
x
I am    able to make decisions independently of any advice I may receive from ATSSC
n/a
n/a
x
x
Through focus groups and written  submissions, community and labour groups and representatives expressed the  following observations and concerns.
The move from the tripartite system to an  independent tribunal created a perception among EI stakeholders that the  Tribunal has lost accountability to key stakeholders.
There is a perception that Tribunal members have no lived experience  with the workplace and are only accountable to meeting performance requirements  of the SST. The Board of Referees was accountable to the union and business  groups that nominated them
Create workers’ access to justice within a worker-friendly process  such as the tri-partite panel, which is accountable to taxpayers and benefits  contributors. The SST must be accountable to labour, business and the  Commission
Must restore stakeholder input into the system. Many of the problems  with the existing system arose because the SST was created with little, if any,  input from affected stakeholders. The connection between former tribunals and  the communities they served was directly embedded into those systems. BOR members  were appointed with input from employer and worker communities. Those members  cared deeply about the system and felt a true sense of accountability to  parties appearing before them.
Interviews with government stakeholders  and focus group participants raised the following concerns with respect to  accountability of the SST.
It is recognized that the SST is four  years old but should be reaching the next stage of maturity. Reporting has  focused on service standards for timelines and not client outcomes such as  accessibility, fairness, and transparency.
There is a reluctance by the SST to standardize procedures and  provide greater direction to members in order to avoid overstepping the independence  of member decision-making
There is minimal performance management for members, for example members  are able to choose when and how they work, resulting in them scheduling their  own hearings; too many members have low levels of productivity
The annual Achievement Report should report on what SST has done and  its performance
There is a performance management framework in place for ATSSC  operations but one is lacking for SST Members. SST needs a stronger performance  management framework ("judicial independence doesn't over-ride this"),  for example, hours expected to be available, productivity, clarify expectations  during hiring process, track outputs and quality
Service standards are silent on the decision-maker as they are seen  by the SST as at odds with independence. Independence of decision-making is  important but doesn't extend to how members do the work and expectations of  performance.
The above comments are as reported by various stakeholders and must  be considered in the context of the fact that the SST publishes guidance and  directives to guide its members; a performance management process for members  is in place, including expectations regarding the number of cases per month;  and the SST published its first Annual Report on results against plans in  September 2017. These reflect a commitment to accountability and should  continue to evolve and be strengthened.
10. Complexity
The government’s stated goal is  “providing a quick, effective and efficient system of appeals that will ensure  that Canadians get the support they need when they need it most.”
Footnote
56
Either or both a complex,  complicated system of appeals will constrain achievement of this goal. A formal  appeals system by design will include a degree of complexity in the interests  of providing a consistent, coherent, and clear process for all parties to  follow.
Quasi-judicial proceedings must also  follow basic standards of due process, including:
Proper notice of the hearing
Providing everyone with an interest in the proceedings an  opportunity to be heard and to hear what others have to say
Full disclosure to every one of the facts being considered by the  decision-making body (in other words, no ex-parte contacts)
An impartial decision-maker free from bias and conflicts of interest
Decisions based on the facts of the case, not on political pressure  or vocal opposition.
Footnote
57
Federal administrative tribunals “operate  as part of the executive branch of government, under the mandate of the  legislature as outlined in Open and Accountable Government. They are not courts,  and do not occupy the same constitutional role as courts. The degree of  independence required of a particular government decision-maker or tribunal is  determined by its enabling statute.”
Footnote
58
A Tribunal nevertheless has a duty of fairness.
Footnote
59
Fairness for purposes of this review was defined from both a structural and a procedural  perspective.
Structural  fairness
: evaluates whether there are structural  guarantees of judicial independence, the individual independence of each of the  tribunal's members, and the institutional independence of the tribunal itself.  It includes an evaluation of whether there are structural arrangements for  ensuring adjudicative competence, and whether the underlying act and supporting  regulations are fair.
Procedural  fairness
: examines whether the process elements  themselves support fairness outcomes. This includes an examination of whether  trust in the tribunal members has been established, the quality of treatment of  clients, whether procedures are impartial and fact based, and the extent to  which all clients are given the opportunity to participate in, and provide  input to the process.
The challenge and even obligation of  administrative tribunals serving Canadians and the public interest is to apply  such standards while avoiding unnecessary complexity, and to illuminate  residual complexity in a manner that allows all parties to successfully  navigate the process. “Accessibility” is the antidote to complexity in this  context. Examples of the benefits of an effective process include:
Appeals are conducted as  informally and quickly as warranted by the circumstances
Decisions are made based on  relevant and complete information, reflecting the rules of natural justice
Clients are provided with  appropriate tools, information, and logistical support and have access to the  process
The public is properly informed  of tribunal processes, proceedings and decisions.
In assessing the extent to which complexity hinders the Tribunal’s ability to  achieve expected outcomes, our analysis included:
Review of the SST Regulations,  Chairperson Guidelines and Directives and those of comparators
Review of Tribunal information  available on its website for appellants and representatives and those of  comparators
The experience and views from  key stakeholders, appellants, representatives, and members collected through  the consultations
An analysis of key operating  results.
The key findings from the analysis showed:
A significantpercentage of  appeal applications were returned/not accepted because appellants did not  provide information the government already had (from initial application for  benefits and/or reconsideration). Only 57% of applications of IS and 62 % of EI applications were received complete
Summary dismissals, notice of  readiness, and leave to appeal steps can be intimidating and difficult for  appellants to navigate
Tribunal decisions are lengthy  and do not always explain in lay terms the considerations and rationale for the  decisions
The drop-off rate of EI appeals,  where the reconsideration process changed to be mandatory coupled with verbal  explanations of results to appellants, is significant: roughly 3,900 appeals per  year compared to 24,000 under the previous system, a decline of about 85 %. This drop-off rate is explained in Section 4.2.2, specifically under  the discussion related to the change to ESDC
The drop-off rate did not  change between the legacy IS tribunal and the GD-IS
The SST provides a 1-800 number  for appellants and representatives to obtain information on their case;  however, there is no consistent case officer assigned, nor can an  appellant/representative track their case throughout the process.
Based on the analysis completed, the SST  Regulations outline an appeals process consistent with the standards of due  process but one that is more prescriptive than those of comparators.
The SST Regulations introduced new  mechanisms and steps to address challenges experienced under the previous  system; however, these measures have added complexity and time without  achieving the desired benefits.
The complexity of the appeals process  makes it challenging for the lay person to navigate the process on their own  and is considered by stakeholders to be a deterrent to the pursuit of appeals,  in direct contradiction with the very intent of the creation of the SST.
The following section of this report  provides:
An overview of key features of the SST Regulations as they relate to  complexity
A summary of the key added steps to the appeals process under the SST,  as compared to the five external tribunals
Operating data regarding applications
The perspectives of stakeholders.
10.1. Overview of the SST regulations
The Social Security Tribunal Regulations  begin with the general principle:
2
These Regulations must be interpreted so as to secure the just, most  expeditious and least expensive determination of appeals and applications.
Section 3 goes  further to clearly convey the intent of government that  proceedings are to treat appeals in an informal and expedient manner. The  Regulations also allow for flexibilities under special circumstances:
3
(1)
The  Tribunal
(a)
must  conduct proceedings as informally and quickly as the circumstances and the  considerations of fairness and natural justice permit; and
(b)
may,  if there are special circumstances, vary a provision of these Regulations or  dispense a party from compliance with a provision.
In addition, the Regulations frequently  use the term “without delay” regarding notifications, sharing of documents with  parties, hearings, and decisions. This is consistent with the government’s  stated goal of “providing a quick, effective and efficient system of appeals  that will ensure that Canadians get the support they need when they need it  most.”
Footnote
60
With the exception of IS cases at second level, timelines under the  SST, from first contact with the Tribunal through to decision, are longer on  average than under the previous system (refer Section 4 Comparison with Legacy  Tribunals).
The Regulations also provide for  pre-hearing conferences, alternative dispute resolution, and settlement  conferences which would indicate an intent that the Tribunal provide various  means for parties to be heard and to facilitate the resolution of cases,  consistent with the above-stated goal. Operational data indicated limited use  of such mechanisms: settlements were reached in 116 GD-IS cases (3%) and  17 AD-IS cases (3%) per year on average during the two years’ data  examined.
That said, the Regulations set out clear  parameters within which the appeals process operates. These “rules” reflect  considerable formality and range from time requirements for appealing at each  level and for submitting documents, detailed requirements to be met by  appellants for an appeal to be considered complete, Tribunal authority for decision-making  at numerous steps, among others.
10.2. Structural requirements
The table below outlines the key  additional steps introduced under the SST Regulations that did not exist under  the previous system, and are not replicated in comparator tribunals, indicative  of the more legalistic/prescriptive SST model.
Refer to Section 5.2 on Appeals Structure  for more detailed analysis.
SST
VRAB
OSB
AC
TAQ
AAT
Summary dismissal
Y
N
N
N
N
N
Notice of readiness (IS)
Y
N
N
N
N
N
Leave to appeal
Y
N
N
N
N
N
The rate of summary dismissal is low at two% for EI and 12 % for IS and adds delays as the SST is required under the Regulations to  allow the appellant to make submissions prior to making a decision. Regulations  for comparators do not include this provision
The notice of readiness, introduced to curb endless adjournments by  parties, has had the unintended consequence of extending the process. None of  the comparators requires a notice of readiness by the parties
The introduction of leave to appeal at the second level of the  process poses a higher bar than that of comparator tribunals, and has resulted  in an annual average of 133 EI appeals (17%) and 85 IS appeals (13 %) referred back to the General Division, further extending the process.
10.3. Key operating statistics
Drop-off  rates and withdrawals
Much has been made of the 85%  reduction in EI appeals under the SST, as compared to the previous system  (refer Section 4.2.4). As mentioned previously, the added step of explaining  the reconsideration decision to clients is considered a contributing factor to  the reduction in EI appeals to the General Division. The complexity of the new  processes were also identified to be a deterrent to appellants proceeding to  the SST (refer Sections 10.4, 12.4).
The figure below shows the number of  appeals withdrawn from each division. Only a small proportion of EI and IS appeals  were withdrawn. Overall, this data does not indicate that appeals are not  proceeding due to the complexity of the process.
Figure 31 - Withdrawn appeals - Annual average
Text description for Figure 31
Cases concluded
(excludes agreements)
Appeals
Not withdrawn
Withdrawn
(annual average)
EI-GD
3,060
330
EI-AD
390
140
IS-GD
4,610
380
IS-AD
380
10
Another example of complexity is the  information required under the SST Regulations to constitute a complete  application. The majority of reasons for incomplete appeal applications are for  information the government already had as part of the application for benefits-appeal-decision  continuum.
Between April 2013 and October 2016, 57 % of applications of IS and 62% of EI applications to the General  Division were complete. Missing items are outlined in the chart below (there  can be more than one missing item per case). Until all such information is  provided, appeals are not accepted and do not progress, and can add on average  30-50 days to the appeal process (refer Section 4.2.6). In November 2016, the  SST updated its notice of appeal forms, and completion rates increased to 78 % and 74% respectively.
Footnote
61
Nonetheless, with the exception of grounds  for appeal (which can be different than those under reconsideration), this  information should all be available from ESDC with the case file and not be a  reason for delay.
Missing items
Incomplete applications IS (%)
Footnote
62
Incomplete applications EI (%)
Footnote
62
Reconsideration    decision
72%
84%
Date    received recon decision
47%
21%
Declaration
47%
10%
Telephone    number
23%
10%
Grounds
9%
4%
Social    Insurance Number
9%
4%
Procedural decisions
The establishment of the  SST introduced formal procedural decisions that differ from those of the legacy  tribunals. As presented in Section 5.3.3, decisions other than merit decisions  made through the process include procedural decisions such as allowances of  late appeals, summary dismissals, and leave to appeal granted. As was shown for  the two-year period under review, between 26 and 42% of member decisions related to these other types of  decisions. In contrast, the legacy tribunals convened a hearing based on  available information; there was limited member time spent on other decisions  prior to the hearing.
Generic client journey  maps were created for both simple and complex appeals to understand the  interaction between the SST and the appellant over the course of the appeals  process. What these journey maps demonstrate is the number of decision types  that the SST performs with limited personal interaction with the appellant  until the hearing. At the very least, the length of time for appeals as  previously presented in Section 4.2.6 creates a perception of complexity for  the appellant.
10.4. What we found and heard
“The SST brand is stained because of the  complexity of the process, the timelines, and a number of other factors; they  need to rebrand or address the complexity and bring the trust back to the  citizens.” – Community Group.
Below are highlights of survey responses  and input from the consultations regarding the complexity of the appeals  process. There is a stark difference of views between appellants and  representatives, and those of Tribunal members.
The majority of appellants (50% of EI and 53% of CPPD)  did not agree with the statement that they understood the decision on their  appeal and the reasons behind it
Relative to available comparators, appellants expressed overall  dissatisfaction with the accessibility and timeliness of information relevant  to their case, the SST website, and other support available
Complexity of the process:
The process was often described  as formal, impersonal, and legalistic, making it intimidating and difficult to  navigate for clients, many of whom are challenged with varying literacy levels  and language barriers, especially for those without representation; appellants  are discouraged from appealing or continuing with appeals due to the complexity  of the process and document submission requirements
The current system appears to  discourage appellants from moving on from the reconsideration phase because it  is too complex and people get discouraged from continuing the appeal. People  get to the point that they become upset, they do not understand why the process  is taking so long or why they are not entitled to the benefits; this disincentivizes  people. The process is overly complex - appeal numbers are down because of  complexity
89 percent of EI and 82% of IS Tribunal members agreed that they can conduct proceedings informally and  quickly, within the considerations of fairness and natural justice.
Communications:
Communication throughout the  process is viewed as too legalistic and not accommodating enough to the lay  person, or persons with literacy and/or language barriers
Stakeholders indicated that the  process and decisions are often not in plain language, may include boilerplate  text, references to precedent, etc., that are not well understood by lay people.  There are too many barriers for claimants who do not speak French or English,  those with literacy issues, and for persons with disabilities, including mental  health needs, for example forms are difficult to understand and complete
There is an assumption that all  appellants have access to computers, phones, and transportation but many do  not, making the methods of communication and forms of hearings inaccessible
Timelines for key steps in the  process, for example time to hearing, are not being well communicated. Application  forms are not as clear as they could be
If form content (language) and  format does not change, a step-by-step guide or Frequently Asked Questions  document should be provided to support applicants or those completing the forms.  Ineffective communication on timelines is viewed as an accessibility issue
Appellants whose appeals were  successful agreed communications were understandable (79% EI, 59% CPPD agreed),  while there was less agreement for those with unsuccessful appeals (34% EI, 27%  CPPD agreed). For AAT, 75% of parties and representatives were satisfied  with information products (website and correspondence); for TAQ, 90% of  appellants agreed correspondence was easy to understand
91 percent of EI and 77% of IS Tribunal members agreed relevant information was readily available to all  parties involved.
Decisions:
The length and lack of clarity  of decisions make it hard for appellants to really understand why their appeal  was either granted or denied, making the process appear not very transparent or  fair
Decisions and forms are not  accessible due to the quality and use of too much legal language in decisions  and documents
While reportedly an improvement  from the previous legacy tribunals, we heard from stakeholders that Service  Canada reconsideration of EI decisions lack adequate explanation or rationale,  in contrast with IS decisions. EI  phone calls help but the level of understanding is still low
The majority of appellants with  appeals granted agreed they understood the reasoning behind the decision (100%  EI, 82% CPPD); survey results for appellants whose appeals were denied  indicated the reverse: only 1% agreed they understood the reasoning behind  their decision, and over 55% of EI and CPPD did not feel that the  decisions explained how the law had been applied.
Representation:
The need for appellant support  was echoed in focus groups, in particular for disadvantaged and vulnerable  groups
There is a view that there are  different outcomes for appellants with and without representation; appellants  should be aware that they are allowed to use a representative throughout the  process; when an appellant does not have a representative, they are not able to  obtain or really understand information about the process itself and the  decisions
Barriers to representation exist  for those who are not lawyers due to the rules of provincial and territorial  law societies intended to prevent the unauthorized practice of law and  provision of what may be seen as legal services.
Case management:
There is no consistency of case  managers or people you are dealing with throughout the process, since there is  no longer a single case manager that is assigned to one case. The 1-800 number  does not provide this, it is very indirect and anonymous. Survey respondents  (appellants and representatives) responded neutrally when asked whether they  agreed that they were able to obtain the information they needed from the SST’s  toll free line.
Timelines:
One year limitation period for  making an application to the General Division is unfair for CPPD claims, it  sets a limitation bar for disabled appellants
Timelines to hear an appeal are  largely delayed, pushing workers into poverty. The process needs to be faster,  including the time to send and receive decisions; the speedier the process, the  more confidence Canadians will have in it
Timelines for the BOR were  considerably shorter than for the GD-EI
The lack of timeliness in the  appeals process has negative consequences on the personal lives of appellants.  Sometimes they become homeless while waiting for a decision from the SST
It takes too long to resolve an  appeal – the service standard to resolve 85% of EI cases within 90 days  of appeal filed (to the GD-EI) is too long for someone to be unemployed, especially  those with low incomes. The delays discourage appellants to defend their right  to benefits because the process costs a lot in time and energy
Appellants and representatives  should be provided with a detailed schedule of timelines at the beginning of  the appeal process. Introducing a case manager or single point of contact to  support appellants would help to effectively communicate timelines.
Community groups and labour associations  are interested in supporting appellants and want to work with the government to  inform Canadians of potential services.
There is an interest across community groups and organizations for  training of community members and advocates who assist appellants through the  appeals processes, either to provide representation or to better explain how to  navigate the process
Community groups and organizations have noted the need for literacy  training or leveraging literacy organizations to better assist and equip  appellants through the process
Websites, including Service Canada and the SST, should publish  contact information of existing and relevant groups and organizations  (community, legal, and labour groups) that are able to provide support and  assistance to appellants
Previous support projects and programs should be brought back to  help people in the community get the assistance and information needed. The  public outreach and sharing of knowledge made people feel better about the  process
While all forms cannot be translated into all languages spoken by  Canadians, contact information could be provided to direct appellants to  community groups and centres that are able to provide support in the language  of their choice
There is interest across community groups and organizations to  develop networks across communities and cities to be able to share information,  tools, and resources to better support appellants.
“Make resources more readily available  for appellants, that is non-profit organizations, community groups. There needs to  be a better way to refer appellants on how and where to get help. If the  process is complex, there needs to be resources available to help”. – Community  Group.
Complexity of the appeals process is part  of a larger story, beginning with initial application for benefits to Service  Canada. While the extent to which complexity under the SST is an extension of  the overall process is not in scope of this review, it is worth noting that in  its 2015 report, the OAG found that applying for the Canada Pension Plan  Disability (CPPD) benefit was a lengthy and complex process, requiring the  completion of many forms in a largely paper-based process: between the 2009 to 2010  and 2014 to 2015 fiscal years, more than a third of CPPD applicants who were  granted the benefit after reconsideration or appeal had waited more than  one year.
Footnote
63
While the Department indicated that they are  already working to address this issue, opportunities to reduce complexity  should take a whole-of-system approach.
11. Efficiency
11.1 Overview
Efficiency is the extent to which the use  of resources is optimized, using the least amount of resources to produce an  output. Something is more efficient if it produces more output for the same  level of input, or if a lower level of input is used to produce the same level  of output.
An efficient tribunal function has  enabling legislative and supporting regulations, and established policies and  processes that contribute to the following outcomes:
Tribunal resources are optimized
Tribunal processes ensure that only appeals with merit are heard
Client participation is balanced with procedures supporting a fact-based  decision
Workflows minimize wait time and delays for transfer of information
Decisions are made in a timely manner
Hearing time and costs are minimized.
The determination of whether tribunal  resources are optimized was based on the number of merit decisions per member  and the cost per merit decision in comparison to the external comparators. The  analysis of the remaining outcomes was drawn from the analysis completed in  previous sections of the report.
On balance the results show that the SST is  not as efficient as the comparators:
Members appear to make fewer decisions annually than most  comparators
Member cost per decision is generally higher than most comparators
Total cost per decision appears consistent or slightly lower than  most comparators supporting the corroborating evidence that the SST provides  less support than comparators
Timelines for GD-EI and AD-IS are largely in line with the  majority of comparators, while those for AD-EI and GD-IS are longer than  comparators.
In comparison to legacy tribunals, the  SST does not present as efficient. Important to remember in this regard however  is that the establishment of the SST shifted what was previously a much more  informal and less structured EI appeals process that operated within ESDC, to  an independent tribunal that is required to follow processes enacted by legislation  (such as summary dismissal and leave to appeal).
The SST has implemented some measures  that contribute to efficiency, for example the workflow enabled by its case  management system (Atrium), and its digital case files are considered leading  practices.
There are opportunities to improve the  efficiency of the Tribunal function, which could both reduce member time and  cost per decision, and reduce the time from appeal to decision.
The remainder of this section includes:
An analysis of key measures compared to external comparators and  legacy tribunals
Other observations related to efficiency
What we heard.
11.2. Findings
Optimization  of Tribunal resources
The analysis of the optimization of Tribunal  resources considered member case loads, timelines, and the unit cost per case  in comparison to the external comparators.
Member caseloads were presented in  Section 7.2. Other than AD-EI, the number of cases per SST member is lower than  most comparators.
SST members were also asked to consider  the proportion of time spent on various tasks. Illustrated in Section 7.2, a  similar assessment was obtained from VRAB. In comparison, SST members allocate  their time in similar proportions as do VRAB members. At the same time, the  overall time for an appeal under the SST is longer than most comparators.
Cost  per case
The cost per case was also compared to  external and legacy tribunals (refer Section 4.2.5). The calculation of total  cost of the SST was based on total costs of the SST (the Tribunal function  consisting of SST leadership and SST members), cost of the services and support  provided by ATSSC, and cost of certain services and support provided from ESDC.  Support and services that the SST receives from ESDC that were not available  and therefore not reflected in part or in whole include: corporate support,  booking and hosting hearings, information management, and information  technology support. The cost per case for comparators was based on available  public reports.
As with the SST, it is expected that the  comparator tribunals may also receive certain services and supports from the  related programs or departments. Notwithstanding these differences, and there  will be some variation to actual from what is reported herein, the results from  the analysis are considered directionally relevant.
Shown below are both the average member  salary cost per decision for the SST, legacy tribunals, and comparators, and  the total cost per decision. Although salary costs are higher for the SST than  VRAB and legacy tribunals, total cost per decision is lower than comparators  for the SST-EI and in line with comparators for IS.
Figure 32 – Member salary cost per case – SST and comparators
Text description for Figure 32
SST and comparator tribunals
Member salary
cost per case
($)
EI    legacy
580
VRAB
comparator
860
EI -    SST*
910
IS -    SST*
1,060
IS    Legacy
1,290
AC
comparator
7,730
AAT
comparator
n/a
*  incl. General and Appeal Divisions
n/a: not available
*SST figures include both the general and appeal  divisions
Figure 33 – Total cost per case – SST and comparators
Text description for Figure 33
SST & comparator    tribunals
Total cost per case
($)
EI legacy
840
EI - SST*
1,910
IS - SST*
2,560
VRAB
comparator
3,250
AAT
comparator
3,510
IS legacy
4,850
AC
comparator
12,270
*SST figures include both the general and appeal  divisions
Other observations on efficiency
Other observations on efficiency are summarized  below and reflect a mix of results in relation to efficiency.
Outcome
Relevant observations
Increased    time available to review appeals with merit
This    review found that summary dismissal and leave to appeal processes designed to    increase the time available to review appeals with merit are at odds with    enabling the SST to conduct its business as informally and as quickly as    warranted by the circumstances.
Results    indicate that the summary dismissal is not providing the value anticipated    when this measure was included in the legislation. Given the low numbers, the    time to process a summary dismissal, and the perceived denial of natural    justice when an appeal is dismissed, the SST’s resources may be better    applied to deciding the case on its merits.
Reduction    in hearing time and travel costs
Under    the legacy systems, members were located often in centres close to    appellants. As the SST conducts a significant portion of hearings through    video conference and by telephone, there is not a significant difference from    legacy tribunals to the SST cost of hearings. The time for hearing, whether    conducted in person or through another mechanism that allows for    participation, was reported to be the same.
Client    participation is balanced with procedures supporting a fact-based decision
SST    generally allows for some form of client participation as noted above; member    time was considered to be the same regardless of hearing format, unless the decision    was made without any client participation.
Decisions    made in a timely manner
As    previously presented, the time of hearing to decision under the SST compares    to VRAB; it was not possible to draw a conclusion on total time in comparison    to other tribunals due to differences in reporting.
Total    duration of SST appeals is significantly higher than legacy tribunals.
Increased    speed and accuracy of workflow
While    members and employees agreed that the Atrium case management system supported    efficient workflow, processes were found to involve considerable back and    forth between members and employees working on files due to division of    responsibilities that could introduce delays into appeals processing. In    addition, the exchange of information for IS cases between ESDC and the SST    are not fully electronic, further contributing to delays.
11.3 What we heard
Although members expressed satisfaction  with having access to the necessary supporting tools, other stakeholders  expressed concerns that the current policies and processes place a much greater  burden on the appellant.
Enhanced support to appellants is needed  so they better understand the appeals process, including the rationale for the  reconsideration decision, and the required information and opportunity to  provide new information to support an appeal.
Conducting hearings on the record or via  telephone or video conference has not directly contributed to increased efficiencies  of the tribunal processes, nor to faster outcomes for appellants.
Stakeholders challenged the limited use  of alternative mechanisms as allowed for in the Regulations to more quickly  resolve appeals, for example alternative dispute resolution.
There were differing views on the value  of summary dismissal, ranging from not applied often enough to its use  considered as a denial of natural justice.
11.3.1. Survey responses
Members and employees were surveyed on  attributes of the Tribunal function related to efficiency and effectiveness.
While members agreed that they were both  effective and efficient, employees did not agree that the function was  efficient.
Members strongly agreed that they were  able to work effectively form home. Opinions were lower in relation to caseload.  While the majority agreed that their caseload was reasonable, approximately 20 % of EI members and 33% of IS members disagreed that their  caseload was reasonable.
Employee responses were neutral to  negative regarding the timelines of processes.
Figure 34 – Employee and member survey results
Text description for Figure 34
Employee and member    survey results
Neutral
Agree
Strongly agree
EI
IS
EI
IS
EI
IS
Member
Employee
Member
Employee
Member
Employee
Member
Employee
Member
Employee
Member
Employee
(average response)
Atrium (the case management system) enables/enabled    me to perform my duties efficiently
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
x
x
n/a
n/a
n/a
I    have/had the appropriate tools and support to carry out my duties
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
x
x
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Cases    are/were assigned to me based on my available capacity
n/a
x
n/a
n/a
x
n/a
x
x
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Cases    are/were assigned to me based on case profile and my experience
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
x
x
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
The    appeals processes are/were efficient
n/a
x
n/a
x
x
n/a
x
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
The    appeals processes minimize/minimized the elapsed time from application to the    time of decision
n/a
x
n/a
x
x
n/a
x
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
12. Client centricity
12.1. Overview
The strategic direction set out in the  ESDC 2017 to 2018 Departmental Plan (the ESDC Plan) is to “design and deliver client-focused,  convenient, and secure services”. Key priorities within this strategic  direction include development of digital tools to support access to services  and information, bundling services across departments, and leveraging  information already provided for related services, ensuring clients have easy  to use, timely, and secure services. The ESDC Plan also emphasizes processes  premised on the results of client engagement and consultation.
ESDC’s strategic direction and plan is  consistent with a continued emphasis and recognition by governments around the  world that in order to improve social outcomes, human and social programs must  be designed and delivered with a focus on the client. A client-focused model  based on leading practices includes the following key elements:
Values and policies promote respect and diversity
Policies and program designs reflect the circumstances and needs of  the client
Service delivery systems meet the diverse needs of the communities they  support
Service delivery systems enable a “tell us once” approach for the  client that is convenient and accessible
Service delivery systems enable collaboration and coordination across  government programs and between government and non-government organizations to  share information and build partnerships
Clients are provided the necessary support to ensure they understand  their rights and responsibilities, and are able to navigate the system and meet  their obligations.
When the SST was announced in Budget  2012, “the Government reaffirmed its commitment to preserve an independent,  objective, client-centered appeals process for administrative decisions.” There  is an opportunity now to orient the SST more towards the client, including  options around consistent case management, client-centered priorities and  performance measures, and providing additional support.
The SST does not incorporate practices  consistent with external comparators that support a client-centric orientation  while still maintaining critical elements of an administrative tribunal.
The following section of the report  provides:
Leading practices identified from the  comparative tribunals in comparison to SST’s policies, practices and delivery  system
Findings regarding what is important to  clients
Operating metrics and survey results  relating to client-centric elements
What we heard from appellants and  representatives.
12.2. Client centricity leading practices
ESDC’s strategic direction and plan is  consistent with a continued emphasis and recognition by governments around the  world that in order to improve social outcomes, human and social programs must  be designed and delivered with a focus on the client.
The appeals system in the context of  social and human service programs must balance the principles of an independent  administrative process to review and adjudicate program decisions with the  values and principles of the program itself.
The external comparator tribunals were  selected purposefully to understand the degree to which other income and social  benefit support tribunals reflect
client-centric
elements. KPMG reviewed the  comparator tribunals’ public reports, websites, value statements, and other  documents such as charters to identify leading examples of client-centric  elements. For each element that follows below, SST’s practices are compared to  the leading practices identified.
Values  and policies promote respect and diversity
Core value statements or other mechanisms  such as a declaration of commitment to citizens set out the values and  principles that guide all actions of the tribunal. These value statements  include statements focused on the client and include respect, inclusion,  courtesy, diversity, and dignity.
For example, the Appeals Commission for  the Worker’s Compensation Board states “We are guided by four values – respect,  fairness, cooperation, excellence – and a Code of Conduct.” The Appeals  Commission defines each value further. For respect the Appeals Commission  states “We respect all people, treating them with honesty and integrity. We  show respect by treating all people the way we would like to be treated. In  doing so, we consider people's thoughts, aspirations and feelings. In our  dealings with people we are truthful, ethical and straightforward.”
The core value statements also reflect  foundational elements of a tribunal and include independence, transparency,  fairness, efficiency, consistency, and quality. The Social Justice Tribunal of Ontario  (which includes the Ontario Social Benefits Tribunal) has four core values of  which one is fairness and independence which states: “SJTO and its tribunals  must be, and be seen to be, impartial and independent in our decision-making  functions. Our decisions will be based on the evidence and the law, and will be  supported by clear, concise and coherent reasons.” As explained by the SJTO,  core value statements “set the foundation for rules and policies, how those  rules and policies will be applied, and how we deliver service to the public.”  Core value statements are important to guide all members and employees to act  consistently against a common values framework.
The SST’s website is silent on its core  values. Its Code of Conduct for Members, largely a technical document that discusses  compliance with legislation and directives, work expectations, decision-making,  protection of personal and confidential information, among others, does include  a statement that members are expected to make every effort to act with dignity, respect, courtesy,  fairness, discretion and impartiality in all aspects of their role as  decision-makers. The SST could do  more to articulate its values from the lens of its clients.
Policies  and program designs reflect the circumstances and needs of the client
Leading practices for policies  and program designs that reflect the circumstances of the client include  accessibility, choice of hearing, and  proportionality.
Accessibility provided by other tribunals includes translation  services, services for the deaf, hearing or speech impairments, interpreters,  access for wheelchairs and other mobility devices, and other supports to ensure  that all clients have equal and consistent access to the appeals system
Appellants have the choice of method of hearing to fit their  circumstances and needs
Resolution processes allow for flexibility such that the process is  proportionate and appropriate to the issues in each case.
The SST provides and funds interpretation  services for persons who cannot communicate effectively in English or French.  The description of the appeals process published on its website does not  include consideration of other supports described above such as for hearing or  mobility impairments. Appellants are asked if they have a preference for the  form of hearing, but the decision rests with the member hearing the case.
Service  delivery systems meet the diverse needs of the communities they support
Community needs are reflected in the  service delivery systems of the comparator tribunals while ensuring the  independence, quality and efficiency of the tribunal decision-making. This  includes the member requirements, appointment of members, location of members  and number of members assigned to a hearing, and location of hearings.
Members are selected based on merit and appointed by the Governor in  Council or equivalent. The total make-up of the membership reflects a range of  knowledge and experience that represents the underlying income, social or  benefit program, as well as some members having a legal background
Members are generally located in major centres
Hearings are generally conducted by at least two members with  different backgrounds reflecting the circumstances of the case
Hearings are held in person. It was also noted that the comparators  all are working to implement greater use of automation, digital access, and to increasingly  shift in-person hearings to alternative methods.
The SST service delivery system differs  from the noted practices in the following ways:
Although recruitment of SST members asks for related income and  benefit experience, the actual membership consists largely of those with legal  backgrounds
Appeals are heard by only one member
There is limited use of in-person hearings.
In contrast to the external comparators  and the SST, the Board of Referees had a tripartite system for both the  selection of members and the make-up of the appeals panels. Under the legacy  system, the Commissioners for Workers and Employers were actively engaged in  the recourse process for EI. They selected and participated in training members  of the Board of Referees; they had full access to the Board of Referees, and  they had access to cost and performance information of the EI recourse process.  Over 1,000 members were located in approximately 80 cities and towns across  Canada.
There is no evidence of external  comparators providing formal structural measures for inclusion of components of  civil society in the appeals system, such as the former tripartite system that  existed under the BOR. That said, both the SST and external comparators  reported member selection processes and stakeholder engagement mechanisms that  are intended to bring relevant expertise and experience to bear on the appeals  process (refer Sections 5.2 and 8).
Service  delivery systems enable a “tell us once” approach for the client that is  convenient and accessible
It has been recognized that the provision  of timely and appropriate benefits for those in need requires a different  approach that enables the client to tell their story once, and that service  providers are working from a single case file. Service delivery systems are  tiered, recognizing that some just require access to the system and can  navigate on their own, whereas others have complex needs and require case  managers to help them navigate the multitude of government programs and arrange  the necessary support.
Similarly, leading practices of the  comparator tribunals includes:
The use of a single case file that originates from the program and  is accessed by the tribunal member for review
The assignment of a single case manager
A range of supports to the client including help to understand the  process, drafting and filing of the client’s appeal, and referrals for  representation which may or may not be available to the client at no cost
The use of plain language.
Service  delivery systems enable collaboration and coordination across government  programs and between government and non-government organizations to share  information and build partnerships
Appellants to the SST are required to  provide all supporting documentation for their appeal, including for instance  the reconsideration decision. A single case file for the individual that  originates with the ESDC and accessed by the SST is not in place, but a new  case file is created. Once created by the SST, a single case file is then  maintained for the appellant.
Supports accessed through the SST are  limited and include access to tools allowing all parties to identify precedent  information to help determine and prepare their appeals as well as the use of  the call centre to help clients navigate the system. The SST’s website uses a  mix of plain and technical language to explain the appeals process and  requirements and what to expect.
Service  delivery systems are strengthened by the participation of stakeholders
Tribunals by their nature must be both in  fact and perception independent of the underlying programs on which they are  making decisions. Notwithstanding, leading practices of the external tribunals  included formal outreach programs to key stakeholders and representatives.
The SST has conducted a number of  sessions with stakeholders for input on changes to legislative reforms, policy,  and process. A formalized strategy and communication of planned engagements  however does not exist.
Support  for clients ensure they understand their rights and responsibilities and meet  their obligations.
Similar to value statements that reflect  respect, leading practices also include expectations of appellants. The AAT for  instance includes a statement of “Your Responsibilities” which outlines what  the tribunal needs of the individual in order to meet its commitments, for example:
Let us know in advance if you need any assistance with language  and/or access to our offices
Take reasonable care for your own (and other’s) health and safety  when at the AAT and cooperate with any reasonable AAT instruction, policy or  procedure
Give us complete and accurate information
Tell us promptly of any changes to your contact details
If you are a department/agency, use your best endeavors to assist  the AAT in making its decision.
The AAT was the only comparator that  included an explicit statement of others’ responsibilities.
12.3. Findings
Through the surveys, a number of  questions explored the importance and degree to which the SST reflects the  elements of a client-centric organization while still balancing the attributes  of an independent tribunal. An analysis was completed of available operational  metrics relating to form of hearing and completion of applications.
The results show there are positive  attributes to the SST that should be recognized. The independence of the  tribunal function was most notably identified as being one of the most  important attributes. Other feedback received through the survey was the high  level of respect for appellants by members, and that the process allowed for some  form of client participation.
Overall however the SST has not  incorporated attributes that reflect a client-centric organization as  demonstrated by the following:
The majority of appellants and representatives did not agree with  the statement that they understood the appeals process or the decision
There is a highpercentage of incomplete submissions received from  appellants which delays the process and suggests a lack of understanding of the  requirements and the need for more support
The SST does not present information in a way that is easy to understand  and navigate
Notwithstanding the general satisfaction with form of hearing, CPPD appellants  expressed a high level of dissatisfaction with the form of hearing
The time to process an EI appeal is simply too long in relation to  the short term nature of the benefit and the vulnerability of the appellant  while waiting for a response.
The above findings are further explained  and supported below.
What’s important
Survey appellants were asked to identify  what was most important: independence of the tribunal, quality decisions,  timely decisions, simplicity of the process, transparency of the process, or  format of the hearings.
The results of the survey by program area  reflect that independence, quality, and timeliness are the most important  factors for all appellants. Of additional interest is the difference in ratings  between CPPD appellants as compared to EI and CPP/OAS reflected below. CPPD  ranked quality of the process higher than independence in comparison.
Figure 35 – Factors identified as most important by appellants
Text description for Figure 35
Most important factors identified by appellants
EI
CPP
CPP/OAS
(%)
Independence of the Tribunal
40
29
45
Quality decisions
25
34
19
Timely decisions
21
17
24
Simplicity of the process
5
11
4
Transparency of the process
8
4
4
Format of hearings
2
5
4
Independence  of the SST
Despite the importance of independence,  when asked to rank the degree to which appellants felt the appeals system was  independent, only 31% of EI appellants and 26% of CPPD appellants  agreed that they believed the SST’s processes were independent of  reconsideration within ESDC.
Timeliness,  understanding and experience
Appellants and representatives were asked  whether they agreed or disagreed with statements relating to timeliness,  understanding of the appeal process, and the statements related to the conduct  of the appeals process.
The results below show that the majority  did not agree that the appeals process is timely, or that they understand the  process and decision. Appellants and representatives agreed that members  listened to them and that they were treated with respect.
Figure 36 – Appellant responses in relation to timeliness, understanding and the appeal process
Text description for Figure 36
Factors related to    SST
Strongly Disagree
Disagree
Neutral
Agree
SST appellant
SST representative
SST appellant
SST representative
SST appellant
SST representative
SST appellant
SST representative
Timeliness (average response)
Overall, my appeal was processed in a timely manner
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
n/a
n/a
n/a
The SST/Tribunal responded to my inquiries in a    timely manner
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
n/a
n/a
Understanding (average response)
I understood the decision issued by the Tribunal and    the reasoning behind the decision
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
n/a
n/a
The decision explained how the law and the rules    were applied to the facts of my case
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
n/a
n/a
Communications (other than the decision) I received    from the SST/Tribunal were understandable
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
n/a
n/a
Appeal (average response)
Overall, I was satisfied with the Tribunal’s appeal    process
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
n/a
n/a
n/a
During the hearing the Tribunal Members (decision    makers) understood my position in the appeal
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
I was given sufficient opportunity to provide the    facts of my case at the Tribunal
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
During    the hearing the Tribunal Members (decision makers) listened to what I had to    say
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
During the hearing the Tribunal Members (decision    makers) were respectful
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
Appellants and representatives were asked  if they were able to obtain the information they needed from the SST. The  responses below indicate that those in all programs largely disagreed or were  at best neutral, with slightly higher responses in CPP/OAS.
Figure 37 – Appellant and representative responses about availability of information
Text description for Figure 37
The Appellants and Representatives of EI, CPPD and CPP/OAS unanimously responded neutral on the following statement:  If I had a question or problem, I was able to obtain the information I needed from the SST.
Members and employees were asked similar  questions regarding responsiveness of the appeals process and participation by  appellants. The results below reflect a significant contrast between the  perspectives of members and those of employees.
Figure 38 – Employee and member perceptions of responsiveness to client needs
Text description for Figure 38
Perceptions of responsiveness to client needs
Neutral
Agree
Strongly agree
EI
IS
EI
IS
EI
IS
Member
Employee
Member
Employee
Member
Employee
Member
Employee
Member
Employee
Member
Employee
(average response)
In my opinion, the    appeals processes are/were responsive to appellant needs
n/a
x
n/a
x
x
n/a
x
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Appellants/representatives seldom complain about the type of hearing    selected to hear their case
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
x
x
n/a
n/a
n/a
Appellants are able to participate in the process in an effective    manner, regardless of the mode of hearing
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
x
x
x
x
n/a
n/a
n/a
Incomplete  applications
Over one-third of applications to the  General Division are incomplete. Often missing is information that the appeals  system should already have if a single case file between the ESDC and the SST  existed. The current application process has put the responsibility for the  provision of all information primarily on the appellant. Further, the process  for the identification and provision of missing information, including basic  information already in the possession of the underlying program areas,  increases the time from application to final decision between 30 and 50 days as  reflected in the figure below.
Figure 39 - Processing time – Delay added by an incomplete application for an appeal
Text description for Figure 39
Tribunal
Delay    added by an incomplete application for an appeal
(# of days)
EI - GD
35.5
EI - AD
37.0
IS - GD
53.0
IS - AD
40.5
In-person  hearings
Although the SST conducts much fewer  hearings in person than external comparators, most hearings still allow for  some form of participation as reflected in the charts below.
Figure 40 – Format of hearings - SST
Text description for Figure 40
Format of hearings - SST
EI
IS
GD
AD
GD
AD
(%)
Appeals concluded without a hearing
15
46
47
68
On the record
1
16
6
24
Teleconference hearings
67
36
20
1
Written Q and A hearings
Nil
Nil
2
Nil
In-person hearings
9
1
11
1
Videoconference hearings
8
1
14
6
Appeals concluded without a hearing  include those that were withdrawn or dismissed before a hearing, or settled due  to an agreement between the appellant and ESDC. This type of resolution was  especially prevalent in the AD-IS and is reflected in the largepercentage of  appeals concluded without a hearing. Overall, when an appeal was heard, of the  three major hearing types, in-person hearings take place less often than video  conference or teleconference hearings. In-person hearings were used in 10%  of cases overall, while video/teleconference was used in 45% of  hearings.
The length of time to complete an appeal  does not strongly depend on the form of hearing. The figure below shows that  there is little variation of the total time elapsed between appeal submission  and decision within each division, whether the hearing was held in person, by video  conference, or by teleconference. Only cases with no hearing are resolved more  quickly.
Figure 41 – Time from complete application to decision by form of hearing
Text description for Figure 41
Format of hearings - SST
EI
IS
GD
AD
GD
AD
(# of days)
Teleconference
153
590
704
189
Videoconference
188
699
705
244
In-person
189
595
716
300
Q and A
131
Nil
650
Nil
No hearing
116
243
424
72
An analysis was also performed of the  appeal outcomes by hearing type. This data was only available for the General  Division and is shown below. The data shows that cases with no hearing have the  lowest success rate, and that in-person hearings generally have higher  acceptance rates.
It should be noted that there were only  an average of five EI appeals involving written Questions and Answers (Q and A)  so the high rate of success for these appeals may not be representative.
Discussions with the SST indicated that  in-person hearings are selected by members for cases where there is more  complexity, more doubt in the mind of the adjudicator, and/or questions of  credibility. These factors may explain in part why this form of hearing is associated  with a greaterpercentage of appeals being allowed as they are more likely to  require the application of judgement. In-person hearings are normally held at  locations closest to addresses provided by appellants, usually at the local  Service Canada office.
Figure 42 – Rate of allowed appeals by hearing type
Text description for Figure 42
Hearing type
GD appeals    allowed
EI
IS
(%)
Teleconference
25
40
Videoconference
37
47
In-person
48
52
Q and A
56
23
No hearing
21
18
Success rates for represented and  unrepresented appellants were also compared. The figure below shows that where  the appellant has been represented, there has been a higher success rate.
Footnote
64
Figure 43 – Rate of allowed appeals by representation
Text description for Figure 43
Tribunal
Represented
Unrepresented
(% of appeals allowed)
GD-EI
44
24
GD-IS
51
27
While the majority of SST cases are  resolved with alternate forms of hearings, survey results do not suggest that  fewer in-person hearings have had an impact on client satisfaction. Results  indicate that as long as the appellant had a forum to be heard, satisfaction  was relatively consistent. Appellants who had no hearing (on-the record) did,  however, show lower satisfaction.
Representative perspectives overall were  not very different from those of appellants, with 57% of those  representing EI appellants and 44% of those representing CPPD appellants  satisfied with form of hearing. Responses from representatives cover the range  of hearings in which they would have participated and therefore are not  available by type of hearing.
Figure 44 – Appellant and representative agreement with the question “I was satisfied with the method in which my appeal was heard”
Text description for Figure 44
Employment    Insurance type of hearing
Level of agreement
In-person
Teleconference
Videoconference
No    hearing
Representatives
%
Strongly    disagree
14
16
17
50
20
Disagree
14
14
17
13
14
Neutral
29
9
Nil
13
9
Agree
43
39
50
13
46
Strongly    agree
Nil
23
17
13
11
Average    on scale of 5 where 5 is strongly agree
3.0
3.4
3.3
2.3
3.1
Number of responses
7
44
6
8
35
CPP/Disability Type of Hearing
Level of    Agreement
In Person
Teleconference
Videoconference
No Hearing
Representatives
%
Strongly    Disagree
40
24
Nil
50
20
Disagree
20
18
non-disponible
25
30
Neutral
10
24
non-disponible
13
n.d.
Agree
20
18
55
13
27
Strongly    Agree
10
18
27
Nil
17
Average    on scale of 5 where 5 is strongly agree
2.4
2.9
4.0
1.9
2.9
Number of    responses
10
17
11
8
30
12.4. What we heard
In addition to the findings reflected  above, the results of the public consultation provide insight into the  experiences of appellants and their representatives in relation to client-centric  elements.
Overall, what we heard reflects that the  current system does not incorporate many of the leading practices of a client-centric  organization:
There is inadequate support to  appellants through the appeals process
There is too much emphasis on  the law and the regulations, versus the tenets of an administrative tribunal,  to the detriment of the population served
An overly bureaucratic approach  to administrative issues, such as completeness of applications and document  sharing with appellants following reconsideration, increases barriers to client  participation
There is a desire for choice in  the format of hearing, balancing accessibility and desire for appellants to  feel heard. Not all appellants want an in-person hearing, and not all are  satisfied with an alternate form of hearing.
These observations are further explained  below.
There is inadequate support to appellants  through the appeals process
With regard to support provided for  appellants, opinions of those consulted included:
The appeals processes are impersonal and intimidating, which are  hard to navigate and often confusing for those without representation
There is a perceived lack of accommodation for languages other than  English and French, and physical and mental health requirements (in other words insufficient available tools and support resources)
Services are geared towards appellants who have access to computers,  phones, and transportation but many do not, making the methods of communication  and forms of hearings inaccessible
There is a view that there are different outcomes for appellants  with and without representation
When an appellant does not have a representative, they are not able  to obtain or really understand information about the process itself and the  decisions. Part of this is due to the legalese of the process, and part due to  the overall state the appellant is in, that is overwhelmed and stressed.
A common challenge raised was not having  a single point of contact for the client through the appeal process; there is a  need for someone who can walk clients through the end-to-end process. The SST’s  current toll free line was felt to be impersonal and less straightforward to  use. In contrast, recent polling by the SST of representatives indicates high  levels of satisfaction with their 1-800 service.
Footnote
65
As satisfaction  perceptions of the toll free line appear to be mixed, it will be important to  identify and recognize the aspects of the service that are effective and  helpful to clients, but also acknowledge there are still likely opportunities  for improvement.
One community group summarized some of  these issues: “Needless complexity of the process undermines accessibility. There  are unnecessary procedural hurdles for those who do not speak or read English  or French fluently, and for persons with disabilities. The system should be  created with the needs of the most vulnerable in mind.”
There is too much emphasis on the law and  the regulations, versus the tenets of an administrative tribunal, to the  detriment of the population served.
There is a perception that the appeals  process is overly procedural and legalistic and does not consider all of what  clients deem is relevant information, such as testimony from family, friends,  and other witnesses.
A need is seen for more flexible  deadlines for clients, but also adherence to schedules and deadlines by the  Tribunal.
Decisions are long and legalistic,  include boilerplate text, and are not in plain language.
In terms of the streamlining that took  place in consolidating the legacy tribunals into the SST, a repeated sentiment  was that “Operations based on economic principles not based on elements of  natural justice.”
Some interviewed felt that judicial  soundness is emphasized over satisfying the client.
Perception was that clients are less  interested in independence of the SST than in a streamlined appeals process.
An overly bureaucratic approach to  administrative issues such as completeness of applications and document sharing  with appellants following reconsideration increases barriers to client  participation.
The SST requires appellants to submit  information that, from a client perspective, “the government” already has, for example  reconsideration decision, Social Insurance Number, business number. This information  was not required for legacy tribunals due to closer integration with ESDC, and  missing information leads to incomplete applications, delays, and frustration,  and creates an additional administrative burden on appellants.
Regulations are too prescriptive and  formal regarding procedural aspects of the appeal, including completeness of  appeals, and have been strictly interpreted – there is no reason the  regulations cannot be interpreted closer to BOR type arrangement.
“Current tribunal follows the letter of  the law”
Challenges were cited in relation to the  ability for the appellant to have access to all relevant documents in advance  of filing their appeals to prepare and understand their case. Some parties felt  that with more information available, fewer applicants would appeal, and those  who did would have higher quality, evidenced-based cases to present.
There is a desire for choice in the  format of hearing, balancing accessibility and desire for appellants to feel  heard. Not all appellants want an in-person hearing, and not all are satisfied  with an alternate form of hearing.
Many stakeholders felt that type of hearing  is a crucial factor to a fair appeal. Right now the format is decided by the SST  and not the appellant. It was felt that in-person hearings should be the  default and that it should be the appellant deciding on the format.
Reasons for the importance of in-person  hearings included assessing credibility, greater transparency between the  appellant and the Tribunal, and better communication both of the facts and of  decisions to appellants.
There were those who felt that leaving  the choice of hearing to the SST interfered with the appellant’s right to be  heard.
13. Conclusion
While the SST’s legislative and  regulatory framework that underpins its processes and operations has  significant differences from the previous tribunals, the “raison d’être”  remains the same: to secure the just, most expeditious and least expensive  determination of appeals and applications, and to conduct proceedings as  informally and quickly as the circumstances and the considerations of fairness  and natural justice permit. There are two levels of appeal for each program, as  before. The basis of appeal – eligibility against established criteria –  remains. The governing principles of providing a fair, credible and accessible  appeals process are unwavering. Economies of scale have been achieved by  consolidating administrative functions of four tribunals to one. According to  survey responses, client satisfaction with the SST is not high but not significantly  lower than under the previous system. Still, legitimate complaints and strong  evidence of added complexity, lengthier timelines, and a more formal, distant,  legalistic Tribunal that is difficult for the lay person to navigate has many  longing for the past and calling for change.
In addition to the factors noted above,  other differences include the shift in the balance of power: from a  three-member tribunal, seen as a “trial by peers” to a single decision-maker  often in a location distant from the appellant and his/her associated work/life  context; a process that is not seen as putting the client first; and the  elimination of tripartism in EI appeals. Combined with the reduction in EI  appeals and the five-fold increase in time to conclude EI appeals, these  factors are at the very least creating a perception of reduced access and  fairness. These changes have masked the positive attributes introduced by the  creation of the SST, most notably independence.
The challenge for this review has been to  understand these perspectives from the various stakeholders - many of which are  deeply embedded - in the context of the available evidence and in comparison to  the previous system, and endeavour to distinguish fact from fiction, reality  from perception, in a manner that can help all share a common understanding of  what is working and what needs to improve, and offer options for a coherent  path forward.
At the same time, multiple sources of  input into this review - from what we know and what we heard - provide the  basis for a reliable assessment to compare the current system to the legacy  tribunals. The legacy appeals system that consisted of four tribunals were  supported by two government agencies - the Commission and ESDC. With the creation  of SST and ATSSC, four government agencies now have various roles in the  appeals system for EI and IS benefits. Each of these four agencies recognize  and are focused on realizing the government’s commitment for “an independent,  objective, client-centered appeals process for administrative decisions through  continued modernization to improve efficiency”   but lack effective coordinating and accountability mechanisms and a  collective ethos focused on the client.
The question, therefore, is less about  which tribunal, past or present, has it “right,” but rather, how to take  concrete measures to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the SST’s  structure and processes, leverage the full flexibilities of its enabling  legislation and regulations, and foster a client-centric culture that places  the client at the heart of the appeals process.
In light of our review, we strongly  encourage the Minister to take the required time to complete the due diligence  necessary to evaluate the recommendations and options provided. These will  require conscious choice and trade-offs across multiple objectives and require  further analysis and assessment to ensure that the changes achieve positive  results for clients in the short, medium, and longer term. Learning from the  past, the development of the go-forward strategy should include engagement with  the stakeholder communities and include a multi-year plan designed to deliver  operational changes in the short term, followed by more fundamental changes,  including changes to legislation and regulations, in the medium to long term.  The plan should be updated annually, accompanied by regular public reporting on  results. Finally, the changes implemented should be designed to achieve desired  outcomes for accessibility, fairness, and transparency, that collectively continue  to improve the SST and the overall benefits system for vulnerable Canadians.
Annex A - Approach and methodology
The following Annex provides information on  KPMG’s approach and underlying methodologies including an overview of the  Evaluation Framework, and the Resource and Financial Model to develop the costs  of the SST. Additional supplementary information is provided on the external  comparators.
Evaluation  framework
KPMG developed the following framework to reflect the multiple dimensions of  the SST review based on the scope and tasks described in the Statement of Work  summarized in Section 1.2.1 of this Report.
Figure 45 - Illustration of the evaluation framework developed and applied for the SST review
Text description for Figure 45
On the right hand, an illustration shows the structure of the Social Security Tribunal, consisting of the Employment Insurance Section and the Income Security Section within the General Division and the Appeal Division.  On the left side, a three-dimensional drawing demonstrates linear cubes of information regarding data collection and analysis:
Interviews, data collection, performance metrics, public consultations
Core SST capabilities:  triage and liaison, operations, tribunal leadership, tribunal functions, advice and support and corporate functions
Adjacent lenses:  tribunal costs, efficiency and effectiveness, client satisfaction, transparency and fairness
Governance and operational elements:  legislative and regulatory, policy, organisational model, operational processes, ATSSC support
Current process, comparison with previous system, comparator analysis and environmental preview
The framework captures all review elements and enabled the  different analytical lenses to be applied to inform the development of  recommendations and options for consideration.
Applying the framework, a comprehensive view of the  current and previous state governance and operating model for the SST was developed.  This included collecting both structured and unstructured data, such as cost  and performance data; information from previous reports; information from the  SST, ESDC, and the ATSSC; and insights and learnings from stakeholder  interviews and consultations. Likewise, similar information for the legacy  tribunals and for the external comparators was collected to the extent information  was readily available.
The results were analyzed using the lenses shown on the  face of the cube above. The analysis lenses and the governance and operational  elements align to the requirements specified in the Statement of Work as presented  in Section 1.2.1.
Analysis lenses
The analysis lenses are described below.
Tribunal costs
Tribunal  costs are the total costs including all direct and indirect costs to deliver  the mandate of the SST. This includes all costs incurred directly by the SST,  as well as indirect costs including administrative and other costs incurred by ESDC  and ATSSC, based on agreed upon criteria (for example Full Time Equivalent (FTE),  volume of transactions, etc.). Further information on the actual cost  categories, in addition to salaries and benefits is included in Section 4.2.5.
Efficiency and  effectiveness
The following definitions from the Treasury Board  Secretariat
Footnote
66
were applied:
Efficiency is the extent to which resources are used such  that a greater level of output is produced with the same level of input, or a  lower level of input is used to produce the same level of output. The level of  input and output could be increased or decreased in quantity, quality or both.
Effectiveness is the extent to which the Tribunal is  achieving expected outcomes.
Client satisfaction
Client satisfaction is defined as the extent to which the  client was satisfied with their experience with the Tribunal. This took into  consideration aspects such as:
Customer service
Complexity of process
Deadlines
Timelines
Forum
Communications
Responsiveness.
Transparency and  fairness
Transparency and fairness considered both structural  fairness and procedural fairness.
Structural fairness evaluates whether there are structural  guarantees of judicial independence, the individual independence of each of the  tribunal's members, and the institutional independence of the tribunal itself.  It includes an assessment of whether there are structural arrangements for  ensuring adjudicative competence, and whether the underlying act and supporting  regulations are fair.
Procedural fairness examines whether the process elements  themselves support fairness outcomes. This includes an examination of whether  trust in the tribunal members has been established, the quality of treatment of  clients, whether procedures are impartial and fact based, and the extent to  which all clients are given the opportunity to participate in and provide input  to the process.
Value  management
KPMG’s proprietary Value Management methodology provided a  formal, disciplined approach to identify and catalogue the ways in which the  SST creates value using logic models. The logic models graphically depicted how  business processes and capabilities gave rise to results, and indicated how  those results contributed to benefits and strategic objectives. The use of  value models provided a formal, disciplined approach to guide the collection of  information and conduct of analysis in order to assess the value contribution  of the SST’s activities to intended outcomes.
Figure 46 – Example  of KPMG’s value management logic model
Text description for Figure 46
This illustration provides for a structural model. Column 1 reads initiative for SST and application; Column 2, capability of receiving application, reviewing application and requesting additional information, with metrics of resources and demand.  Column 3 shows results over single point of contact for submitting an appeal/creation, information availability for appeal review, as well as key performance indicators (KPI).  Column 4 shows benefit for appeals process is accessible and appeal process is efficient, with KPIs.  Column 5 also shows benefit for appeals processing is affordable and Justice is accessible and transparent, with KPI.  Column 6 concludes with a strategy/goal:  Government-wide service excellence.
The use of value models enabled:
The identification of relevant key operating  metrics for comparison to legacy tribunals and different administrative  tribunals
Understanding the relationship of legislative  and policy requirements on core business processes
The comparison of service standards and client  satisfaction between the SST and legacy tribunals
The comparison of volume demand and operational  performance between the SST and legacy tribunals.
Period  of review
The review periods selected to compare the legacy  tribunals costs and operating results to the SST costs and operating results were  fiscal years 2010 to 2011 and 2011 to 2012 and fiscal years 2015 to 2016 and 2016  to 2017 respectively. Results over the respective two year periods were  averaged to calculate average annual results, unless otherwise stated in the Report.
Client  journey maps
KPMG’s Client Journey Mapping methodology was leveraged to  examine the SST’s processes from the appellants’ perspective. This methodology  allowed KPMG to better understand the EI and IS recourse processes and  implications for efficiency, effectiveness, client satisfaction, and fairness  and transparency, across organizational boundaries. Appellant personas and the  respective journey maps were developed to capture and illustrate the experience  throughout the appeals processes.
Resource/financial model
The total  costs as previously defined were allocated to Tribunal capabilities, to the EI  and IS programs and to the divisions within the programs following the model  illustrated below.
Figure 47 –  Illustration of resource and financial model
Text description for Figure 47
The figure is entitled FTEs and Costs (Salary and O&M) and shows a breakdown of:
Resources
Value model/capabilities
Program
Division - Program
between the ATSSC and the SST and their capabilities down to the General and Appeal Divisions for EI and IS. The figure presents the leadership within the SST consisting of the Chair and Vice-Chairs and the tribunal functions within the programs (EI, CPP, CPP/D and OAS).  Next, are the main functions of the ATSSC, under the Executives & Employees, by Fund Center:  tribunal leadership, corporate functions, operations, triage and liaison, advice and support. The functions are displayed according to thepercentage of time they require in the organization’s operations.
The  underlying information was based on the following:
Allocation  to capabilities was based on time use data provided by members and by the ATSSC
Expenditures  by program were provided by the SST
Resources  were allocated to the divisions based on the number of members in each division  – member Full Time Equivalents (FTES) were provided by the SST
Costs  were adjusted for inflation to fiscal year 2016 to 2017 dollars using an  average annual rate of inflation of 1.59%. The average rate was obtained  from the Bank of Canada’s Inflation Calculator for the years 2010 to 2017. The  Calculator uses data from Statistics Canada’s Consumer Price Indexes for  Canada.
A summary  of the results is reflected below.
Footnote
67
Full time employees
The  figures below show the FTE break down between the ATSSC and the SST membership,  and their capabilities as well as between the General and Appeal Divisions for  EI and IS. The leadership within the SST represents the Chair and three  Vice-Chairs, accounting for four FTEs.
Figure 48 -  FTEs by capability (average fiscal year 2015  to 2016 and fiscal year 2016 to 2017) for the SST and ATSSC
Text description for Figure 48
Capability
SST
ATSSC
(average FTEs for fiscal years 2015 to 2016 and 2016 to 2017)
Tribunal    leadership functions
n/a
n/a
Tribunal    functions
74
n/a
Tribunal    leadership functions
n/a
3
Corporate    functions
n/a
27
Operations
n/a
61
Triage    and liaison
n/a
21
Advice    and support
n/a
29
Figure 49 - Total  average FTEs (average fiscal year 2015 to 2016 and fiscal year 2016 to 2017) for  the SST and ATSSC by division
Text description for Figure 49
Division
SST members/chairs
ATSSC employees
Total
(average FTEs for fiscal years 2015 to 2016 and 2016 to 2017)
GD-EI
28.5
41.4
70
AD-EI
2.3
3.3
6
EI average total FTEs
30.8
44.7
76
GD-IS
42.1
85.1
127
AD-IS
5.4
11.1
17
IS average total FTEs
47.5
96.2
144
Full Time Employees legacy
The FTEs for the legacy tribunals were provided by ESDC  and are reflected in the figure below. It should be remembered that the BOR  members were generally part-time.
Figure 50 - Legacy  tribunals – Members/chairs and employee FTEs
Text description for Figure 50
Legacy tribunals
Members/chairs
(headcount)
Employees
(FTEs)
(average)
Board of Referees
976
71
Office of the Umpire
32
14
Total
1,008
85
Office    of the Commissioner of Review Tribunals
276
95
PAB
72
25
Total
348
120
Social Security Tribunal costs
The  annual average cost for the SST adjusted for inflation was $21.2 million based  on fiscal year 2015 to 2016 and fiscal year 2016 to 2017 costs. The break down  by capability is illustrated below. Further details on SST costs are included  in Section 4 of the Report and are based on information provided by the  SST/ATSSC and ESDC.
Figure 51 - Costs  by capability (average FY 2015 to 2016 and FY2016 to 2017) for the SST and  ATSSC – Adjusted for inflation
Text description for Figure 51
Capability
SST
ATSSC
(average costs ($000s) adjusted for inflation)
Fiscal years 2015 to 2016 and 2016 to 2017
Tribunal leadership functions
$759
n/a
Tribunal functions
9,066
n/a
Tribunal leadership functions
n/a
$427
Corporate functions
n/a
3,024
Operations
n/a
3,541
Triage and liaison
n/a
1,261
Advice and support
n/a
3,167
Legacy Tribunal costs
The average annual cost of the four legacy tribunals  combined, adjusted for inflation, was $43.8 million based on fiscal years 2010 to 2011  and 2011 to 2012. The costs of the legacy tribunals are included in Section 4 of the  Report and are based on information provided by ESDC.
Comparator  information and sources
The five  tribunals that formed the basis of the environmental review and used as a basis  for developing common and leading practices presented throughout this Report  are:
Ontario Social Benefits Tribunal
The  Ontario Social Benefits Tribunal (OSB): The Social Benefits Tribunal hears  appeals from people who have either been refused social assistance or who  receive social assistance but disagree with a decision that affects the  assistance they receive. This tribunal provides recourse decisions from the  Ontario Works and Ontario Disability Support programs. The OSB is a portfolio  tribunal of Social Justice Tribunals Ontario (SJTO), a group of 8 adjudicative  tribunals in Ontario
Data  regarding the OSB was sourced from this Tribunal’s
2015 to 2016 annual report
, available as well as the
OSB
.
Administrative Appeals Tribunal, Australia
Administrative  Appeals Tribunal (AAT, Australia): The Administrative Appeals Tribunal is an  independent body established to provide independent review of administrative  decisions made by the Australian Government and some non-government bodies.  Within the AAT, the Social Services and Child Support Division reviews  decisions in relation to social security, family assistance and student  assistance entitlements, child support, and paid parental leave
Data  regarding the AAT was sourced from this Tribunal’s
2015 to 2016 annual report
as well as the AAT.
Appeals Commission for Alberta Workers’ Compensation
Appeals  Commission for Alberta Workers’ Compensation (AC): The Appeals Commission for  Alberta Workers’ Compensation is a quasi-judicial tribunal operating under the  authority of the Workers’ Compensation Act as the final level of appeal for  decisions made by the Workers’ Compensation Board
Data  regarding the AC was sourced from the
Board’s 2015 to 2016 annual report
;
information on member counts
was sourced from the AC’s website;  additional information was sourced from the
AC’s website
and from the
Alberta Workers’ Compensation Board website
as well as cost information from the
Alberta Labour 2015 to 2016 Annual  Report
.
Veterans Review and Appeal Board
Veterans  Review and Appeal Board (VRAB): The Veterans Review and Appeal Board provides  the recourse process for disability benefits decisions made by Veterans Affairs  Canada
Data  regarding VRAB was sourced from
the Board’s 2015 to 2016 annual  report
, their
2015 to 2016 Departmental  Performance Report
,  their
website
, and information provided directly from VRAB,  including interviews with Director of Strategic and Corporate Services and  Director General of VRAB
Tribunal Administratif du Québec
Tribunal  Administratif du Québec (TAQ): The TAQ reviews administrative decisions made  within Quebec, grouped according to categories of social affairs, real estate  affairs, economic affairs as well as territory and environment. The Tribunal  decides on appeals filed by citizens against decisions taken by the Public  Administration
Data regarding the TAQ was sourced from the
Tribunal’s 2015 to 2016 annual  report
and the
Tribunal’s website
.
Tribunal information
Shown below are statistics for each of the comparator  tribunals showing the number of members, appeal volume, timelines, and total  costs.
Statistics of comparator tribunals, including number of members, appeal volume,  timelines, and total costs
Tribunal
Members
Appeals
Average timelines (days)
Costs
OSB
43
13,038
299
Not    available
Manual    count from listing in annual report
Cases    completed, from annual report
Average    processing time, from annual report
AAT
223
38,146
77    days
$133,895,000
From    table in annual report, counting Part-time as 0.5 members
Overall    decisions, from annual report
11    weeks, from annual report
Annual    report (Australian dollars based)
AC
37
998
172
$12,399,000
Manual    count from listing on website
Appeals    concluded, from annual report - 922 initial appeals, 50 reconsiderations and    26 time extensions
Annual    report, 144 from application to hearing, 28 from hearing to decision
Alberta    2015-2016 Labour Annual Report
VRAB
23
3389
56/48    Review/Appeal
$11,002,365
Departmental    Performance Report
Total    decisions, from annual report
Average    based on distribution of appeal times provided in annual report
Departmental    Performance Report 2015-2016
TAQ
93
11,796
694
$36,462,045
From    annual report, counting Part-time as 0.5 members
Annual    report, number of files closed
22.8    months for social affairs section, from annual report
Total    expenditures, from annual report 2015-2016
Timelines  of the SST and comparator  tribunals
The time to  resolve an appeal, or thoughput time, is defined as the time from receipt of an  appeal application until the client receives a decision.  Timelines for the SST in compartison to the  legacy tribunals is provided in Section 4.2.6 of this Report. Timelines between  the external tribunals and the SST were difficult to compare directly due to  differences in the basis for reporting timelines. The information provided  below should be considered directional only.
Figure 52 - Average tribunal throughput times
Text description for Figure 52
Tribunal
SST    duration from appeal filed to hearing
SST    duration from hearing to decision
Comparator    reported duration
(average days throughput times)
Employment Insurance
GD-EI SST
203
24
n/a
AD-EI SST
277
32
n/a
Income Security
GD-IS SST
492
25
n/a
AD-IS SST
100
52
n/a
Total time from appeal to decision
AAT
n/a
n/a
77
AC
n/a
n/a
172
OSB
n/a
n/a
299
TAQ
n/a
n/a
640
Hearing to decision
Appeals VRAB
n/a
n/a
48
Review VRAB
n/a
n/a
56
AAT, AC,  OSB and TAQ reported durations reflecting total time from application to  decision. VRAB appeals begin with the appellant contacting the Bureau of Pension  Advocates and preparing their case with a lawyer. When the case has been  prepared, the lawyer notifies VRAB and schedules a hearing. Times represent the  time between when the hearing was scheduled and when the decision was provided  to the appellant.
Annex  B - Consultations
Internal consultations
KPMG interviewed 34 individuals representing the internal  stakeholders including the CEIC Commissioners for Workers and Employers, the SST  Leadership, ESDC and Service Canada Officials, and the ATSSC.
Executive leadership
Executive leadership interview dates and interviewee names
Interview date
Stakeholders
May    3, 2017
Groen, Cliff – Assistant Deputy Minister, Benefits    Delivery Services, ESDC
May    4, 2017
Robidoux, Benoit – Associate Deputy Minister, ESDC
May    11, 2017
Brazeau, Murielle – Chairperson, SST
Ballagh, Margot – VP, Appeal Division, SST
Lengellé, Fabien - Executive Director, ATSSC
Proulx, Chantal – Senior Counsel, ATSSC
June    9, 2017
Forget, Dominique – Senior Director of Operations,    ATSSC
Lengellé, Fabien - Executive Director, ATSSC
Internal stakeholders
Internal stakeholder interview dates and interviewee names
Interview date
Stakeholders
May    15, 2017
Brown, Steve – Manager, ESDC
May    16, 2017
Andrew, Judith – Commissioner for Employers, CEIC
May    16, 2017
Laliberté, Pierre – Commissioner for Workers, CEIC
May    19, 2017
McCombs, Mark – Senior General Counsel, ESDC
McLean, Carol – Senior Counsel, ESDC
Richard, Annie – Paralegal, ESDC
May    19, 2017
Perlman, Mark – Chief Financial Officer, ESDC
Won, Jason – Director General, Financial    Management and Advisory Services and DCFO, ESDC
Stephens, Clifford – Executive Director, Special    Projects, ESDC
Tanguay, Sylvie – Director, Financial Management    Services, ESDC
May    23, 2017
MacNeil, Isabel – Manager, CPP, ESDC
Saravanamuttoo, Malcolm – Executive Director, CPP,    ESDC
May    29, 2017
McDade, Kathryn – Senior Assistant Deputy Minister,    Income Security and Social Development, ESDC
Johnson, Kris – Director General, CPPD, ESDC
Campbell, Gillian – Director, ESDC
Racine, Marc – Director, ESDC
May    30, 2017
Thompson, Paul – Senior Assistant Deputy Minister,     Skills and Employment Branch, ESDC
Meighan, Ron – Director General, ESDC
Brown, Andrew – Director, ESDC
Underwood, Kristen – Director, ESDC
May    30, 2017
Giguère, Eric – Former Director Appeals, ESDC
June    2, 2017
Mathieu, Michel – General Counsel, ATSSC
Proulx, Chantal – Senior Counsel, ATSSC
June    7, 2017
Ballagh, Margot – VP, Appeal Division, SST
Bellemare,    Dominique – VP, General Division EI, SST
Hazlett Parker, Valerie – VP, General Division IS,    SST
June    13, 2017
Chartrand, Raynald - Second Executive Director, ATSSC    (Retired)
June    14, 2017
Shimbashi, Danica – First Executive Director, ATSSC
July    17, 2017
Pelletier,    Marie-France – Chief Administrator, ATSSC
Lengellé, Fabien - Executive Director, ATSSC
Focus group summary
KPMG facilitated a series of focus groups as part of the  review of the Social Security Tribunal.   A total of six in-person focus groups were conducted across the country  in Halifax, Montreal, Vancouver, Ottawa, and two in Toronto.  A virtual Skype session was also held for  participants in Manitoba and Saskatchewan.
Invitations were sent to 139 stakeholders; a total of 62  stakeholders participated in the focus groups. Participants included  representatives from a broad spectrum of community, legal, and labour  organizations; former members of the Board of Referees; and a few appellants  (invited by their representatives). This diverse range of participants provided  KPMG with the opportunity to hear from stakeholders across Canada involved  throughout the appeals processes before the SST and previous tribunals for both  CPP and EI.
ESDC representatives and the Commissioners for Employers  and for Workers attended the focus groups as observers.
Over the course of each focus group session, participants  took part in engaging dialogue, and identified desired outcomes of the review,  improvement opportunities, and suggestions for change.  Key discussion topics included:
Timeliness
Accessibility and Complexity
Communication and Interaction
Transparency
Focus group discussion highlights
The following reflect the level of engagement with the  focus group sessions, and highlight the reaction to the consultation approach  and opportunity to participate.
Overall, the discussion topics resonated well  with participants from across all focus group sessions and there was valuable  input provided on the need and suggestions for change
Participants viewed the focus groups as a good  opportunity to share views, opinions, and suggestions in an open and safe  environment
A number of participants came prepared with  reports, documents, and data in order to engage in meaningful discussions,  support their points of view, and provide improvement opportunities
Many of such documents were provided to KPMG  either by hand or by email and were reviewed and analyzed
Participants’ interest in the improvement of the  SST was evident across all focus groups.   While a number of participants felt strongly that the current system was  beyond repair, several pain points within the appeals processes were identified  and recommendations for change were proposed
Attendance by ESDC officials and the  two CEIC Commissioners was particularly valuable  and allowed participants to have direct discussion with the leaders and key  stakeholders of the SST
Participants were interested in the other  consultation methods, in particular the survey designed for the appellants and  representatives, as they felt that input and feedback from these stakeholders  were integral to the review.
Focus group location, date, and participants
Halifax  focus group details
Location:
Halifax
Date:
June 16, 2017
Participant organization
Annapolis Valley Labour Council
Appellant
Canadian Labour Congress
Dalhousie Legal Aid Service
Former Board of Referees member
Halifax-Dartmouth & District Labour Council
New Brunswick Federation of Labour (2)
New Brunswick Union    of Public and Private Employees
PEI Council of People with Disabilities (4)
Prince Edward Island Federation of Labour
Retired Occupational Therapist (Previously    Employment Services Manager at Halifax Connections)
Montreal focus group details
Location:
Montreal
Date:
June 27, 2017
Participant organization
Mouvement    Action Chômage Est de Montréal
Fédération    des travailleurs et des travailleuses du Québec (FTQ) (2)
Mouvement    autonome et solidaire des sans-emploi (MASSE) (2)
Centrale    des syndicats démocratiques (2)
Confédération    des syndicats nationaux (CSN) (2)
Conseil    national des chômeurs et chômeuses
Centrale    des syndicats du Québec
Ouellet,    Nadon et Associés
Walk-in    participant - Did not register or provide name and contact details
Vancouver focus group details
Location:
Vancouver
Date:
June 29, 2017
Participant organization
BC    Maritime Employers Association
Community    Legal Assistance Society (2)
Disability    Alliance BC
Former    Board of Referees member and previously a senior official with the Ontario    Ministry of the Attorney General
National    ME/FM Action Network (Myalgic Encephalomyelitis / Chronic Fatigue Syndrome    and Fibromyalgia)
Toronto  focus group details
Location:
Toronto
Date:
July 4, 2017
Participant organization
Appellant    (2)
Canadian    Council on Rehabilitation and Work
Canadian    Labour Congress (CLC)
Canadian    Life and Health Insurance Association Inc.
Former Board of Referees member
Good    Jobs for All Coalition
Income    Security Advocacy Centre (2)
Legal    Aid Clinic Employment Insurance Working Group
Legal    Aid Clinic Employment Insurance Working Group and EIs' Health and Safety    Legal Clinic
Sudbury    Community Legal Clinic
Toronto    East Employment and Immigration Law Services     (TEELS)
Unifor
Unifor    Local 88 and Unifor Ontario EI/CPP Committee
Voices    of Scarborough
Yormak    and Associates
Videoconference focus group details
Location:
Manitoba, Saskatchewan, (Videoconference)
Date:
July 12, 2017
Participant organization
Community    Unemployment Help Center – Regina (2)
Community    Unemployment Help Center - Saskatoon
Community    Unemployment Help Center - Winnipeg
Former    Board of Referees member and Community Unemployment Help Centre – Winnipeg
Manitoba    Federation of Labour – Winnipeg
Manitoba    Teachers’ Federation– Winnipeg
Second  Toronto focus group details
Location:
Toronto
Date:
July 13, 2017
Participant organization
Council    of Canadians with Disabilities
Parkdale    Community Legal Services
Former    CPPD Appellant and current community volunteer
Ottawa  focus group details
Location:
Ottawa
Date:
July 24, 2017
Participant organization
Disability    Claims Advocacy Clinic Inc.
Survey summary
Online consultations were promoted on 14 government  websites, and over 17,680 emails were sent to targeted audiences.  The online surveys, including the online  written submission form, were available from June 28, 2017 to August 8, 2017. In  total 5,967 visits were recorded and 905 responses were received. Of the 905  responses, 886 were included in the analysis
Footnote
68
representing 661 completed surveys, and  225 written comments.
Total survey  responses and written comments received
Total responses
Survey reponses
Written comments
Appellants and representatives
Members
Employees
905
354
245
62
225
The sections that follow provide information on the survey  response demographics. Notepercentages will not always add to 100%, nor  will the population numbers remain constant as respondents may have answered  for more than one role, program, or tribunal, or may not have responded to all  questions. Perspectives shared through written feedback are reflected  throughout the main Report and are not replicated here.
Appellant and representative  survey
The 354 responses from appellants and representatives were  split as follows:
Appellants
248
Representatives
96
Other interested party
10
Total
354
The following charts show the relative distribution of  appellant and representative survey responses by program. The distribution by  program was relatively consistent by appellants and representatives, and  whether they had experience with the SST or the legacy tribunals. Almost half  of all respondents indicated they interacted with the EI appeals process, and  over a third of the respondents indicated they had interacted with CPPD. Less  than 12% interacted with the OAS program.
Footnote
69
Figure 53 – Percentage of survey responses received by role (appellant and Representative),  broken down by Benefit Program
Text description for Figure 53
Benefit Program
Survey responses by role
Appellant
Representative
(%)
Employment Insurance
47
44
Canada Pension Plan
7
10
Canada Pension Plan - Disability
41
34
Old Age Security
5
12
Figure 54 – Percentage of survey responses received by Tribunal (SST and legacy tribunals),  broken down by benefit program
Text description for Figure 54
Benefit Program
Survey responses by tribunal
SST
Legacy tribunal
(%)
Employment Insurance
49
43
Canada Pension Plan
8
11
Canada Pension Plan - Disability
36
38
Old Age Security
7
8
As shown in the chart below, most representatives (81%) were involved in ten or less appeals a year, almost equally split  between one or less appeals and two to ten appeals.
Figure 55 – Percentage of appeals per representative for SST and legacy tribunals
Text description for Figure 55
Number of appeals per representative for SST and    legacy tribunals
%
One or less
43
Two to ten
38
Eleven to twenty
11
More than twenty
8
Number of responses
96
As shown below, the majority of the SST appellant  respondents indicated that they have submitted only one appeal. A slight  majority of legacy appellant respondents indicated they had submitted two to  five appeals. Most of the SST respondents also indicated they had participated  in the appeals process over the fiscal years 2015 to 2016 and 2016 to 2017.
Figure 56 – Percentage of appeals per appellant for all appeals and also broken down by SST  and legacy tribunals
Text description for Figure 56
Number of appeals per appellant
All
SST
Legacy
(%)
One
64
67
42
Two to five
34
31
53
Six to ten
1
1
0
More than ten
1
2
5
Number of    responses
248
180
38
The SST and Legacy appellants that responded to the survey  were from across Canada.
Figure 57 – percentage of SST appellant survey responses broken down by location
Text description for Figure 57
Location
Survey
SST    appellant responses
(%)
British    Columbia
13
Prairies/Territories
18
Ontario
39
Quebec
12
Atlantic
18
Number of responses
180
Figure 58 – Percentage of legacy tribunal survey responses broken down by location
Text description for Figure 58
Legacy appellants location
Survey
Legacy tribunal responses
(%)
British Columbia
10
Prairies/Territories
11
Ontario
45
Quebec
16
Atlantic
18
Number of    responses
38
The following charts summarize the level of education of  the appellants that responded to the survey. The relativepercentages were  similar between the EI and IS and legacy appellants. Further, the majority that  responded to the survey had a minimum high school education.
Figure 59 – Percentage of SST and legacy tribunal appellant survey responses broken down by  level of education
Text description for Figure 59
Level of education
Appellant survey responses
SST EI
SST IS
Legacy
(%)
Grade 8 or less
2
0
3
Some high school (no diploma)
7
8
5
High school diploma or equivalent
18
22
21
College CEGEP or other    non-university
26
42
34
University undergraduate, diploma/ certificate
27
16
21
University post-graduate degree
20
12
16
Number of    responses
91
91
38
The following charts present information regarding  assistance to appellants with the appeals process. Of the EI appeals to the  SST, 78% of appellants were not represented, compared to 57% of  IS appellants. Data was only available in the aggregate for the legacy  tribunals where representation levels were similar to those of SST-IS  appellants.
Figure 60 – Percentage of SST and legacy tribunal survey responses broken down by type of  assistance/representation used throughout the appeal process
Text description for Figure 60
Type of assistance / representation throughout the appeal    process
Appellant survey responses
SST EI
SST IS
Legacy
(%)
Not applicable
4
1
3
From a lawyer
8
20
25
From another professional
4
8
3
From a family member or friend
6
14
14
None, went through by myself
78
57
55
Number of    responses
89
87
36
Member survey
In total 245 members responded to the survey. The  following chart shows that 172 (or 70%) respondents indicated they were appointed  to the Board of Referees, 66 (or 27%) are/were members of the SST, 43  (or 18%) were members of the OCRT, and three (or 1%) were members  of the PAB. Responses were not solicited from members of the Office of Umpire  as contact information was unavailable.   Note that 207 respondents indicated they were/are a member of one  tribunal, 37 indicated two tribunals, and one respondent indicated three  tribunals.
Figure 61 – Number  of member survey responses broken down by Tribunal
Text description for Figure 61
Members by Tribunal
Survey responses
# of respondents
Current
SST
66
Previous tribunal
OCRT
43
PAB
3
BOR
172
OU
0
Number of responses
245
About half of the member respondents have worked for the  SST for three to four years or since the SST began operations, indicative of  stability in member tenure.
Figure 62 – Percentage  of SST member survey responses broken down by tenure
Text description for Figure 62
SST member tenure
Survey responses
SST member
(%)
Less than six months
9
Six months to 1 year
23
1 to 2 years
3
2 to 3 years
15
3 to 4 years
26
Since SST began operations
24
Number of    responses
66
Employee survey
There were 62 participants in the employee survey; of  those 38 participants (or 61%) were employees of the SST/ATSSC and the  remainder employees of a legacy tribunal. With respect to the previous  tribunals, more than half the respondents were employees of the Board of  Referees. In addition 46 of the participants indicated they were employed with only  one of the tribunals, while the remaining 16 participants had been employed by  two or more of the tribunals (either the SST/ATSSC and a legacy tribunal or  more than one legacy tribunal).
Figure 63 – Number of  employee survey responses broken down by Tribunal
Text description for Figure 63
Employees by Tribunal
Survey responses
# of respondents
Current
SST
38
Previous tribunals
OCRT
11
PAB
2
BOR
23
OU
4
Number of responses
62
The following chart shows the percent of SST/ATSSC  employees by the main duties their work support(ed).
Figure 64 – Percentage of SST/ATSSC employee survey responses broken down by main duties
Text description for Figure 64
Main duties of SST / ATSSC
SST / ATSSC employee survey responses
(%)
Tribunal leadership functions
11
Corporate functions
21
Operations
34
Triage and liaison
8
Advice and support
26
Number of    responses
38
All but one of the SST/ATSSC employees who participated in  the survey indicated they are still employed with the SST/ATSSC. Also, 42% of the employees indicated that they have been employed since the SST  began operations indicative of stability of tenure (as shown below).
Figure 65 – Percentage of SST/ATSSC employee survey responses broken down by tenure
Text description for Figure 65
SST /ATSSC Employee tenure
Survey responses
SST /ATSSC employee
(%)
Less than six months
5
Six months to 1 year
8
1 to 2 years
19
2 to 3 years
8
3 to 4 years
18
Since SST began operations
42
Number of    responses
38
While more than 60% of the SST/ATSSC employees  indicated they interact(ed) with Tribunal members and directly with appellants  and/or client representatives, their interactions were at lower rates than  those of employees of the legacy tribunals, consistent with interviews that  reflected a narrower scope of duties for the SST/ATSSC employees.
Figure 66 – Percentage of SST/ATSSC employee survey responses broken down by interaction  with tribunal members and appellants/client representatives for the SST and  legacy tribunals
Text description for Figure 66
Interactions with:
SST/ATSSC employee survey responses
(%)
Yes
No
Number of responses
SST tribunal members
87
13
38
SST appellants or client representatives
63
37
38
Legacy tribunal members
93
8
40
Legacy appellants or client representatives
88
13
40
Annex C - Acronyms
AAT: Administrative  Appeals Tribunal Australia – Social Services and Child Support
AC: Appeals  Commission for Alberta Worker’s Compensation
AD: Appeal  Division
AD-EI: Appeal  Division - Employment Insurance
AD-IS: Appeal  Division - Income Security
ATSSC: Administrative  Tribunals Support Service of Canada
BOR: Board  of Referees
CEIC: Canada  Employment Insurance Commission
CPP: Canada  Pension Plan
CPPD: Canada  Pension Plan Disability
EI: Employment  Insurance
ESDC: Employment  and Social Development Canada
FTE: Full-Time  Equivalent
GD: General  Division
GD-EI: General  Division - Employment Insurance
GD-IS: General  Division - Income Security
HRSDC: Human  Resources and Skills Development Canada (now ESDC)
HUMA: Standing  Committee on Human Resources, Skills and Social Development and the Status of  Persons with Disabilities
IS: Income  Security
MOU: Memorandum  of Understanding
OAS: Old  Age Security
OCRT: Office  of the Commissioner of Review Tribunals
ODSP: Ontario  Disability Support Program
O&M: Operations  and Maintenance Costs
OSB: Ontario  Social Benefits Tribunal
OU: Office  of the Umpire
OW: Ontario  Works
PAB: Pension  Appeals Board
SJTO: Social  Justice Tribunals Ontario
SST: Social  Security Tribunal of Canada
TAQ: Tribunal Administratif du Québec
VRAB: Veterans  Review and Appeal Board
Footnotes
Footnote 1
The Board of Referees (BOR) and the Office of the Umpire (OU) for  Employment Insurance (EI), and the Office of Commissioner of the Review  Tribunals (OCRT) and the Pension Appeals Board (PAB) for Income Security (IS)  benefits
Return to footnote
1
referrer
Footnote 2
Open  and Accountable Government 2015
Return to footnote
2
referrer
Footnote 3
These periods were selected as representing periods of relative  stability for the respective organizations
Return to footnote
3
referrer
Footnote 4
These periods were selected as representing periods of relative  stability for the respective organizations
Return to footnote
4
referrer
Footnote 5
Report of the Standing Committee on Human Resources, Skills and  Social Development and the Status of Persons with Disabilities, Exploring the  Impact of Recent Changes to Employment Insurance and Ways to Improve Access to  the Program, June 2016, p.33
Return to footnote
5
referrer
Footnote 6
Overview: Legislation for the Social Security Tribunal, HRSDC, May  8, 2012
Return to footnote
6
referrer
Footnote 7
A Canadian Social Security Tribunal, Patrice Garant, LL.D, FRSC,  Quebec City, November 30, 2002
Return to footnote
7
referrer
Footnote 8
Open  and Accountable Government 2015
Return to footnote
8
referrer
Footnote 9
Government Response to HUMA Report, Exploring the Impact of Recent  Changes to Employment Insurance and Ways to Improve Access to the Program,  Jean-Yves Duclos, Minister, Families, Children and Social Development
Return to footnote
9
referrer
Footnote 10
Open and Accountable Government, issued by the Privy Council of  Canada, 2015
Return to footnote
10
referrer
Footnote 11
Minister of Families, Children and Social Development Mandate  Letter, 2015
Return to footnote
11
referrer
Footnote 12
HSRDC Overview: Legislation for the Social Security Tribunal May 8,  2012
Return to footnote
12
referrer
Footnote 13
ESDC indicated that there has been an increase of approximately $6 million  expenditure within ESDC to account for the changes in the EI reconsideration  process
Return to footnote
13
referrer
Footnote 14
The decisions to allow or deny benefits being appealed are called  merit decisions. Prior to concluding on the merits of the appeal, a number of  intermediary or procedural decisions are made by Tribunal members before they  review and conclude on the merits of an appeal. These are called interlocutory  decisions
Return to footnote
14
referrer
Footnote 15
Program and Service Delivery Overview, Canada Employment Insurance  Commission (source ESDC)
Return to footnote
15
referrer
Footnote 16
First level of appeals consists of the BOR and OCRT for the legacy  tribunals and the General Division of the SST. Second level consists of OU and  PAB for the legacy tribunals and Appeal Division of the SST
Return to footnote
16
referrer
Footnote 17
Caseload is used as appeal applications were not available for the  IS legacy tribunals. Further only fiscal year 2010 to 2011 caseloads was available  versus the two year annual average
Return to footnote
17
referrer
Footnote 18
The terms cases and appeals are used interchangeably
Return to footnote
18
referrer
Footnote 19
Note that all costs were adjusted for inflation using Bank of Canada  rates and are presented in fiscal year 2016 to 2017 dollars
Return to footnote
19
referrer
Footnote 20
Centrally managed costs (for example severance, leave of absence  benefits, etc.) are excluded as they fall outside the responsibility of both  the SST and legacy tribunals
Return to footnote
20
referrer
Footnote 21
Operating costs represent salaries and benefits of administrative  staff and operations and maintenance costs
Return to footnote
21
referrer
Footnote 22
Most challenged EI issues reported by ESDC under previous  (2012 to 2013) and current (2013 to 2017) system are voluntary leaving, benefit  period not established, availability, misrepresentation – penalty, misconduct  and earnings
Return to footnote
22
referrer
Footnote 23
Based on data provided by the SST
Return to footnote
23
referrer
Footnote 24
A service standard to complete the appeals process was only in  place for the Board of Referees
Return to footnote
24
referrer
Footnote 25
The number of days for the legacy tribunal IS reconsideration  process was not available
Return to footnote
25
referrer
Footnote 26
Reasons to conclude cases without a hearing include withdrawals,  agreements, and late appeals denied
Return to footnote
26
referrer
Footnote 27
Data provided by the SST/ATSSC September 2017
Return to footnote
27
referrer
Footnote 28
SST Survey Data. Totals may not add to 100% due to rounding
Return to footnote
28
referrer
Footnote 29
2003 Auditor General of Canada Report Section 7—Human Resources  Development Canada and the Canada Employment Insurance Commission—Measuring and  Reporting the Performance of the Employment Insurance Income Benefits  Program. This audit examined four components of EI program delivery, including  the processing of appeals, and found that timeliness targets for appeals were  not met, nor was there consistent quality review of Board of Referees appeals  across the regions
Return to footnote
29
referrer
Footnote 30
The SST will be reporting on the service standards beginning with  its 2016 to 2017 Achievements Report
Return to footnote
30
referrer
Footnote 31
Based on interviews and discussions with the SST up to and  including August 18, 2017
Return to footnote
31
referrer
Footnote 32
Composite of interviews, written submissions and focus groups
Return to footnote
32
referrer
Footnote 33
The rate of overturned decisions at the reconsideration stage is 36%  for EI and 39%  for IS in FY2016 to 2017
Return to footnote
33
referrer
Footnote 34
A Canadian Social Security Tribunal, Patrice Garant, LL.D, FRSC,  Quebec City, 30 November 2002 defined de novo as a first external challenge  before a tribunal where any manner or method of proof is admitted even if the  tribunal is seized of a preconstituted file
Return to footnote
34
referrer
Footnote 35
Under the DESD Act, grounds for appeal to the Appeal Division  restrict the ability of the AD to consider new information; therefore, if the  appellant raises new information in the application for leave, the AD returns  the case to the General Division which can consider the new information. This  step adds time and complexity to resolve the appeal, and can be confusing for  the appellant, even more so if the General Division still denies the appeal,  leading on occasion to “an endless loop”
Return to footnote
35
referrer
Footnote 36
To note, in fiscal year 2016 to 2017, there were 16 AD-EI appeals to the  Federal Court and 27 AD-IS appeals to the Federal Court.
Return to footnote
36
referrer
Footnote 37
Information is included in Annex A  however should be considered directional only
Return to footnote
37
referrer
Footnote 38
SST service standard established for EI appeals filed at the  General Division, September 1, 2015, SST website
Return to footnote
38
referrer
Footnote 39
The SST’s Achievements Report 2016-2017 stated that this service  standard was met 12% of the time for that year
Return to footnote
39
referrer
Footnote 40
ESDC officials state its case file and position on the appeal is  prepared to stand on its own before the General Division, and their  participation at the hearing could be intimidating for appellants
Return to footnote
40
referrer
Footnote 41
Forum Social Security Tribunal (the Tribunal) / Employment and  Social Development Canada (ESDC) Terms of Reference, document provided by ESDC
Return to footnote
41
referrer
Footnote 42
MOU  between the Attorney General of Ontario and the Executive Chair of Social  Justice Tribunals Ontario, 2017
Return to footnote
42
referrer
Footnote 43
Ocean Port Hotel Ltd. v British Columbia (General Manager, Liquor  Control and Licensing Branch), 2001 SCC 52, [2001] 2 SCR 781 at para 24
Return to footnote
43
referrer
Footnote 44
Member caseload is explained in Section 4.2.4
Return to footnote
44
referrer
Footnote 45
Decisions related to group appeal have been counted as one decision
Return to footnote
45
referrer
Footnote 46
Stakeholder Involvement in Decision Making: A Short Guide to  Issues, Approaches and Resources, OECD 2015
Return to footnote
46
referrer
Footnote 47
A Canadian Social Security Tribunal, Patrice Garant, LL.B, FCRA,  Quebec City, November 2002
Return to footnote
47
referrer
Footnote 48
The Seventy-Five Year Decline, How Government Expropriated Employment Insurance from Canadian Workers  and Employers and Why This Matters, Donna Wood, June 15, 2017
Return to footnote
48
referrer
Footnote 49
Minister of Families, Children and Social Development Mandate  Letter, 2015
Return to footnote
49
referrer
Footnote 50
Adapted from Stakeholder Involvement in Decision Making: A Short  Guide to Issues, Approaches and Resources, OECD 2015
Return to footnote
50
referrer
Footnote 51
Open and Accountable Government, issued by the Privy Council  Office, Canada, 2015
Return to footnote
51
referrer
Footnote 52
Government of BC, Tribunal appointment guidelines, May 2007
Return to footnote
52
referrer
Footnote 53
Independence,  Accountability and Human Rights
, Lorne Sossin, Dean Osgood Law School
Return to footnote
53
referrer
Footnote 54
The SST Achievements Report 2016-2017 was published late September  2017 after completion of our analysis
Return to footnote
54
referrer
Footnote 55
See
MOU  between the Attorney General of Ontario and the Executive Chair of the Social  Justice Tribunals Ontario
. VRAB reported an MOU with VAC; however, it is  not available online
Return to footnote
55
referrer
Footnote 56
Government response to HUMA report
Return to footnote
56
referrer
Footnote 57
Legislative versus quasi-judicial decisions
, Iowa, 2010
Return to footnote
57
referrer
Footnote 58
Open and Accountable Government, Government of Canada 2015
Return to footnote
58
referrer
Footnote 59
Practice Essentials for Administrative Tribunals, Saskatchewan  Ministry of Justice and Attorney General
Return to footnote
59
referrer
Footnote 60
Government response to HUMA report
Return to footnote
60
referrer
Footnote 61
New Appeal Applications Analysis, SST, May 2017
Return to footnote
61
referrer
Footnote 62
Eachpercentage in the chart is a stand-alone metric out of  100%.  For example, 72% of  IS-applications are missing the reconsideration decision.percentages should  not intended to be summed or added together
Return to footnote
62
referrer
Footnote 63
Report 6—Canada Pension Plan Disability Program, 2015 Fall Report of the OAG
Return to footnote
63
referrer
Footnote 64
The SST indicated that while it appears to show that the outcome is  biased towards those with representation, it was felt that representatives  would be more likely to counsel a client without a viable case not to pursue an  appeal, and therefore the average case with representation would be expected to  be stronger than those that are unrepresented
Return to footnote
64
referrer
Footnote 65
Social Security Tribunal of Canada Representatives Satisfaction  Study Final Report, Quorus Consulting Group, February 2017
Return to footnote
65
referrer
Footnote 66
Source:
TBS  Policy on Evaluation
(April 2009)
Return to footnote
66
referrer
Footnote 67
Totals may differ slightly for both FTEs and costs reflected in the detailed graphs as a result of differences due to rounding
Return to footnote
67
referrer
Footnote 68
Of the 905 responses, 19 did not address any of the topics of the study and were therefore not included in the analysis
Return to footnote
68
referrer
Footnote 69
The response rate between CPPD and the other IS programs (CPP and OAS) is consistent with the higher rate of appeals for CPPD
Return to footnote
69
referrer
Page details
Report a problem on this page
Date modified:
2022-04-19