Evaluation of Pathways to Education, final report
On this page
Executive summary
Management response
1. Introduction
1.1. Pathways: program objectives
1.2. Pathways funding
2. Evaluation strategy
2.1. Evaluation scope, methodology, and limitations
3. Findings: relevance, effectiveness, and efficiency
3.1. Relevance
3.2. Outcomes
3.3. Impacts
3.4. Costs and benefits
4. Lessons learned and conclusions
4.1. Lessons learned
4.2. Conclusion
Appendix A: Pathways logic model
Appendix B: net social cost-benefit analysis
Appendix C: lifetime earnings assumptions for the net social cost-benefit analysis
Alternate formats
Evaluation of Pathways to Education, final report
[
PDF
- 1.4
KB
]
Large print, braille,
MP3
(audio), e-text and
DAISY
formats are available on demand by
ordering online
or calling 1 800 O-Canada (1-800-622-6232). If you use a teletypewriter (
TTY
), call 1-800-926-9105.
Executive summary
This report presents the findings and  conclusions of Pathways to Education Canada, in accordance with the Financial  Administration
Act
and Treasury  Board's Policy on Results requirements.
The program
Pathways to Education is a charitable  organization that provides after-school programming to help at-risk youth in  low-income communities graduate from high school and successfully transition  into post-secondary education or training. Currently there are 20 sites  providing services to over 5,000 students across Canada. Pathways to Education  collaborates in partnership with governments, community partners, schools,  school boards and hundreds of diverse volunteers to break the cycle of poverty  through education and by enabling strategic, long-term social change.
Pathways to Education funding comes  from various sources, including a named grant of $31 million to Pathways to  Education between 2014 to 2015 and 2017 to 2018 from Employment and Social  Development Canada.
Findings
The evaluation found that:
Pathways to  Education programming addresses a demonstrable need by providing support to  disadvantaged youth to complete their education, transition to a successful  future and better reach their potential.
Pathways to  Education contributed to increased enrollment to post-secondary education among  participants.
Adapted  programming in Winnipeg positively affected Indigenous youth.
Pathways to  Education had a direct positive effect on high school graduation rates, enrollment  to post-secondary education and educational attainment.
The program  also positively affected eligible participant's labour market outcomes.
Moreover, the evaluation determined  that Pathways to Education programming has a net positive social return on  investment. Using the incremental impacts for Pathways-eligible students from  1 location (Regent Park) over a comparable population of students at  locations not served by Pathways to Education programming as a proxy, the total net social benefit (to both individual  participants and to governments) of an intervention for a single student  represented a return on investment of approximately 50% over 25 years.  Based on this analysis, an investment in the program “breaks even” (where the  benefits equal the costs) after 22.5 years from a government perspective and  after 20.8 years from a total social net benefit perspective.
Lessons learned and conclusions
The evaluation derived 3 key  lessons learned applicable not just to the Pathways to Education program, but  also other similar programming:
Targeted early  interventions positively affect vulnerable populations.
A key component  of the success of the Pathways to Education model is the flexibility to adapt  to local needs and conditions.
Early  interventions with vulnerable populations can generate long-term net benefits  not just for individuals but also for governments.
As such, the evaluation determined that  programming of this nature—designed to support early interventions to help  vulnerable youth complete high school—has a valuable role to play.
Management response
Every year too many young Canadians drop out  of high school because they lack access to the basic supports needed to succeed  in school. Youth who drop-out of school are more likely to hold low-paying  precarious jobs as the number of jobs requiring post-secondary education is  increasing and those with limited education face greater risk of unemployment.
In addition to helping make post-secondary  education more affordable for students from low- and middle-income families  through savings incentives, grants and loans, Employment and Social Development  Canada has invested nearly $55 million in Pathways to Education Canada  (Pathways) since 2010. Pathways is a community-based not-for-profit  organization that provides youth in low-income communities a suite of  after-school programming, including tutoring, mentoring, and financial  incentives to help them complete high school and transition to post-secondary  education. Budget 2017 committed to renew the Government's support for Pathways  to Education Canada by providing $38 million over 4 years, starting in 2018  to 2019.
An evaluation was recently conducted by the Strategic and Service Policy  Branch's Evaluation Directorate in order to assess whether Pathways was  achieving the intended outcomes of improving rates of high school graduation  and increasing successful transitions to post-secondary education and the  labour market. The Learning Branch is pleased with the conclusions of this  evaluation report, which reinforces the importance of the Government of Canada's  investment in Pathways. The report confirmed that Pathways to Education Canada  responds to the needs of underrepresented learners and generates desired  outcomes.
Learning Branch's response to key findings and lessons learned from the  report are included below.
Finding 1: Overall,  Pathways programming is contributing to a demonstrable need by providing  support to disadvantaged youth in order to complete their education, transition  to a successful future and better their potential
Learning Branch is pleased that Pathways' work to address the  educational barriers that disadvantaged youth are facing was recognized in the  evaluation. Their model, which is based on various types of supports (i.e.,  academic, social, financial and one-on-one mentoring), contributes to a more  equitable participation of Canadians in post-secondary education.
Finding 2: Pathways  programming contributed to increased enrollment to post-secondary  education
Learning Branch is pleased that Pathways' impact on enrollment to post-secondary  education is highlighted by this report. Given an on-time high school  graduation rate of 79%, and a cumulative rate (since the launch of the  program) of 73% of Pathways graduates successfully transitioning to post-secondary  education, it can be inferred that the overall post-secondary education participation  rate for Pathways participants is approximately 58%. By way of  comparison, a recent report by Statistics Canada indicates that approximately  47% of 19 year olds in the lowest income quintile and approximately 57% of 19 year olds in the second-lowest income quintile participated in post-secondary  education in 2015.
Footnote
1
Finding 3: Adapted  programming in Winnipeg positively affected Indigenous youth
Learning Branch agrees with this finding and recognizes the importance  of offering culturally adapted programming to Indigenous students. Other  Pathways' sites that also serve large proportions of Indigenous youth have been  able to tailor their program as well, for example offering to middle school  students to meet the needs of the community (e.g., Mashteuiatsh, Quebec).
Finding 4: Pathways  positively affected high school graduation rates
Learning Branch recognizes the positive impact of Pathways on high  school graduation rates. This success was demonstrated through the tracking of  on-time graduation rates before and after the introduction of Pathways in the  community. The introduction of the Pathways program has correlated with a  significant change in graduation in some communities post-Pathways (e.g. in  Kingston, Ontario, the rate of on-time graduation increased from 40%  before the program was introduced to 79% for the 2015 to 2016 school  year
Footnote
2
). In fact, an average of 79% of all Pathways'  participants complete high school on time.
Finding 5: Pathways had a  positive effect on enrollment to post-secondary education and  educational attainment
Learning Branch is pleased with the findings of the evaluation which  used research commissioned by the Learning Branch to demonstrate Pathways'  impact on educational attainment in Regent Park. Since the study that was  originally conducted by Drs. Lavecchia and Oreopoulos, more time has passed and  additional data is available making it timely to confirm the positive impact of  Pathways on participants go beyond its initial site in Regent Park. As such, Learning  Branch plans to commission additional research that would examine the impact of  Pathways at 2 of its expansion sites in Toronto (Rexdale and Lawrence  Heights). This research would also explore the data feasibility of the impact  of Pathways on social outcomes such as reducing health inequality and crime as  well as examining the feasibility of studying expansion sites outside of  Toronto. The Rexdale and Lawrence Heights sites were selected because the  maturity of their program would allow for a better longitudinal view of  outcomes of Pathways participants. Having both opened in 2007, the first cohort  of students from these sites would now be approximately 24 years old.
Finding 6: Pathways  positively affected labour market outcomes
As noted in finding #5, a small sample was used to consider Pathways'  impacts on labour market outcomes. However, given that the first expansion  sites (Lawrence Heights and Rexdale) are now at an appropriate age of  maturation, Learning Branch plans to pursue additional research to examine  other sites to broaden the sample size and expand on research available on Pathways'  impact on labour market outcomes for students.
Lesson learned 1: Targeted early interventions can  positively affect vulnerable populations
Learning Branch welcomes the first lesson learned through the  evaluation. Early interventions have proven to be a successful means to  increase academic success and improve labour market outcomes for  underrepresented populations. While the Pathways model has proven to be  particularly effective, the organization continues to be very intentional in  its growth. Their model requires extensive community engagement and takes an average  of 2 to 3 years to open a new site. With 20 sites currently in operation,  mostly in larger urban areas, both Learning Branch and the organization  recognize that there are still many communities that could benefit from  Pathways-like supports. In order to increase capacity, Employment and Social  Development Canada will explore with Pathways and other organizations ways to  address this gap and provide similar opportunities to underrepresented youth  who do not have access to Pathways' programming including youth in rural,  remote, and Indigenous communities.
Lesson learned 2: A  key component of the success of the Pathways model is the flexibility to adapt  to local needs and conditions
Learning Branch agrees with this finding. The flexibility and  decentralized nature of the Pathways model is critical to allowing the program  to be easily adapted to account for regional diversity and provide culturally  relevant content for students. Most importantly, the Pathways model is student centered  focusing on students' needs and is delivered by local, trusted community  partners.
Lesson learned 3: Early interventions with vulnerable  populations can generate long-term benefits not just for individuals but  also for governments
As the evaluation found and consistent with research produced by Drs.  Levecchia, Oreopoulos and Brown, it is clear that early learning interventions  with underrepresented populations can generate long-term benefits at both the  individual and societal levels. Additional research including validation of the  results of the aforementioned study by expanding the sample to additional sites  in Lawrence Heights and Rexdale and studying additional factors by including  crime and health data, will further enhance our understanding of the long-term  benefits of Pathways.
1. Introduction
This report presents the findings and  conclusions of the 2018 Evaluation of Pathways to Education Canada (Pathways).  Pathways is a charitable organization that works with at-risk youth to improve  their educational outcomes. Employment and Social Development Canada (the  Department) provides funding to Pathways for after-school programming through a  named grant.
In accordance with the Financial  Administration Act and Treasury Board's Policy on Results, the Department is  required to evaluate Pathways by March 31, 2019. The evaluation examines issues  of relevance and performance, including:
The  extent to which it assisted Pathways-eligible students to improve their high  school graduation rates
Increased  the number of Pathways-eligible students entering post-secondary education
Whether  participating in Pathways improved labour market outcomes
This report contains the following:
A  description of Pathways, including their mandate, objectives, components and  resources (Section 2)
Evaluation  strategy, including the scope, methodology and limitations (Section 3)
Key  findings (Section 4), including outcomes, impacts and a cost/benefit analysis;  and,
Conclusions  and lesson learned (Section 5)
The report appendices include the logic  model (Appendix A) and the net social cost-benefit analysis (Appendix B) and an  explanation of the earnings assumptions made to support the net social  cost-benefit analysis (Appendix C).
1.1 Pathways: program objectives
Program description
Pathways is a charitable  organization founded in 2001 that provides comprehensive after-school  programming to help at-risk youth in low-income communities graduate from high  school and successfully transition into post-secondary education or training.
Figure 1: Pathways components
Figure 1: Pathways components – Text version
Pathways  consists of 3 elements:
Tutoring
,
Mentoring sessions
, and
Financial support
.  Combined, these 3 components lead  directly to
Improved Likelihood of  Graduating High School
, which flows, into
Improved access to post-secondary education
.
Pathways collaborates in  partnership with governments, community partners, schools, school boards, and  hundreds of diverse volunteers. Working with these partners, Pathways aims to help “break  the cycle of poverty through education and enable strategic, long-term social  change” (retrieved from
Pathways
).
It operates within the  community alongside the school system and provides after-school tutoring,  mentoring, and financial assistance to address the barriers that can stand in  the way of education.
Each student benefits  from a personal relationship with their Student/Parent Support Worker who  motivates and guides students and their families, and ensures students'  accountability to the contract they sign as a condition of participation in the  Program.
Pathways has a policy of  equality, inclusion, and accessibility, and is available to all students of  high school age within the communities served by Pathways. With average sign-up  rates of more than 80%, Pathways to Education is a collective  community-based movement for education.
Pathways has the following objectives:
Reduce  poverty and its effects by lowering the high school dropout rate and increasing  access to post-secondary education among disadvantaged youth in Canada
Help  youth from disadvantaged communities set higher aspirations for their future
Ensure  that a greater number of youth can fully benefit from Pathways by expanding  direct supports to participants and by expanding the organization's capacity to  deliver more services to more participants countrywide
Expected results of the funding  agreement include:
Improved  high school graduation rates and labour market outcomes for youth at-risk of  leaving high school before completion
Expand  its supports to reach more students in more areas of the country.
Expand  employability programming for participants
Develop  a sustainability plan that will support knowledge transfer and sustainable reach
Program sites
As of 2017, Pathways is located in  Ontario, Quebec, Nova Scotia, Manitoba, and British Columbia with sites in 20  communities serving over 5,000 students. Programming in Alberta, Saskatchewan and  New Brunswick are expected to be accepting students soon.
Figure 2: Program site map
Source:
Pathways to Education 2017 Results Summary
.
Figure 2: Program site map – Text version
The image depicts Pathways locations across Canada, the year  of establishment, and the number of students as of 2015 to 2016.
Pathways to Education locations
Year established
Number of students
Halifax, Nova Scotia
2010
269
Saint John, New Brunswick
Opening soon
0
6 locations within the province of Quebec
2007 to 2014
984
8 locations within the province of Ontario
2001 to 2010
3,810
Winnipeg, Manitoba
2010
321
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan
Opening soon
0
Edmonton, Alberta
Opening soon
0
Vancouver, British    Columbia
2017
103
1.2 Pathways funding
As a registered charitable  organization, Pathways has developed many formal and informal partnerships  across Canada with local governments, private sector groups and other  not-for-profit organizations to deliver their programming. Its funding comes  from various sources, including the Government of Canada, provincial  governments, charitable foundations and private companies
Footnote
3
. The  Department provides annual funding to Pathways through a named grant. Between  2014 to 2015 and 2017 to 2018, the Department provided $31 million to Pathways.
Table 1 : Total grant funding from the department
Fiscal year / source
2014-2015
2015-2016
2016-2017
2017-2018
Total
Budget 2013
$6.0M
$6.0M
$6.0M
$6.0M
$24M
Budget 2015
-
-
$3.5M
$3.5M
$7M
Total
$6.0M
$6.0M
$9.5M
$9.5M
$31M
2. Evaluation strategy
2.1 Evaluation scope, methodology, and limitations
This evaluation examines the extent to  which Pathways is relevant, achieved its outcomes, and the impact it had on its  eligible students. The Department synthesized 3 reports described below to  address the evaluation reporting requirements of the Financial Administration  Act and the Policy on Results.
The evaluation  of the Pathways to Education program: In 2016 to 2017, Pathways externally  contracted this evaluation as stipulated under its agreement with the  Department. The report focused on general evaluation issues, program effects  and the design and delivery of the program. This line of evidence applied a  methodology that compared outcomes between Pathways-eligible students  (treatment group) to on-eligible students (comparison group)
Footnote
4
and generated qualitative data from key  informant interviews, focus groups and 3 surveys
Footnote
5
.
The long-term impacts  of the Pathways to Education program: This is an academic study
Footnote
6
prepared  by Adam M. Lavecchia, Philip Oreopoulos and Robert Brown for the Department in  2018. It examined the incremental impacts of the program covering the period  between 1999 and 2013. It compared the outcomes of all adolescents from Regent  Park that were eligible for the program with the outcomes of adolescents from  other Toronto public housing sites, both before and after the introduction of  Pathways. A regression analysis was also used to estimate the impacts on  earnings and employment
Footnote
7
.
The returns to completing high school Education: This  Department-generated line of evidence literature review focused on the  economics of completing high school education as well as individual and  societal benefits. It reported on the frequency of not completing high school  in Canada; labour market benefits from completing high school; and the benefits  of completing post-secondary education.
3. Findings: relevance, effectiveness, and efficiency
The results presented in this section  include an assessment of a demonstrable need for the program (relevance); the  effectiveness of Pathways (outcomes); the impact Pathways has had on the eligible  students (program attribution); and, the overall costs and benefits of the  program.
The results of the analyses, detailed  below, confirm that Pathways is making a difference in the lives of the eligible  students. Eligible students' graduation rates are higher and they have  increased their post-secondary enrollment. They have increased their labour  market attachment. The analysis also demonstrates that Pathways' benefits  outweigh the costs.
3.1 Relevance
Relevance  is the extent to which a program, policy or other entity addresses and is  responsive to a demonstrable need.
In 2015, approximately 1 out of every 8 Canadians (or about 12%) lived in poverty according to
Opportunity  for All - Canada's First Poverty Reduction Strategy
(2018).
Overall, Pathways programming is contributing  to a demonstrable need by providing support to disadvantaged youth in order to  complete their education, transition to a successful future and better reach  their potential
Footnote
8
. The  discussion that follows describes the challenges facing children living in  poverty and the consequences specifically associated with not completing high  school.
Participant profile
Gender:
Pathways participants at the  Ontario sites were equally divided between men and women, whereas the Halifax,  Verdun and Winnipeg sites had more female than male participants.
Age:
Generally, when entering Pathways,  participants are in grade 9 and approximately 14 years old at the Ontario  sites. The average age of Pathways participants in Halifax and Winnipeg was 14  years old and was 12 years old in Verdun.
Language:
About one-third of the  Ontario site participants were born outside of Canada and 39% of the  participants first spoke a language other than English or French. Over 30% of participants in Verdun first spoke a language other than English or  French and the Halifax site reported less than one-tenth of participants first  spoke a language other than French or English.
Source: Goss Gilroy  Inc. (2017). Evaluation of the Pathways to Education Program. Ottawa.
In 2013, more than 15% of  Canadian children overall, and as high as 40% among Indigenous children,  lived in poverty. According to the Goss Gilroy evaluation report, children living  in poverty are at high risk of developing health issues, developmental delays  and behaviour disorders and are more likely to have lower levels of education  and remain in poverty as adults. This group is also most likely to experience,  among other things, interrupted school attendance, lower university attendance,  increased risk of illiteracy, and higher dropout rates
Footnote
9
.
While a minority of the total  population, a significant portion of the population fails to complete secondary  school. For example, in 2011 to 2012, Canada's dropout rate was 7.8%  nationally with the dropout rates for men being higher (9.7%) than for  women (5.9%)
Footnote
10
.  Moreover, the Literature Review also suggested that Canadian youth at risk of  dropping out of high school are among the most vulnerable in our society.  Figure 3 illustrates the potential consequences of dropping out of high school
Footnote
11
.
Figure 3: Potential consequences of dropping out of high school
Figure 3: Potential consequences of dropping out of high school – Text version
Dropping out of high  school potentially leads to
Increased  incidence of marital instability
;
Reduced  lifetime earnings
and
Increased  unemployment
. It also potentially leads to
Early childbearing, Delinquency
and
Substance abuse
. As well, dropping out of high school could lead to  a
Reduced quality of life
,
Poor health
,
Crime
, and
Economic  dependency
.
As well, youth who drop out of high  school experience lower wage level increases than those who completed high  school, report lower wage satisfaction, and were less likely to be employed by  age 24
Footnote
12
. For  example, the present value of lifetime earnings is $129,000 higher for men and  $104,000 higher for women with a high school diploma, relative to high school  dropouts
Footnote
13
.
These factors all suggest a continuing relevance for programs and policies designed to help vulnerable youth complete secondary school.
3.2 Outcomes
An outcome,  under the 2016 Policy on Results, is a change or consequence attributable to  outputs or to which outputs or other outcomes of the program contribute.
This section focuses on the program's outcomes with respect to  increasing the number of participants entering post-secondary education and  helping Indigenous youth. The evidence presented below suggests that Pathways  is achieving these outcomes.
Pathways programming  contributed to increased enrollment to post-secondary education
Pathways helped eligible students apply for, be accepted to and enroll  in post-secondary institutions. The  majority of alumni survey respondents
Footnote
14
and  surveyed staff members
Footnote
15
agreed  that Pathways programming helped eligible students apply for post-secondary  education.
Across the 6 Ontario sites
Footnote
16
analyzed, 63% of Pathways students from the  2010 and 2011 cohorts applied to a post-secondary institution. Application  rates were highest in Regent Park (75%) and lowest in Kitchener (51%).
Furthermore, the average  Pathways-eligible Regent Park student claimed more tuition spending as an  income tax deduction than the average Toronto Community Housing project student  who enrolled in a Toronto District School Board school between 2000 and 2008
Footnote
17
.
Adapted programming in  Winnipeg positively affected Indigenous youth
Focus group discussions with Pathways alumni in Winnipeg
Footnote
18
, of which 72% of Pathways students are  Indigenous, suggested that the program is positively influencing their lives. In  focus groups, the Winnipeg Pathways staff stated that some of the Indigenous  students faced multiple barriers and challenges and, as such, they adapted the  Pathways programming to meet these students' specific needs and circumstances.  For example, Pathways programming in Winnipeg has adapted to Indigenous culture  and offers a medicine wheel, sharing circles, smudging ceremonies and sweat  lodge ceremonies. Winnipeg Pathways staff supported the holistic development of  the students and created a space where students had a sense of belonging and  could build relationships
Footnote
19
.
In addition, other services that Pathways staff in Winnipeg provided for  students when necessary included collaborating with housing organizations to  provide beds for homeless students; established a peer helper initiative to  help students develop leadership skills and gain confidence; and, provide meals  and snacks for students who attend tutoring sessions.
Focus group participants in Winnipeg agreed that Pathways positively  helped them to do better in school and graduate from high school. Some  participants (43%) also noted that they were the first ones to graduate  in their family and highlighted the importance of having adult figures in their  lives that value education and motivate them to do well in school. The focus  group participants who had gone on to post-secondary education had accessed the  Pathways scholarship and indicated it had helped them purchase school-related  supplies and equipment (e.g., books, laptops, etc.)
Footnote
20
.
3.3 Impacts
Impacts are positive or negative, primary or secondary long-term effects  produced by the program, directly or indirectly, intended or unintended
Footnote
21
.
This section presents the impacts of  participation in Pathways. The findings demonstrate the extent to which the  program can be attributed to improving high school graduation rates; increasing the number of eligible students entering and  graduating from post-secondary education; and improving the labour market outcomes for Pathways-eligible students.
Pathways positively affected  high school graduation rates
Across observed Pathways sites, there  was a noticeable improvement in graduation rates compared to non-eligible  students
Footnote
22
. Graduation rates were 19.1%  higher for participants at the Ontario sites on average. The graduation rates  in the Halifax and Verdun sites were also higher for participants (28.4 percentage points and 10.4 percentage points, respectively)
Footnote
23
.
This finding is supported by a  separate study, conducted in 2017, which also attributed an increase in  graduation rates to participation in Pathways
Footnote
24
. It estimated that eligibility in  Pathways led to an increase of 35% in high school graduation rates for  Pathways-eligible Regent Park students compared to non-eligible students from  Toronto public housing projects.
Figure 4, below, also demonstrates how  Pathways positively influences secondary school completion. Across 10 sites  where Pathways was present in the 2015-16 academic year, there was a noticeable  increase in the share of students who graduated no more than 1 year beyond  the province's standard secondary school term (e.g., within 4 years where  high school comprises grades 10, 11, and 12) than was the case in the year  before Pathways was introduced
Footnote
25
. This type of comparison cannot  attribute the observed increases to Pathways, but the improvement does suggest  that the Program is likely contributing to greater on-time graduation at these  sites.
Figure 4: On-time graduation rates by site, 2015-16
Source:
Pathways to Education 2017 Results Summary
.
Figure 4: On-time graduation rates by site, 2015-16 – Text version
The graph  depicts the on-time graduation rates, before and after the Pathways program, by  site, over 2015 to 2016. These results compare the 2015 to 2016 results of a  Pathway site to the results in the year prior to the introduction of Pathways.  The definition of “on-time graduation rates” appears in the in-set of the  graph.
Pre-pathways
Pathways
Halifax
54
89
Hamilton
59
72
Kingston
40
79
Kitchener
54
77
Montreal (Verdun)
19
63
Ottawa
52
80
Toronto (Lawerence Heights)
54
73
Toronto (Regent Park)
44
83
Toronto (Rexdale)
46
72
Toronto (Scarborough Village)
57
79
Pathways had a positive  effect on enrollment to post-secondary education and educational attainment
In addition to the improved graduation rates noted above, the average Pathways-eligible  Regent Park
Footnote
26
student claimed more post-secondary tuition  expenditures for university or college.  Figure 5 illustrates that between the ages of 19 and 23, the average  Pathways-eligible student had higher tuition expenditures than an average  non-eligible student indicating that more Pathways-eligible students  participated in a post-secondary education. As well, the regression estimates indicate  that eligibility for Pathways increases postsecondary education attainment by approximately  0.5 years.
Figure 5: 2013 average tuition expenditures for Pathways-eligible and non-eligible students
Source : Lavecchia, Adam M., Philip Oreopoulos et Robert Brown. Long-term impacts of the Pathways to Education program. 2018
Figure 5: 2013 average tuition expenditures for Pathways-eligible and non-eligible students – Text version
The graph depicts the comparison  between Pathways-eligible students at Regent Park location, and the  non-eligible students associated with other public housing, in terms of average  expenditures on tuition, in 2013.
Age
Eligible Pathways Regent Park students
Non-eligible students (other public housing)
19
$760
$635
20
$1,265
$727
21
$1,352
$744
22
$1,320
$689
23
$950
$477
24
$587
$303
25
$259
$316
26
$139
$278
Pathways positively  affected labour market outcomes
Employment earnings for Pathways-eligible Regent Park students were  higher than non-eligible students following graduation
Footnote
27
. Regression analysis from the Lavecchia study found  that, on average, these students earned less than non-eligible students in the  comparison group (by an average of $638 annually over 5 years) between the  ages of 19 and 23, (see Figure 6); however, at age 24, they earned $12,678  compared to $11,818 for non-eligible students or approximately $950 more. By  age 26, Pathways-eligible students earned $1,207 more per year on average
Footnote
28
.
Figure 6: Difference between Pathways-eligible and non-eligible students’ earnings
Source : Lavecchia, Adam M., Philip Oreopoulos and Robert Brown. Long-term impacts of the Pathways to Education program. 2018
Figure 6: Difference between Pathways-eligible and non-eligible students’ earnings  – Text version
The graph shows that the employment  earnings of Pathways-eligible Regent Park students were higher than the  earnings of the non-eligible students, after graduation.  On average, these students earned less than  did the non-eligible students in the comparison group between the ages of 19  and 23. However, at age 24, they earned more as compared to the non-eligible  students. By age 26, Pathways-eligible students continued earning comparatively  more per year, on average.
Age
Difference    in salary
19
- $955
20
- $563
21
- $43
22
- $1,287
23
- $340
24
$950
25
$1,179
26
$1,207
Pathways  also positively affected the employment rate of young adults eligible to  participate in the program (Figure 7)
Footnote
29
. At age 19, there was no difference between the Pathways-eligible and non-eligible  students. By age 21, their employment rate was 5 percentage points higher compared  to non-eligible students; and by age 26, it was more than 6 percentage  points higher than non-eligible students.
Figure 7: Difference of employment rate between Pathways-eligible students and non-eligible students
Source: Lavecchia, Adam M., Philip Oreopoulos and Robert Brown. Long-term impacts of the Pathways to Education program. 2018
Figure 7: Difference of employment rate between Pathways-eligible students and non-eligible students – Text version
The graph depicts how Pathways  positively affected the employment rate of young adults eligible to participate  in the program. At age 19, there was no difference between the  Pathways-eligible and non-eligible students. By age 21, their employment rate  was 5 percentage points higher compared to non-eligible students; and by age  26, it was more than 6 percentage points higher than that of the non-eligible  students.
Age
Difference in    employment rate
19
0%
20
2%
21
5%
22
3%
23
6%
24
6%
25
2%
26
6%
In addition to the improved incidence of employment, the regression  analysis found that Pathways-eligible students made less use of social  assistance and employment insurance benefits than ineligible students, on  average. Specifically, they decreased their likelihood of receiving social  assistance by 5.1 percentage points and employment insurance by 5.8 percentage  points when compared to non-eligible students. As well, they received $525 less  social assistance and $183 less employment insurance than similar non-eligible  students
Footnote
30
.
3.4 Costs and benefits
This section presents benefits and costs associated with participation  in the program that arise from improving high school completion rates and  increasing post-secondary participation. As the program is focused on early  interventions, the effects and benefits can be long-lasting and require a  longer time horizon to fully assess the impacts.
The costs and benefits of Pathways accumulate to both individual participants  and to governments over the short- and long-term (see Appendix B for further  details). The impacts of the program begin with participation in Pathways,  which results in students improving their high school completion rates.
Using Pathways-eligible Regent Park students as a proxy and comparing  them to similar student population without access to Pathways programming, participation  in Pathways increased the individual's lifetime earnings, even after factoring  in the additional costs associated with higher levels of education and  reductions in Employment Insurance and Social Assistance benefits received.
From the individual's perspective, there are short-term costs that arise  from participation, such as the direct costs of post-secondary education and  the opportunity costs of foregoing employment to increase educational  attainment, which can be offset by short-term benefits such as education  subsidies and improved skills/employability.
Long-term benefits for individuals consist of greater lifetime earnings  and improved social outcomes. Pathways helps at-risk youth graduate high  school, thus improving their skills and outcomes. Pathways participants are subsequently  less likely to rely on government supports and may pay more taxes as their  labour market attachment strengthens, which in turn may moderate (but does not  completely offset) their life-time improvement in earnings.
From the government's perspective, short-term costs consist of program  costs and costs associated with supporting higher levels of education. Benefits  to the government begin in the medium-term and extend into the long-term. These  benefits include increased tax revenues from greater lifetime earnings of  participants; decreased outlay on Employment Insurance, Social Assistance and  other labour market programming; and, a potential decrease in spending on  social programs, such as justice and health, reflecting the improved outcomes  of participants. Not all of these benefits—particularly those reflecting  improved social outcomes—are easily quantifiable.
Figure 8 illustrates the costs and benefits of Pathways associated to governments  and an individual student over a longer period of time. The incremental impacts  were determined by comparing the outcomes of Pathways-eligible students to non-eligible  students in Regent Park
Footnote
31
. This analysis was estimated by comparing costs and  benefits associated with individuals participating in Pathways compared to  individuals who did not participate.
Figure 8: Costs and benefits per student over 25 years, net present value
* Components may not sum to reported total due to rounding
Chart Source: ESDC staff estimates based on results found in Lavecchia et al. (2018). “Long Term Impacts of the Pathways Education Program” for ESDC.
Figure 8: Costs and benefits per student over 25 years, net present value – Text version
The graph shows how costs and benefits  of Pathways accrue to both individual participants and to governments, over the  short- and long-term. From individuals' perspective, short-term benefits such  as education subsidies and improved skills/employability can offset short-term  costs incurred due to participation. Long-term benefits for individuals consist  of greater lifetime earnings and improved social outcomes. From the  government's perspective, short-term costs consist of program costs and costs  of supporting higher levels of education. Benefits to the government begin in  the medium-term and extend into the long-term, and include the following:  increased tax revenues from greater lifetime earnings of participants;  decreased outlay on Employment Insurance, Social Assistance etc. and a  potential decrease in spending on social programs, such as justice and health  of individuals.
Governments
Real cumulative impact (discounted at 3% per year)
Program Costs
-$17,920
Post-Secondary Tax Credit
-$1,720
Social Assistance and Employment Insurance
+$15,250
Increased Government Revenues
+$6,400
Total Governments Net Benefit
+$2,010
Individual
Real cumulative impact (discounted at 3% per year)
Reduced Wages During Studies
-$3,022
Post-Secondary Tuition
-$2,370
Post-Secondary Tax Credits
+$1,430
Net Post-studies Earnings
+$22,140
Total Individual Net Benefit
+$5,480
Total net benefit (Governments plus Individual)
+$7,490
While the Pathways' program has total  costs ($17,920) in the short-term
Footnote
32
from the government perspective (from all  sources of funding), the long-term approach reveals a net benefit ($2,010) due  to decreased outlays and increased revenues.
In the short-term, Pathways-eligible  students incur tuition costs related to post-secondary education and foregone  earnings due to decreased employment while attending school. Their benefits  include a tuition tax credit remitted to individuals attending a college or  university and greater net earnings from having pursued a post-secondary education.
The  individual's total net benefit is about $5,480. The total net social benefit to  society of an eligible student participating in Pathways over 25 years is  $7,490 compared to a non-eligible student. This results  in a social return on investment for Pathways of 50.1% over 25  years or a compound annual growth rate of 1.6%.
As a result, an investment in the  program “breaks even” (where the benefits equal the costs) after 22.5 years  from a government perspective and after 20.8 years from a total social net  benefit perspective.
As noted above, other potential gains,  such as improved well-being for individuals related to better health outcomes  and improved social outcomes (for example, reduced interactions with the  criminal justice system), may also accrue to individuals.  A number of studies suggest that completing  high school is linked to social and economic benefits later in life
Footnote
33
.
Though not quantifiable for the  purposes of this analysis, international studies have shown that secondary  school completion is correlated with:
Large and significant decrease in the likelihood of both conviction and  incarceration
Small, but significant, improvements in health outcomes
Increased civic engagement with the probability of voting rising by 28  to 34 percentage points
Generating significant social savings through crime reduction
4. Lessons  learned and conclusions
4.1  Lessons learned
Pathways is an organization that  assists Canadian youth living in poverty and who are at risk of dropping out of  high school. Pathways help youth graduate from high school and transition into  post-secondary education so they can reach their full potential.
The lessons learned— applicable to both Pathways and similar programming—are  as follows:
Targeted early interventions  can positively affect vulnerable populations
Targeted and sustained early  interventions for vulnerable youth has resulted in significant positive  outcomes. The evidence indicates that Pathways is improving high school  graduation rates.
Graduation rates were higher for Pathways students compared to  non-eligible students at the Ontario, Verdun and Halifax sites
Students where participation in  Pathways was an option invested more in post-secondary education than  comparable students not able to access the program.
The average Regent Park Pathways-eligible student claimed more  post-secondary tuition expenditures for university or college than the  average non-eligible student
Moreover, it positively affected their labour market outcomes.
Employment earnings for Regent Park Pathways-eligible students at age 26  were $1,200 greater than the earnings of non-eligible students
Pathways positively affected the employment rate of young adults  eligible to participate in the program by 6 percentage points at age 26
Regent Park Pathways-eligible students made less use of Social  Assistance and Employment Insurance benefits
A key component of the success of the Pathways  model is the flexibility to adapt to local needs and conditions
The flexible nature of the Pathways  program allowed staff to adjust the programming to meet the unique needs of the  local youth.
For example, Pathways staff adapted the  programming at the Winnipeg site to address the multiple barriers and  challenges faced by Indigenous students by incorporating Indigenous teachings  and traditions. The findings from this example suggest that this tailored programming  has had a positive influence on the lives of Indigenous youth.
Early interventions with  vulnerable populations can generate long-term net benefits not just for  individuals but also for governments
Pathways participants and the  government both incurred short and long-term costs and benefits from  participation. Using the impact analysis for Pathways-eligible Regent Park students as  a proxy, it was determined that the  average total benefit for an eligible participant are greater than the personal  costs and result in a net benefit of $5,480 per individual. In addition, this  does not include any improvements in well-being that might arise from other  improved outcomes.
From a government perspective, participants may  be less likely to require government supports (i.e. Employment Insurance, Social  Assistance) over their lifetime and may contribute more to government revenues due  to improved personal incomes and stronger attachment to the labour market. The  same social cost-benefit analysis noted above determined the benefits to the government outweigh the costs  associated with Pathways resulting in a net benefit of $2,010 even before  potential gains due to reduced expenditures on other types of programs or  potential intergenerational effects. Considering only a limited set of  government programs (Employment Insurance and Social Assistance) and revenue  and expenditure sources, governments collectively break even 22.5 years after  the initial investment, after which point it represents a net gain.
When taken together, the total net  social benefit of participation was calculated at $7,490 per participant over a  25-year projection, for a total social rate of return of 50.1%.  Looking over a longer time horizon and including other factors would  potentially increase this even further.
4.2  Conclusion
Overall, the findings show that  Pathways reduced the high school dropout rate and increased access to  post-secondary education. The program is flexible, adapting to the needs and  characteristics of the target population and benefits society as a whole.
As such, programming of this  nature—designed to support early interventions to help vulnerable youth  complete high school—has a valuable role to play.
Appendix A
Appendix A: Pathways to Education Canada logic model
*PSE refers to post-secondary education
Appendix A: Pathways to Education Canada logic model – Text version
Appendix A presents a flow chart  illustrating the logic model of the Pathways to Education program. The flow  chart outlines, from top to bottom:
The  program's ultimate outcome: support ESDC's mission to build a stronger and more  competitive Canada, to support Canadians in making choices that help them live  productive and rewarding lives, and to improve Canadians' quality of life.
The  intermediate outcomes are reduction of poverty and its effects; increased  graduation from post-secondary education; and, improved labour market outcomes.
Immediate  outcomes include improved high school graduation rates of program participants  and increased number of participants entering post-secondary education.
The  program's outputs are: programming expanded into 3 additional sites;  programming expanded to support more youth (between 900 and 1,400); continued  support for existing participants across the program's active sites; expanded  capacity to track labour market outcomes of program graduates; agreement  reporting requirements (annual reports, financial reports, final report and  independent evaluation report) submitted to ESDC; and, programming serves youth  from populations under-represented in post-secondary education.
The  input or activities for the program are ESDC grant funding, grant agreement  between ESDC and Pathways to Education Canada and Pathways to Education Canada  programming.
Appendix B
Appendix B: net social cost-benefit analysis
Appendix B: net social cost-benefit analysis – Text version
Appendix B is a flow chart illustrating the costs and  benefits associated with participating in the Pathways to Education program.  The flow chart, from left to right, includes the following:
Participation in Pathways leads to  improved high school completion rates and increased post-secondary  participation.
The short-term costs include the direct  costs of schooling, opportunity costs of schooling for individuals. For  governments, the short-term costs include program costs and costs associated  with increased schooling (such as increased use of tax credits).
The individual short-term benefits are  education subsidies and improved skills/employability.
The governments' benefits are both  short-term and long-term. They include increased tax revenues from greater  lifetime earnings of participants; decreased outlay on Employment Insurance,  Social Assistance and other labour market programming; and, decreased spending  on social programs, such as justice and health.
The individual long-term benefits are  great lifetime earnings and improved social outcomes.
These costs and benefits flow directly  into net benefits.
This graphic presents a conceptual  framework for how costs and benefits might accrue from participation in the  Pathways to Education program. While not intended to be exhaustive, it includes  elements that are not part of the net benefit analysis due to insufficient  information on how to quantify the specific cost or benefit, such as the gains  from potential improvements to health outcomes, but are reasonably expected to  have an effect.
This section presents the methodology  used to develop the analysis found in section 3.4 of the report and  provides more detail on Figure 8: Costs and Benefits per Student over 25  Years.
Programs that focus on improving the  outcomes of youth are designed, almost by definition, to have long-lasting and  cumulative effects. As such, analysis focused entirely around the period of  intervention will underestimate the full impact of the programs for individual  participants and for society in general.
The  benefits and costs associated with participation in Pathways stem from the  direct and indirect effects of the program's ability to improve high school  completion rates and, by extension, increase post-secondary participation.  These benefits do not accumulate solely to the individual participant, but  neither are the costs associated with participation borne only by the program  or its funding sources. As such, the many short-term and long-term labour  market outcomes, as well as social benefits, result in broader positive impacts  for society that are rarely captured in more limited, traditional cost-benefit  analysis.
Source material: “Long term impacts of the Pathways to  Education program” (2018)
In “Long Term Impacts of the  Pathways to Education Program”, authors Lavecchia, Oreopolous and Brown used  a difference-in-differences method to determine the causal impacts of Pathways.  This report compared a sample of eligible high school students who entered  grade 9 between 2000 and 2005 in a location served by the Pathways program to a  statistically similar sample of students who were not eligible (non-eligible  students) for the program in 70 public housing projects in the City of Toronto.  The impacts from the analyses focused on the Regent Park site.
Outcomes presented in Lavecchia et al. (2018) are "implied"  (regression-adjusted) means for eligible and non-eligible students. Several  other factors (such as housing project and cohort fixed effects) are accounted  for in these means, allowing them to more precisely reflect the impact of  Pathways on individuals. Furthermore, the difference between the  regression-adjusted means for participants and non-participants can be  interpreted as the causal effect of the program under the assumption that the  evaluation of outcomes for participants would have followed the same path as  the outcomes for non-participants. The plausibility of this assumption is  tested in Lavecchia et al. (2018) through the process of establishing  treatment and control groups.
These results  for Regent Park are used as a proxy for the program overall. While any  individual site might have better or worse incremental impacts for their  observed populations, there is nothing to suggest that these results might be  an outlier.
Through impact analysis, the overall benefits  and costs of implementing the program per participant are presented in Figure  8: Costs and Benefits per Student over 25 Years in section 3.4 of the report.  These figures are based on calculations and assumptions (outlined below) made  by the Evaluation Directorate of ESDC. It is founded in the incremental impacts  reported by Lavecchia et al. (2018) for Pathways-eligible participants at the  Regent Park site in versus a control group (see explanatory box), which is  treated as a proxy for Program-wide participation results in this analysis. This  type of analysis supports the evaluation's effort to better assess and estimate  the relevance of the program and the efficiency and effectiveness of its  outcomes.
Projections: Time  horizon and discount rate
All estimates assume a 25-year time horizon  and an annual discount rate of 3%.
A discount rate of 3% is consistent  with the discounting done in Lavecchia et al. (2018)
Footnote
34
and other  similar studies that examine the impacts of education interventions on earnings  (Krueger, 1999; and Chetty et. al., 2011). This rate is also in line with  Boardman et al. (2008) and the interim TBS guide for Cost-Benefit Analysis (the  “TBS Guide”). The TBS Guide, which cites Boardman et al. (2008), suggests a  social discount rate of 3% accompanied by a shadow price of investment  applied to all the costs that crowd out investment activity
Footnote
35
. Since  Pathways does not invest in capital and is not a regulation, the 3% rate is applied without modification.
Components of the  net benefit analysis
The components of the net benefit analysis  are discussed in the order that they appear in Figure 8 (from left to right) in  section 3.4 of the report.
Below are the costs and benefits from the  perspective of governments. All values include the Marginal Social Costs of  Public Funds, the distortionary loss incurred by society when raising  additional taxes to fund government spending. This effect increases the  magnitude of both the costs and benefits associated with a government program.  As a result, this effect will be positive (net benefit) if a program generates  net savings, but negative (net cost) if it falls short. As in previous  evaluations produced by Employment and Social Development Canada (see the 2017 Evaluation  of the Labour Market Development Agreements), the effect is assumed to be 20%, this is to say that each dollar of net costs or net benefits generated  by a program or an intervention is increased by 20 cents.
Program costs
This  is based on the total program costs per participant ($14,935) reported in  Lavecchia et al. (2018) and applies to Regent Park Pathways-eligible students.
Funding to cover these program costs includes not  only the direct contributions of the Government of Canada, but also  contributions from the Government of Ontario and private donations.
As these sources cannot be disentangled from the  final program costs, the Marginal Social Costs of Public Funds is applied to  the entire amount and may represent an overestimate as a result. The Marginal  Social Costs of Public Funds adds an additional $2,987 (20% of $14,935)  for a total cost of $17,920 per student. While this cost will be spread out  over multiple years, it is treated as an upfront expense and the amount is not  discounted.
Post-secondary tax credit
Tuition  expenses are reported in Lavecchia et al. (2018). This value is the difference  in annual average tuition tax credits between participants and non-participants  between the ages of 19 and 26. It represents a cost to governments due to the  increased take-up of post-secondary education. After discounting, this amounts  to $1,433. The Marginal Social Cost of Public Funds increases  this expense by 20% for a total cost of $1,719 for the analysis period.
Related, though not included, are the potential  additional institutional costs associated with a student continuing their  studies beyond secondary school. The incremental cost of an additional student  is likely minimal for the post-secondary educational system, but it is  conceivable that sufficient scaling of the program could increase system-wide  pressures due to increased demand.
Social assistance and employment insurance
Lavecchia  et al. (2018) reports a reduction in social assistance use among Pathways-eligible  students compared to non-eligible students of $525 in 2013. For this analysis,  this reduction is assumed to be constant over the entire analysis period.
Similarly, Lavecchia et al. (2018) reports that in  2013 a reduction in the use of Employment Insurance among Pathways-eligible  students compared to non-eligible students of $183. This is also assumed to be  constant over the entire analysis.
The total combined savings is $12,706 after  discounting.
These may be middling estimates, as benefit use may  change as a result of changes in an individual's income over time. Incremental  impacts related to Social Assistance, for example, may widen as incomes and  outcomes diverge. In the case of Employment Insurance, it is unclear if benefits  received by participants would increase or decrease relative to  non-participants over the 25-year period. On the one hand, participants appear  to have greater labour market attachment and may earn more, entitling them to  greater benefits during a job separation. On the other hand, participants may  experience fewer extended periods of unemployment, leading to less dependency  on Employment Insurance.
Because it is a net benefit to governments, the  Marginal Social Cost of Public Funds increases the size of this benefit by  20%. This results in a net benefit to governments of $15,248 over  the analysis period.
Increased government revenue
Using  forecasted earnings underlying the values for Net Post-Studies Earnings of  individuals (see below), the incremental taxes paid are estimated based on  similar incremental impacts observed for Ontario participants in Employment  Benefits and Support Measures delivered through the Canada-Ontario Labour  Market Development Agreement. For example, administrative data for tax years  2002 through 2012 showed that where there was an incremental impact on earnings  of just over $1000 in a year, it resulted in increased income taxes paid of  roughly $140 compared to the control population. This was calculated from the  age of 24 to 43, as between 19 and 23 the forecasted earnings for both  participants and non-participants were below or around the basic personal  amount. The total incremental amount for income taxes came to $3,807 after  discounting.
In addition to the gains from income taxes,  the analysis included estimates of the incremental impact in revenues due to  combined Federal and Provincial sales taxes. As in the 2017 Evaluation of the  Labour Market Development Agreements, it is assumed that each dollar in  incremental earnings results in 48 cents of spending on taxable goods (i.e., a  propensity to consume of 96% with an assumed breakdown of half on  taxable and half on non-taxable goods and services). With a Harmonized Sales  Tax (HST) rate of 13%, this results in a little over 6 cents of sales  tax for each incremental dollar in earnings. The total incremental amount for  sales taxes came to $1,526 after discounting.
Because it is a net benefit to governments,  the Marginal Social Cost of Public Funds increases the size of these benefits  by 20%. Combined, this results in $6,400 in benefits due to  increased tax revenues.
Changes in payroll taxes, such as Employment  Insurance Premiums, are not included in this estimation.
Below are the costs and benefits from the  perspective of the individual participant. Unlike the costs and benefits from  the governments' perspective, the costs and benefits experienced by the  individual participant are not affected by Marginal Social Costs of Public  Funding. As was the case above, specific values presented below are prior to  application of the discount rate.
Reduced wages during studies
Lavecchia et al. (2018) report average  annual earnings for eligible students and non-eligible students from ages 19 to  26. Pathways-eligible students have lower average annual earnings than non-eligible  students between the ages of 19 and 23. The difference in annual earnings  between these 2 groups between ages 19 and 23 is taken to be the estimated  opportunity cost of participating in the program and assumed to be associated  with increased likelihood participation in schooling. The total difference is  $3,022 after discounting.
Post-secondary tuition
Lavecchia  et al. (2018) provides average tuition costs incurred by program eligible  students between ages 19 and 26. Eligible students are more likely to pursue  post-secondary education, and incur greater tuition expenses. After  discounting, this amounts to $1,433 for the analysis period.
This value only reflects what has been reported and  claimed according to the tax records and may understate actual incremental  expenditures. Further amounts are not projected beyond the age of 26.
Social assistance and employment insurance
Lavecchia  et al. (2018) reports a reduction in 2013 of social assistance use among Pathways-eligible  students compared to similar students at sites where the Program is unavailable  of $525. This is assumed to be constant over the entire analysis period.
Similarly, Lavecchia et al. (2018) reports  a reduction in the use of Employment Insurance in 2013 among Pathways-eligible  students compared to similar students at sites where the Program is unavailable  of $183. This is assumed to be constant over the entire analysis period.
The total combined savings is $12,706 after  discounting.
From the individual participant's  perspective, changes in Social Assistance and Employment Insurance income are a  reduction in lifetime earnings and represent a cost.
It should be noted that this method treats a dollar  collected in Social Assistance or Employment Insurance as being of equal value  to a dollar earned from employment. A potential concern of this approach is  that it does not consider the possibility that income from employment earnings  may be preferred to income from Social Assistance and Employment Insurance, as  employment earnings may be a reflection of self-sufficiency, well-being, and greater  participation in society.
Net post-studies earnings
Lavecchia  et al. (2018) finds that from the age of 24 to 26 (inclusive), eligible  students have higher average annual earnings than non-eligible students. This  increases from $950 at age 24 to $1,207 at age 27.
Earnings for participants and the  divergence in earnings between the 2 group from age 27 ($1,369) to age 43 ($3,425)  are extrapolated from the above results. The forecasted earnings for  participants is the sum of these 2 extrapolated values. See Appendix C: Lifetime  Earnings Assumptions for the Net Social Cost-Benefit Analysis for more details.
The divergence in incomes does result in a  larger gain than assumed by Lavecchia et al. (2018), as the authors assume a  constant gap of $1,207 after age 27.
From the total increased post-studies earnings, the  additional amount paid in taxes (see Increased Government Revenues above) is  removed. The net increase in post-studies earnings is $22,144 after  discounting.
Taken together, the social rate of return  is calculated as the total net benefits of individuals and government ($2,010 +  $5,480 = $7,490) divided by the unadjusted program costs ($14,935), which  equals 50.1% over 25 years or an annualized rate of return of 1.6%.
Beyond year 25
The 25-year time horizon was selected in  order to illustrate the effects of early interventions over a longer period.  Even at 25 years, the constrained time period likely underestimates the full  discounted benefits of a program such as Pathways.
The most obvious underestimation relates to  improved lifetime earnings. Pathways, by definition, involves an intervention  at a point very early in a person's life. As such, the expected earnings  differential should persist well beyond the 25-year time horizon (when the  participant will be only 43 years old) and may even continue to expand. This  would have implications not only for the individual—who would see net earnings  increase—but also on the Governments perspective, which could experience  further savings in Social Assistance and Employment Insurance and increased tax  revenues.
Also outside the time horizon, governments  may enjoy savings in seniors' programs—particularly Old Age Security/the  Guaranteed Income Supplement—because of the individual's greater lifetime  earnings. Expanding the analysis would require taking into account Canada  Pension Plan (CPP) payments and would need to analyze the effect related to the  collection of CPP premiums over the entire period (currently not included in  the analysis).
Finally, intergenerational effects could  play an important role in considering the long-term outcomes associated with  such an early intervention. This is beyond the scope of the evaluation, but  longer time horizons could reasonably wish to encompass the effects of improved  outcomes on successive generations.
Further analysis:  other social benefits
In addition to the related labour market costs  and benefits of governments and of individuals captured above, there are social  benefits of the program that would factor into a more extensive analysis of Pathway's  net benefit.
As an extension of the analysis to date, it  would be worthwhile to examine ways to reflect other societal gains—such as  savings for governments and higher well-being for individuals related to better  health outcomes and reduced criminality—that may correlate with the outcomes  observed. The Department may seek to consider how best to quantify these effects  for future analysis and longer time-series data may be required. Even if  quantified, however, it is unlikely this would capture the full positive  impact, as it would not reflect the knock-on effects within society.
References for the net social cost-benefit analysis
Boardman et al. (2008). “Social Discount Rates for Canada”. Working paper.
Chetty et. al. (2011). “How Does your Kindergarten Classroom Affect Your Earnings? Evidence from Project Star,” Quarterly journal of Economics, 126(4): 1593-1660
Employment and Social Development Canada (2017). “Evaluation of the Labour Market Development Agreements — Synthesis Report”. Ottawa, ON: ESDC.
Krueger, Alan B. (1999). “Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 497-532.
Lavecchia et al. (2018). “Long Term Impacts of the Pathways to Education Program,” ESDC.
Lochner, Lance. (2011). “Nonproduction Benefits of Education: Crime, Health and Good Citizenship,” In Handbook of Economics of Education, vol. 4, edited by Eric Hanushek, Steve Machin and Ludger Woessmann, Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Appendix C: lifetime earnings assumptions for the net social cost-benefit analysis
Lavecchia et al. (2018) find that from the age of 24 to 26 (inclusive), eligible students have higher average annual earnings than non- eligible students. This earnings differential increases by 6% between 24 years old ($950) and 26 years old ($1,207).
In order to estimate the program’s incremental impact over 25 years, the Net Social-Cost Benefit Analysis requires an estimate of the earnings over the analysis period of participants and non-participants. This section of the report details the assumptions made in the Social Cost-Benefit Analysis to project earnings beyond 26 years old (labelled as the “Straight-Line Projection” approach) and also an alternative method undertaken as a robustness check (the “Educational Attainment” approach).
Straight-line projection
The following steps were taken to project earnings for both participants and non-participants from age 27 to 43 (inclusive):
Extrapolated income levels for non-participants from age 27 to 43 using a straight trend line
Used the difference in average annual earnings (for each year between 24 and 26) reported in Lavecchia et al. (2018) to extrapolate the future increases using a straight trend line
The forecasted earnings for participants is the sum of these 2 extrapolated values
The annual post-program earnings of participants show incremental gains over the years to follow. The size of the increase continuously grew over the years and ranged from $1,369 (age 27) to $3,425 (age 43). In other words, at the end of the projection period the annual average earnings of participants were $3,425 higher than if they had not participated.
The upward growth in income is consistent with what is observe in Statistics Canada data, where average earnings appear to peak after 50 years old for all levels of educational attainment. However, this assumption of a sustained, steady rise results in a more gradual increase in the initial years than is generally observed in the data (where a sharper increase will generally occur between the 20 to 24 and the 25 to 29 age categories).
Figure 9: Straight line projection results on employment earnings
Source: Lavecchia and al. (2018) for observed results and ESDC calculations for projected and inferred income levels.
Figure 9: Straight line projection results on employment earnings – Text version
In order to estimate the program's incremental impact over  25 years, the net social-cost benefit analysis requires an estimate of  the earnings over the analysis period of participants and non-participants.  Figure 9 depicts the projected earnings beyond 26 years old, i.e. earnings for  both participants and non-participants from age 27 to 43 (inclusive), labelled  as the “Incremental Impact” approach. In addition, as an alternative method was  undertaken as a robustness check, labelled as the “Income levels” approach.
Age
Non-participants (observed) $
Participants (observed) $
Non-participants (projected) $
Participants (inferred) $
Gap
(observed) $
Gap    (projected) $
19
3,828
2,873
-955
20
4,957
4,394
-563
21
6,183
6,140
-43
22
7,768
6,481
-1,287
23
9,833
9,493
-340
24
11,818
12,768
950
25
13,448
14,627
1,179
26
15,574
16,781
15,574
16,781
1,207
1,207
27
17,456
18,825
1,369
28
19,379
20,877
1,498
29
21,302
22,928
1,626
30
23,224
24,979
1,755
31
25,147
27,030
1,883
32
27,070
29,081
2,012
33
28,993
31,133
2,140
34
30,915
33,184
2,269
35
32,838
35,235
2,397
36
34,761
37,286
2,526
37
36,683
39,337
2,654
38
38,606
41,389
2,783
39
40,529
43,440
2,911
40
42,451
45,491
3,040
41
44,374
47,542
3,168
42
46,297
49,593
3,297
43
48,220
51,645
3,425
Robustness check:  Educational attainment approach
Given the simplicity of the Straight-Line Projection  method, the Evaluation Directorate wished to validate it against a method using  assumptions on educational attainment and age. This was to ensure that the  Straight-Line Projection:
provided  a good approximation of the pattern that might be observed under other assumptions.
would  not result in significant over-estimates in the potential gains in lifetime  earnings over the analysis period.
To that end, the Evaluation Directorate  used Statistics' Canada income/earnings data (2010) in order to construct the  average income profile for participants and non-participants based on the average income associated with age and educational attainment,  as in Table C1.
Table C1: Individuals' earnings, Canada  (2010)*
Highest    education attainment
20 to    24
25 to    29
30 to    34
35 to    39
40 to    44
No    certificate, diploma or degree
$17,507
$25,588
$30,233
$31,878
$33,752
High    school diploma or equivalent
$15,792
$29,346
$35,299
$38,898
$41,783
Apprenticeship    or trades certificate or diploma
$24,846
$35,969
$40,298
$43,082
$44,828
College,    CEGEP or other non-university certificate or diploma
$18,752
$33,531
$40,323
$45,010
$48,915
University    certificate or diploma below bachelor level
$16,210
$32,600
$41,386
$47,400
$53,687
University,    diploma or degree at bachelor level or above
$17,970
$38,485
$52,623
$65,191
$74,892
Source: Statistics Canada, Average earnings or employment income, by age group and highest certificate, diploma or degree, Canada,    2010  Visit
Statistics Canada
In order to determine the weights/breakdown  among different educational attainment categories, the Report on Pathways to  Education produced by Goss Gilroy Inc (GGI report) was used to weight “no  certificate, diploma or degree” versus those that completed secondary school or  higher. As per the GGI report, 57.6% of participants and 38.5% of  the comparison group completed high school.
Among those that graduated high school,  distributions observed among Ontario residents aged 25 to 64 as reported in the  2016 Census was applied. The Ontario data were used to remain consistent with  the Toronto-area population analyzed by Lavecchia et al (2018). These can be  found in Table C2.
Table C2: Distribution of educational attainment, Ontario, (25-64 years  old)
Highest education attainment
Share of total population (%)
Share of attainment of secondary and post-secondary education (%)
No certificate, diploma or degree
10.4
--
High school diploma or equivalent
24.5
27.3
Apprenticeship or trades certificate or diploma
6.2
6.9
College, CEGEP or other non-university certificate or diploma
24.7
27.5
University certificate or diploma below bachelor level
2.4
2.7
University, diploma or degree at bachelor level or above
31.9
35.6
Note: Sums may not add up to 100.0% due to rounding. Source: Statistics Canada, 98-402-X2016010-11 Highest level of educational attainment (general) by selected age groups 25 to 64, both sexes, percentage distribution 2016, Canada, provinces and territories, 2016 Census    – 25% sample data. Visit
Statistics Canada
Due to the inclusion of younger and older  age categories in this sample, the level of educational attainment might be  biased downwards slightly
Footnote
36
. However,  given the barriers to educational attainment often faced by the target  population for the Program, this issue may be moot.
The average earnings level for each 5-year  age category using this approach is reported in Table C3. This results in  earnings estimates that are initially higher than our Straight-Line Projection approach,  except after 40 years old when the Straight-Line Projection of income levels  exceed the Educational Attainment approach.
Table C3: Individual participants'  earnings using educational attainment assumptions
25 to 29
30 to 34
35 to 39
40 to 44
Participants
$30,602
$37,789
$42,574
$46,596
Non-Participants
$28,940
$35,284
$39,028
$42,337
Difference    (Incremental Impact)
+$1,663
+$2,506
+$3,547
+$4,259
For all age categories, however, the  incremental impacts exceeds the values produced under the Simple Projection,  but follows a similar pattern of growth.
Figure 10: Incremental impacts (participant earnings minus non-participant earnings) of the straight-line projection approach versus the educational attainment approach
Figure 10: Incremental impacts (participant earnings minus non-participant earnings) of the straight-line projection approach versus the educational attainment approach – Text version
The graph depicts the incremental impacts, i.e. the participant  earnings minus non-participant earnings, of the straight-line projection  approach, in comparison with those of the educational attainment approach. The  Straight-Line Projection approach produces a conservative estimate over the  projection period and is derived from the initial observed data. As well, it  follows a similar growth path in incremental impacts, and it requires fewer  assumptions that need to be calibrated to the target population.
25 to 29
30 to 34
35 to 39
40 to 44
Educational Attainment Assumption
$1,663
$2,506
$3,547
$4,259
Simple Projection
$1,376
$2,012
$2,654
$3,232
Conclusion
The Evaluation Directorate favoured the continued use of the Straight-Line  Projection approach given that it: produces a more conservative estimate over  the projection period; is derived from the initial observed data; follows a  similar growth path in incremental impacts; and requires fewer assumptions that  need to be calibrated to the target population.
Should the projection period be extended further, however, a  re-evaluation of the income assumptions would be necessary and would likely  require the introduction of more complex assumptions.
Footnotes
Footnote 1
Marc Frenette,  Statistics Canada (April 10, 2017), “Postsecondary Enrolment by Parental  Income: Recent National and Provincial Trends,” Economic Insights and internal  ESDC follow-up.
Return to footnote
1
referrer
Footnote 2
Pathways to Education 2017 Results  Summary.
Return to footnote
2
referrer
Footnote 3
For example, in fiscal year 2014 to 2015, federal funding constituted 23% of Pathways total revenue with the remaining sources of funds included the Ontario government (37%), corporations (23%), foundations (7%), individuals (5%) and events (5%).
Return to footnote
3
referrer
Footnote 4
It utilized administrative data from the 2010 to 2014 student cohorts from the Ontario (6 sites), Halifax and Verdun program sites. The Ontario and Halifax comparison groups consisted of students from the year prior to the implementation of the Pathways program; and the Verdun site comparison group consisted of students who did not participate in the program from other local schools.
Return to footnote
4
referrer
Footnote 5
Pathways conducted 2 surveys of alumni in 2014 to 2015 and in 2015 to 2016 with 186 respondents who graduated from Ottawa, Regent Park and Verdun and 145 respondents who had graduated from Ottawa, Regent Park, Scarborough Village and Kitchener.  The third survey of alumni from cohorts not previously surveyed by Pathways, conducted online by the independent evaluators, had 68 respondents for a response rate of 3.8%.
Return to footnote
5
referrer
Footnote 6
Some of the impact results and the cost-benefit analysis reported in this evaluation were for Regent Park students only. These findings may not be representative of the program’s performance throughout all Pathways sites.
Return to footnote
6
referrer
Footnote 7
The incremental impact analysis drew on 6 Statistics Canada datasets as well as administrative client data from the Toronto District School Board and Toronto Community Housing. The regression analysis estimated the impacts on earnings and employment of Pathways-eligible students who were 26 years of age in 2013. The comparison groups consisted of all Toronto District School Board high school students in public housing (other than Regent Park) and entered grade 9 between September 2000 and September 2006.
Return to footnote
7
referrer
Footnote 8
Goss Gilroy Inc. 2017 “Evaluation of the Pathways to Education Program.” Pathways to Education Canada.
Return to footnote
8
referrer
Footnote 9
Ibid.
Return to footnote
9
referrer
Footnote 10
Goss Gilroy Inc. 2017 “Evaluation of the Pathways to Education Program.” Pathways to Education Canada.
Return to footnote
10
referrer
Footnote 11
Ibid.
Return to footnote
11
referrer
Footnote 12
Employment and Social Development  Canada. Returns to Completing High School Education: Literature Review. Labour  Market and Skills Research Division. June 8, 2017.
Return to footnote
12
referrer
Footnote 13
Ibid.
Return to footnote
13
referrer
Footnote 14
Readers should use caution when  interpreting the results of the survey. Due to the small response rates of the  surveys, the views of those who responded may not be generalizable to all  Pathways participants.
Return to footnote
14
referrer
Footnote 15
An online survey of 131 staff members  from 11 sites was conducted as part of the Evaluation of the Pathways to  Education Program. This survey had a 63.3% response rate.
Return to footnote
15
referrer
Footnote 16
The Pathways Ontario sites are Regent  Park, Kingston, Lawrence Heights, Hamilton, Rexdale and Kitchener.
Return to footnote
16
referrer
Footnote 17
Lavecchia, Adam M., Philip Oreopoulos and  Robert Brown. Long-term Impacts of the Pathways to Education Program. 2018
Return to footnote
17
referrer
Footnote 18
Goss Gilroy Inc. (2017). Evaluation of the  Pathways to Education Program. Ottawa
Return to footnote
18
referrer
Footnote 19
Goss Gilroy Inc. (2017). Evaluation of the  Pathways to Education Program. Ottawa
Return to footnote
19
referrer
Footnote 20
Ibid.
Return to footnote
20
referrer
Footnote 21
Organization for Economic Cooperation  and Development (2009).
Key Terms In  Evaluation and Results Based Management
, OECD, Paris
Return to footnote
21
referrer
Footnote 22
As reported in the Goss Gilroy Inc.  (2017).Non-eligible students consisted of students from the year before the  Pathways program start year in each site except for Verdun where the comparison  group was from non-participating students at other nearby schools.
Return to footnote
22
referrer
Footnote 23
The incremental impacts consisted of  Pathways students from Ontario, Halifax, and Verdun between 2010 to 2014.
Return to footnote
23
referrer
Footnote 24
Oreopoulos, Philip, Robert S. Brown  and Adam M. Lavecchia, 2017. “Pathways to Education: An Integrated Approach to  Helping At-Risk High School Students”, Journal of Political Economy, 125(4):  947-984.
Return to footnote
24
referrer
Footnote 25
Pathways to Education (2017). 2017  Results Summary. Toronto.
Return to footnote
25
referrer
Footnote 26
The Impact Study reported on labour  market incremental impacts of eligible participants from Toronto's Regent Park  site between 1999 and 2003. It consisted of regression estimates of eligible  Regent Park participants who were 26 years of age in 2013. Cautioned should be  used when generalizing this particular study's findings to all Pathways sites.
Return to footnote
26
referrer
Footnote 27
Lavecchia, Adam M., Philip Oreopoulos  and Robert Brown. Long-term Impacts of the Pathways to Education Program. 2018
Return to footnote
27
referrer
Footnote 28
Estimates are for Pathways-eligible  students who were 26 years of age in 2013. Earnings at age 26 were used in this  analysis because by age 26, individuals have usually completed their  post-secondary studies and established themselves in the labour market.
Return to footnote
28
referrer
Footnote 29
Lavecchia, Adam M., Philip Oreopoulos  and Robert Brown. Long-term Impacts of the Pathways to Education Program. 2018
Return to footnote
29
referrer
Footnote 30
The sample is individuals who entered  a Toronto District School Board high school between 2000 and 2003, lived in a  Toronto Community Housing project and are at least 5 years from having started  high school in the 2013 tax year.
Return to footnote
30
referrer
Footnote 31
Lavecchia, Adam M., Philip Oreopoulos  and Robert Brown. Long-term Impacts of the Pathways to Education Program. 2018
Return to footnote
31
referrer
Footnote 32
This is the program spending per  student ($14,935) as reported in Lavecchia et al. (2018), and a 20%  increase to reflected Marginal Social Cost of Public Funds as outlined in  Appendix B.
Return to footnote
32
referrer
Footnote 33
Employment and Social Development  Canada. Returns to Completing High School Education: Literature Review. Labour  Market and Skills Research Division. June 8, 2017
Return to footnote
33
referrer
Footnote 34
Lavecchia et al. (2018) estimates a  lifetime earnings gain from Pathways of $43,522 using a 3% discount  rate.
Return to footnote
34
referrer
Footnote 35
See page 38 of the TBS Guide.
Return to footnote
35
referrer
Footnote 36
This is due to 2  main factors. First, younger respondents may not have completed their studies.  Second, as educational attainment has increased with each successive cohort,  the distribution among of older participants would be expected to reflect lower  levels attainment.
Return to footnote
36
referrer
Page details
Report a problem on this page
Date modified:
2022-04-22