Joint Audit and Evaluation of the Medical Devices Program 2013-14 to 2019-20
Table of Contents
List of Figures
List of Acronyms
Executive Summary
1.0 Introduction and Background
1.1 Benefits and Risks of Medical Devices
1.2 Health Canada’s Medical Devices Program
2.0 Safety, Effectiveness and Quality of Medical Devices in Canada
2.1 Pre-market Process Controls
2.2 Post-market process controls
2.3 Safety of Medical Devices Available in Canada
2.4 Adapting to the Evolution of Medical Devices
3.0 Providing Access to Medical Devices in Canada
3.1 Processing of Device Licence Applications
3.2 Measures to Improve Access to Devices
4.0 Communicating with Stakeholders and Canadians
5.0 Program Organization and Governance
5.1 Distribution of Roles and Responsibilities and Governance
5.2 Creation of a new Medical Devices Directorate
6.0 Program Resources
7.0 Conclusions and Recommendations
Management Response and Action Plan
Appendix A – Joint Engagement Scope and Methodology
Appendix B - Internal Audit Summary
Appendix C - Summary of Evaluation Findings
Appendix D – Logic Model
Appendix E – MDP Key Roles and Responsibilities at the Time of the
    Engagement
Endnotes
List of figures
Figure 1: Example of Health Canada’s Involvement in the Medical
    Device Life cycle
Figure 2: Organizational structure of the Medical Devices Program
    at the time of the engagement
Figure 3: Proportion of medical device incident reports entered
    within service standards
Figure 4: Targeted risk communications were disseminated within
    service standards for 3 of 5 years
Figure 5: Proportion of DEVICE licence applications in backlog
Figure 6: Proportion of DEVICE licence applications that complied
    with regulatory requirements at first review and after additional
    information was requested and provided
Figure 7: Organizational structure of the Medical Device Programs
    in the United States and Ireland
Figure 8: Resources and workload of the medical devices and
    pharmaceutical surveillance functions (2015-16)
List of Acronyms
CMDSNET
Canadian Medical Devices Sentinel Network
HPFB
Health Products and Food Branch
HPSEB
Health Products Surveillance and Epidemiology Bureau
IMDRF
International Medical Device Regulators Forum
IT
Information Technology
MDB
Medical Devices Bureau
MDCCD
Medical Devices and Clinical Compliance Directorate
MDCP
Medical Device Compliance Program
MDP
Medical Devices Program
MDSAP
Medical Device Single Audit Program
MHPD
Marketed Health Products Directorate
ROEB
Regulatory Operations and Enforcement Branch
RTOF
Regulatory Transparency and Openness Framework
Executive Summary
This report presents findings from a Joint Audit and Evaluation of
  Health Canada’s Medical Devices Program (MDP). The engagement examined
  MDP’s activities from April 2013 to August 2019. The MDP aims to ensure
  that Canadians have access to safe, effective, and quality medical
  devices through:
approval of establishment and medical device licences;
surveillance of devices available in Canada;
inspections of manufacturers, importers, and distributors; and
communication to Canadians about risks related to devices.
In 2018-19, MDP planned expenditures were about $33M, $15M of which was
  funded by Health Canada. The remaining program funds were recovered
  through fees for regulatory services (e.g., licences to sell devices)
Footnote 1
1
.
Key Findings
Ensuring the Safety, Quality and Effectiveness of Medical
  Devices in Canada
The MDP had sufficient controls in place for its pre-market activities
  to ensure the safety, effectiveness, and quality of medical devices. It
  also completed most of its post-market activities within service
  standards.However, delays in processing medical
  device incident reports affected the Program’s ability to proactively
  detect such incidents. The MDP also experienced delays in completing
  the assessment of medical devices incidents.
While these challenges represent a risk for the Department, there is no
  evidence that they affected Health Canada’s ability to ensure the
  safety of medical devices. The Department was perceived as a trusted
  regulator by the majority of external key informants and available data
  suggests that the safety of medical devices in Canada was comparable to
  other countries.
The medical device environment is complex and evolving rapidly, with
  the development of novel devices using innovative technologies, such as
  digital technology, artificial intelligence, and 3D printing. Health
  Canada made significant strides to adapt its regulatory framework to
  remain effective at regulating such rapidly changing and complex
  devices. The Program also progressed in its efforts to integrate sex-
  and gender-based analysis considerations into the delivery of its
  activities. However, there was room to integrate these considerations
  more systematically across all program functions.
Providing Access to Medical Devices in Canada
The MDP made progress in balancing safety with access to medical
  devices. It processed the majority of device licence applications
  within services standards, but most of those applications did not meet
  regulatory requirements when initially submitted to Health Canada. This
  may have increased their processing time. The reasons why the majority
  of device licence applications did not meet program requirements when
  first submitted are not fully understood. Publicly available guidance
  documents outlining these requirements were difficult to find and were
  sometimes outdated. At the same time, the Program implemented various
  measures to improve the industry’s understanding of the regulatory
  process (e.g., an e-learning course) and aligned its requirements with
  those of other countries, in an effort to improve access to devices in
  Canada. It has also put in place various initiatives to streamline the
  access to medical devices, such as the Special Access Program, which
  allows health care professionals to gain access to medical devices that
  are not approved for sale in Canada for use in emergencies or when
  conventional therapies have failed, are unavailable, or are unsuitable
  to treat a patient.
Communicating with Stakeholders and Canadians
The MDP increased its engagement with stakeholders through meetings
  with industry representatives, discussions with health care
  professionals, targeted outreach to patient groups, and opportunities
  for stakeholders and Canadians to participate in online consultations.
  While these efforts were well received by industry, improvements are
  still required for Health Canada to become a go-to source of
  information for non-industry stakeholders and Canadians.
Program Organization and Governance
Various factors affected the Program’s ability to function efficiently.
  Roles and responsibilities across the pre-market and post-market
  surveillance and compliance and enforcement functions were not always
  clearly defined, particularly at the working level. However, the
  Program delineated clear roles and responsibilities among scientific
  evaluators and medical officers.
In addition, with the creation of the new Medical Devices Directorate,
  the roles and responsibilities between the merged pre and post market
  functions are intended to be further clarified through the development
  of revised operating procedures and processes. The Program is based on
  the Medical Devices Regulations which are based on the level of risk
  for various classes of medical devices. All the Medical Devices
  Program’s core activities centre on a risk-based approach for
  regulating medical devices through their life cycle.The MDP, however,
  did not have a comprehensive framework defining roles and
  responsibilities, nor an integrated risk management and
  information-sharing strategy. This lack of clarity regarding roles and
  responsibilities may have contributed to the development of parallel
  processes across MDP functions.
Additionally, the MDP’s information was stored across several
  repositories. Available information had to be consolidated from various
  sources in order to understand the full history of Health Canada
  activities in relation to a medical device.
Program Resources
A lack of resources challenged the post-market surveillance function’s
  ability to process incident reports and complete signal assessments
  within service standards. Overall, post-market surveillance activities
  received about only 7% of MDP’s budget in 2018-19. Additionally, in
  recent years, the number of staff working in medical device
  surveillance decreased. In comparison, the number of staff increased in
  the other two MDP functions.
With the introduction of mandatory incident reporting by hospitals in
  December 2019, the workload of the post-market surveillance function
  and the compliance and enforcement function may significantly increase.
  At the time of the engagement, the workload implications of mandatory
  reporting were not fully analyzed. However, it should be noted that
  recent investments have been made through various projects. This is
  expected to result in an increased intake of reports that are processed
  through new semi-automated systems. A risk still exists, as the
  challenges regarding the timely assessment and completion of some
  surveillance activities may be exacerbated if capacity issues are not
  addressed in these areas.
Recommendations
The Health Products and Food Branch should address current resource
      gaps in the post-market functions responsible for processing
      incident reports and assessing incidents. The Regulatory Operations
      and Enforcement Branch should consider the subsequent impacts on
      the resource needs of the compliance and enforcement function. As
      well, both Branches should ensure that the MDP has the capacity and
      tools to address the mandatory reporting by hospitals introduced in
      December 2019, and associated enforcement of hospital vigilance
      practices.
MDP’s surveillance activities were challenged by a lack of resources
      and could not always be completed within service standards. The
      introduction of mandatory reporting of medical device incidents by
      approximately 775 Canadian hospitals in December 2019 will likely
      further affect the post-market surveillance function’s ability to
      manage its workload, as the number of incident reports submitted to
      Health Canada may double. Mandatory reporting may also affect the
      resources and activities of the compliance and enforcement function, as
      inspectors will be required to monitor potential under-reporting and
      inspect hospitals. However, at the time of the engagement, Health
      Canada had not fully analyzed the implications of mandatory reporting
      on program workload.
The Health Products and Food Branch and the Regulatory Operations
      and Enforcement Branch should continue their efforts to adapt the
      MDP, through both domestic and international initiatives, to
      address challenges emerging from the rapidly changing life cycle of
      medical devices and the use of novel technologies.
While Health Canada made significant strides to adapt its regulatory
      framework, other challenges need to be addressed to ensure that the MDP
      remains effective moving forward. For instance, at the time of the
      engagement, there was no mechanism to address the growing issue around
      medical devices offered through a subscription or service (e.g., online
      diagnostic tools), or to track individuals using implanted devices so
      they can be notified directly by Health Canada if there is an incident.
The Health Products and Food Branch and the Regulatory Operations
      and Enforcement Branch should consider and document how to further
      integrate sex- and gender-based analysis plus (SGBA+) into the life
      cycle of medical devices, including providing guidance to
      applicants and increasing awareness of MDP staff.
Evidence shows that men and women are affected differently by medical
      devices due to sex and gender disparities. While Health Canada
      progressed in its efforts to integrate sex and gender considerations
      into the MDP, there were additional opportunities to further integrate
      these considerations in all program activities, where relevant.
The Health Products and Food Branch and the Regulatory Operations
      and Enforcement Branch should maintain and scale up communication
      and engagement efforts with industry stakeholders,  health care professionals and organizations, and patient groups. It
      is also recommended that the Health Product and Food Branch improve
      the timeliness and accessibility of program information available
      online. This includes ensuring that guidance documentation is
      reviewed and updated as required across all of the MDP's
      operations, including on the Government of Canada website.
Health Canada’s efforts to increase communication and engagement with
      stakeholders were well received by industry representatives. However,
      Health Canada was not a go-to source of information for health care
      representatives, patient groups, and the population in general. There
      was also a need to improve the timeliness and accessibility of
      information online. In particular, outdated guidance documents may have
      contributed to inaccuracies in application submissions for medical
      device licences. Also, industry key informants mentioned having
      difficulty finding the information and guidance required to support the
      development of their applications.
The Health Products and Food Branch and the Regulatory Operations
      and Enforcement Branch should ensure that roles and
      responsibilities at the operational level are clearly defined and
      distributed, and that program risks are identified and managed.
Roles and responsibilities of operational-level staff were not clearly
      defined across the three MDP functions. The MDP also did not have a
      comprehensive framework defining roles and responsibilities, nor an
      integrated risk management and information-sharing strategy. Challenges
      with roles and responsibilities may be addressed, in part, with the
      implementation of the new Medical Devices Directorate announced in late
      2019, which will integrate the pre-market function and the function
      responsible for the assessments of medical device incidents. However,
      the compliance and enforcement function and the Health Products
      Surveillance and Epidemiology Bureau (i.e., the group responsible for
      processing medical device incident reports) will remain with their
      original directorates.
The Health Products and Food Branch and the Regulatory Operations
      and Enforcement Branch should ensure that a data management
      approach supports the monitoring of medical devices throughout
      their life cycle.
The MDP’s information was fragmented across several repositories. This
      challenged the Program’s efficiency and ability to take a life cycle
      approach to regulating and monitoring medical devices.
1.0 Introduction and Background
This report presents key findings and recommendations of the Joint
  Audit and evaluation of Health Canada’s Medical Devices Program (MDP).
  The engagement examined MDP’s activities from April, 2013 to August,
  2019.
Areas examined include the adequacy of program controls, risk
  management, and the integration of sex- and gender-based analysis plus
  (SGBA+), as well as the MDP’s impacts, how it was positioned to adapt
  to an increasingly complex environment, and how the organizational
  structure at the time of the engagement
Footnote i
i
supported an efficient delivery of MDP’s activities.
Since March 2020, the Medical Devices Program has been focused on
  meeting the immense needs of health professionals, patients and
  industry in the fight against COVID-19. The central role of the Program
  in protecting the health and safety of Canadians has been placed in the
  spotlight, resulting in the fast tracking of a number of significant
  regulatory activities, including the drafting and implementation of
  various Interim Orders, all targeted at providing expedited access to
  COVID-19 medical devices (e.g., testing devices, ventilators, gloves)
  at this critical time. In addition, processes have been adapted to
  expedite the issuance of a significant increase of Medical Device
  Establishment Licences in order to ensure that critical personal
  protective equipment (PPE) is available to combat COVID-19. Lastly, the
  intake of incident reports, post-market monitoring, health risk
  assessments, and compliance and enforcement activities have required
  significant resources.
Although the finalization of the Office of Audit and Evaluation’s (OAE)
  report and Management Response Action Plan has been delayed due to
  COVID-19 priorities, the Program has continued to be mindful of the
  OAE’s recommendations. The pandemic has provided an opportunity to make
  progress in addressing some of these recommendations. Specifically, the
  Program has continued to engage domestic and international stakeholders
  in relation to COVID-19. Furthermore, the Program has been cognizant of
  historical challenges with the existing website when developing new
  content and webpages to share information in relation to COVID-19.
Data was collected from a review of the literature and program
  documents, performance measurement data and financial information as
  well as from case studies, a comparative analysis, and key informant
  interviews with MDP staff and stakeholders. Analyses undertaken also
  included the testing of a sample of operational transactions from April
  1
st
2018 to September 2019 (see Appendix A for further
  details).
1.1 Benefits and Risks of Medical Devices
Medical devices, as defined in the Food and Drugs Act
Footnote 2
2
, cover a wide range of medical instruments, apparatus, contrivance, or
  similar articles, as well as in vitro reagents used in the treatment,
  mitigation, diagnosis, or prevention of a disease, disorder, or
  abnormal physical condition. Without medical devices, many common
  medical procedures would not be possible, such as bandaging a sprained
  ankle, diagnosing infectious diseases, or implanting artificial hips.
The Medical Devices Regulations
Footnote 3
3
group medical devices into one of four risk classes: Class I represent
  the lowest risk (e.g.,
tongue depressors) and Class IV represents the highest risk (e.g.,
  artificial heart valves).
1.3 million
different types of medical devices are available for sale in
  Canada. These devices range from bandages, hospital beds,
  pacemakers, implants, and MRI machines, to smart watches.
Many Canadians are dependent on medical devices to improve their health
  and quality of life. In some cases, medical devices like pacemakers are
  also credited with saving lives. According to several external key
  informants who are using medical devices, having access to a device
  improved their health and allowed them to engage in everyday activities
  such as work, sports, and travel.
Medical devices also provide economic benefits for the health care
  system. For instance, interventional cardiology and the use of
  drug-secreting stents, instead of coronary bypass surgeries, was linked
  to substantial health system savings and improved cardiac disease
  management, which in turn enhanced patient outcomes, including reduced
  recovery times and increased capacity for managing cardiac disease
Footnote 4
4
. According to the Canadian Institute for Health Information Patient
  Cost Estimator, implanting a stent costs approximately $6,000, compared
  to $26,680 on average for coronary bypass surgery
Footnote 5
5
. Additionally, a Diabetes Canada study found that specialized devices
  to treat diabetic foot ulcers can help prevent amputations, which could
  result in direct cost savings ranging from $48 to $75 million a year
  for the province of Ontario
Footnote 6
6
.
Although medical devices are valuable to Canadians and the health care
  system, they also involve a certain level of risk. Incidents can occur
  as a result of a device malfunction, application or user error, the
  inherent risk of a device, as well as the negative interaction between
  the device and another device or medical procedure
Footnote 7
7
. Such incidents may result in health issues or illnesses for the user,
  and in some cases death. For instance, in 2014, the Paradigm Insulin
  Pump was recalled by the manufacturer because inadvertent misuse could
  have resulted in the delivery of an insulin dose exceeding the amount
  intended by the user and potentially cause hypoglycaemia
Footnote 8
8
.
The MDP aims to mitigate the risks associated with medical devices by
  ensuring that Canadians have access to safe, effective, and quality
  
  devices
Footnote 9
9
. The MDP’s activities cover the life cycle of a medical device, from
  providing regulatory guidance to manufacturers during their research
  and product development, through to the review of device licence
  applications, as well as monitoring, prevention, and intervention for
  devices that are licensed for sale in Canada
Footnote 10
10
. The MDP's compliance and enforcement function also monitors the
  extent to which manufacturers, distributors, and importers are
  compliant with the Food and Drugs Act and Medical Devices Regulations. It delivers Medical Device
  Establishment Licences, conducts proactive inspections for
  manufacturers of Class I devices, and for importers and distributors of
  all medical devices, as well as responsive inspections of
  manufacturers, importers, and distributors of all classes of devices.
  Figure 1 below provides examples of some of the MDP’s activities that
  cover the various stages of the medical device life cycle. Of note,
  Health Canada does not licence Class I medical devices, but monitors
  them through the establishment licensing of manufacturers, importers,
  and distributors of medical devices in Canada
Footnote 11
11
.
Figure 1. Example of Health Canada’s Involvement in the Medical Device Life Cycle
Figure 1 - Text description
This figure illustrates some of the Health Canada Medical Device Program
    functions and examples of activities to regulate the life cycle of medical
    devices. The figure is a 4-part circular model. Each section represents a
    particular part of the medical device life cycle. For each section, there
    is also an accompanying statement providing examples of activities of the
    Medical Device Program.
The first section of the life cycle model is labeled: Research, Product
    Development, Licence Application Review. The corresponding function is MDP
    Pre-Market Activities, with a bullet list of the following activities:
Licensing of medical devices;
Quality Management System certification for manufacturers of Class II and
      IV devices (i.e. Medical Device Single Access Program (MDSAP); and,
Special Access Program.
The second and third sections of the model share the label: Monitoring,
    Prevention & Intervention. The second sections shows the MDP
    Post-Market Surveillance with the following examples of activities:
Processing medical device incident reports;
Post-market assessments; and,
Risk Communications.
The third section shows the function: MDP Post-Market Compliance &
    Enforcement whit the following examples of activities:
Inspections
Medical Devices Establishment Licence (MDEL)
Recalls
The third section of the model also has a smaller arrow labeled: Product
    Removal from Market. This arrows indicates that when a device reaches this
    point, it is no longer part of the model or the work of Health Canada.
The final section of the model is labeled: Ongoing Research &
    Development with a note indicating that ongoing research and development is
    the responsibility of the manufacturer. This section is included to show
    the entire life cycle of a medical device. It also points back to the first
    section of the model, which is MDP Pre-Market Activities
1.2 Health Canada’s Medical Devices Program
At the time of the engagement, the MDP was organized along separate
  pre-market (i.e., licence approval) and post-market functions (i.e.,
  surveillance, as well as compliance and enforcement), each responsible
  for different program activities (see Figure 2).
As of November 2019, part of the Program was restructured into a new
  Medical Devices Directorate. This new directorate is comprised of the
  pre-market function and the Marketed Pharmaceuticals and Medical
  Devices Bureau, from the post-market surveillance function. The other
  half of the surveillance function (i.e., the Health Products
  Surveillance and Epidemiology Bureau) and the compliance and
  enforcement function remain with their original directorates
Footnote 12
12
.
In 2018-19, MDP planned expenditures were about $33M, $15M of which was
  funded by Health Canada. The remaining expenditures were funded through
  the Program’s licensing fees.
Figure 2: Organizational Structure of the Medical Devices Program at the Time of the Engagement
Figure 2 - Text description
This figure illustrates the organizational structure within Health Canada
    that comprises the primary functions of the Medical Device Program.
Two Branches deliver program activities: the Health Products and Food
    Branch (HPFB) and the Regulatory Operations & Enforcement Branch
    (ROEB).
Under HPFB, the Therapeutic Products Directorate (TPD) and Marketed Health
    Products Directorate (MHPD) have different divisions involved in the
    program:
Under the Therapeutic Products Directorate (TPD), the Medical Devices
      Bureau (MDB) is responsible for the pre-market function.
Under the Marketed Health Products Directorate (MHPD), the Health
      Products Surveillance and Epidemiology Bureau (HPSEB) and Marketed
      Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Bureau (MPMDB) is responsible for the
      post-market surveillance function.
Under the Regulatory Operations & Enforcement Branch (ROEB), the
    Medical Devices and Clinical Compliance Directorate (MDCCD) has a division
    named the Medical Device Compliance Program (MDCP). This division delivers
    the compliance and enforcement function, which is also a post-market
    function.
Overall, at the time of the engagement, the MDP’s activities were
  similar in scope to other Health Canada regulatory programs (e.g.,
  pharmaceuticals)
Footnote 13
13
. They were also aligned with the Department’s mandate and stewardship
  role of protecting Canadians and facilitating access to products that
  are vital to their health and well-being
Footnote 14
14
.
The engagement focused on the three main functions of the MDP; however,
  it should be noted that program activities are supported by the Health
  Products and Food Branch’s Resource Management and Operations
  Directorate and Policy Planning and International Affairs Directorate,
  as well as the Regulatory Operations and Enforcement Branch’s Planning
  and Operations Directorate and Policy and Regulatory Strategies
  Directorate. Moreover, the Program’s risk communications are developed
  in collaboration with the Marketed Health Products Directorate’s Office
  of Policy, Risk Advisory and Advertising.
2.0 Safety, Effectiveness and Quality of Medical Devices in
  Canada
2.1 Pre-market Process Controls
The MDP implemented adequate controls within its pre-market
  function, and the majority of medical device licence applications
  were processed consistently. However, guidance documents available
  to staff were outdated, which could represent a risk, especially
  for new employees who are unfamiliar with the application process.
The pre-market function established controls and provided guidance
  documents to MDP staff outlining the intake, screening, evaluation, and
  approval of medical device license applications. Transactional testing
  shows that approximately 94% of device licence applications were processed
  by the pre-market function in accordance with all of the required controls.
  The processing errors observed in the remaining 6% of applications were
  minor deficiencies, including administrative errors, formatting
  inconsistencies, and partially completed internal documents.
Some of the controls implemented by the pre-market function included:
For combination products (see definition below), the MDP developed a Combination Products Policy, as well as several standard operating
    procedures for reviewing device licence applications for these products.
    The majority of device licence applications for combination products
    received by Health Canada in 2017-18 and 2018-19 were processed
    consistently, in accordance with the MDP’s standard operating procedures.
    Because combination products involve more than one Health Canada
    directorate, consultations held between the directorates when reviewing
    license applications for these products, were recorded, and stored in a
    document repository named docuBridge.
The MDP required all staff in the pre-market function to sign conflict of
    interest disclaimers when they were hired and on an annual basis. These
    disclaimers were tracked in an electronic database. Moreover, any
    contractors hired by the pre-market function to review applications had to
    answer an extensive list of questions on conflicts of interest related to
    their contracts. They were not assigned to applications in which they may
    have had a potential vested interest.
The pre-market function also established a control mechanism consisting
    of issuing licences with conditions for certain Class III and IV devices.
    These conditions aim to address any safety or effectiveness concerns when
    additional information is required from manufacturers during the
    application process. These licences with conditions helped ensure that
    medical devices with potential safety and effectiveness concerns were
    monitored following license approval.
Key Definition:
Combination products contain multiple different components, such as a
  drug and a medical device, or a biological component and a medical
  device. These types of products typically require joint reviews between
  the MDP and other programs or directorates within Health Canada (e.g.,
  the Biologics and Genetic Therapies Directorate). The primary component
  of the product determined which program or directorate takes the lead
  on reviews.
Although the pre-market function implemented processes and controls that
  were followed almost all of the time, many of the function’s internal
  guidance documents that support the review process for device licence
  applications were significantly outdated. For instance, some of the
  guidance documents for intake and application administration did not
  reflect the MDP’s transition to docuBridge in 2017. This represents a risk
  as outdated information has the potential to mislead program staff when
  reviewing device licence applications. This risk is likely greater for
  newly hired staff who may be unfamiliar with undocumented processes.
2.2 Post-market process controls
The MDP experienced delays in processing mandatory incident
  reports. This represents a risk to the MDP’s ability to ensure the
  continued safety, effectiveness, and risk-benefit profile of
  medical devices.
The MDP detected, monitored and followed up on medical device incidents
  through the collection of:
mandatory incident reports from manufacturers or importers;
foreign incident reports from international regulatory agencies
Footnote 15
15
;
voluntary incident reports, through the Canadian Medical Devices Sentinel
    Network (CMDSNet)
Footnote ii
ii
Footnote 16
16
; and
voluntary incident reports from other sources (e.g., private clinics,
    industry, individuals using a medical device)
Footnote 17
17
.
Once received, incident reports were manually processed by MDP staff.
In addition to receiving incident reports, the MDP also conducted active
  surveillance of incidents through literature and media scans, monitored
  actions taken by international regulatory agencies, followed-up with
  manufacturers to ensure reporting, and implemented compliance actions in
  cases of underreporting. It also had several working groups and committees,
  with representatives from each program function that were responsible for
  identifying and screening these incidents.
From 2013 to 2017, the MDP received between 11,070 and 14,931 incident
  reports per year
Footnote 18
18
. 
  The majority were mandatory reports, for which there are two categories:
“10-day reports”
, meaning that the manufacturer has 10
    days to report incidents that have led to the death or serious
    deterioration of an individual. The MDP received 1,814 of these reports on
    average per year between 2013 and 2017. The processing of 10-day reports
    was prioritized over other reports. MDP staff had to complete the data
    entry for these report within a 15-day service standard.
“30-day reports”
, meaning that the manufacturer has 30
    days to report all other type of incidents. The MDP received 10,317 of
    these reports on average per year between 2013 and 2017. The service
    standard for the data entry of those reports was 84 days
Footnote 19
19
.
An examination of reports by fiscal year showed that the entry of 10-day
  reports within service standards improved over the last few years, as
  illustrated in Figure 3
Footnote iii
iii
. During the same period, the number of 30-day reports entered within
  service standards, decreased significantly. Additional testing showed that
  10-day reports exceeded service standards by up to 319 and 30-day reports
  exceeded service standards by up to 370 days. This included delays of up to
  153 days for high-risk Class IV devices.
Internal documentation suggests that the delays experienced at the
  beginning of fiscal year 2019-20 were attributed to the receipt
of approximately 1,600 incident reports from a manufacturer early in 2019.
  Such a situation can occur when the compliance and
enforcement function discovers that a manufacturer has under-reported
  incidents, and is then required to send all those reports
to Health Canada. According to a few internal key informants, at the time
  of the engagement, the surveillance function did not have the capacity to
  process such a large surge of reports within program service standards.
Figure 3: Proportion of Medical Device Incident Reports Entered within Data Entry Service Standards
Figure 3 - Text description
This figure contains two separate line graphs. The first graph shows the
    proportion of 10-day reports processed within the 15-day service standard
    (n=8,379) over time:
87% in 2016-17
92% in 2017-18
93% 2018-19
The second graph is for 30-day reports processed within the 84-day service
    standard (n=37,666). The line graph shows the results by fiscal year
    starting in 2016-17 through 2018-19. The results are as follows:
96% in 2016-17:
77% in 2017-18:
72% in 2018-19:
The source of information for this graph is results from the audit
    transactional testing.
One control to ensure that 10-day reports were dealt with promptly was to
  verify that incidents were properly labelled as either a 10-day or 30-day
  report when submitted to Health Canada. However, at the time of the
  engagement, the triaging of reports was omitted from the intake process for
  medical device incidents. As a result, 10-day reports were miscategorized
  as 30-day reports when they were received by Health Canada, and remained in
  the processing queue for a longer period than would normally be expected
  for a 10-day report. This is a potential risk to the Canadian public, as
  emerging serious incidents may not be caught and addressed in a timely
  manner.
Some internal key informants explained that delays in completing the data
  entry for incident reports, lack of triaging incoming reports, and
  inconsistencies in the labelling of reports challenged the Program’s
  ability to conduct trend analysis, proactively address emerging and
  suspected safety issues, and conduct compliance and enforcement activities.
That being said, there were delays entering mandatory reports, as evidence
  shows that the voluntary reports received by the CMDSNet, which were
  considered to be at the same priority level as 10-day reports, were all
  entered within the required service standard (i.e., 15 days).
The MDP experienced delays in the completion of signal assessments,
  but most risk communications continued to be disseminated within
  service standards.
When an incident is signalled through reporting or monitoring, staff in the
  post-market surveillance function assess and review such signals in order
  to determine the right course of action to address the incident. MDP
  performance data shows that the majority of signal assessments and reviews
  were completed within the 130-day service standard for signal assessments
  and 60 days for reviews.
The proportion of these activities meeting service standards steadily
  declined from 100% in 2014-15 and 2015-16 to 89% in 2018-19. This downward
  trend continued in the first part of fiscal year 2019-20, as only 50% of
  signal assessments were completed within service standards between April
  and June, 2019. However, while operational data shows that service
  standards were met in the majority of cases before April 2019, they did not
  account for the time required to collect additional information about the
  incident from the manufacturer or other sources. If this time, excluding
  industry delays, is taken into consideration, approximately 30% of signals
  from fiscal year 2018-19 did met the required service standards.
Key Definitions
Signal Assessments aim to gather safety information on a priority issue in order to
  characterize it, come up with strategies to deal with it, and recommend
  solutions to prevent or mitigate identified risks.
Summary Safety Reviews provide information collected from monitoring licensed devices, based on
  several potential sources of information (e.g., domestic and foreign
  incident reports, medical and scientific literature) to identify potential
  safety issues. Each summary outlines what was assessed, what was found, and
  what action was taken by Health Canada, if any.
According to some internal key informants and program documents, activities
  pertaining to signal assessments were challenged by a lack of resources,
  including the redirection of staff towards other activities, such as
  addressing increased media attention regarding implanted devices and
  implementing the Medical Devices Action Plan.
The delays in conducting signal assessment did not affect the MDP’s ability
  to issue risk communications (e.g., recalls, warnings and safety reviews)
  for devices that had an incident
Footnote 20
20
. As shown in Figure 4, since 2014-15, most risk communications regarding
  medical devices were disseminated within service standards (i.e., 25 days
  for standard communications, 10 days for non-standard communications, five
  days for expedited communications, and two days for urgent communications).
Figure 4: Targeted Risk Communications Dissemination within Service Standards
Figure 4 - Text description
This figure is a vertical bar graph showing results by fiscal year from 2014-15 through 2018-19. A target line across the top of the bar graph provides a visual representation of how close results are to the target of 90% of risk communications disseminated within services standards. The following are the results:
75% in 2014-15
100% in 2015-16
100% in 2016-17
75% in 2017-18
100% in 2018-19
The source of information for this graph is MDP Performance Data.
Compliance and enforcement activities were conducted within service
  standards.
Program performance data shows that compliance and enforcement activities
  for medical devices were generally conducted within performance targets:
The target of 95% of manufacturers inspected who were in compliance with
    the Food and Drug Act and related regulations was exceeded every
    year during the 2013-14 to 2018-19 period;
In 2018-19, the proportion of high-risk cases initially identified as
    non-compliant, but that eventually resulted in compliance, met the target
    of 95%; and
•
    The target of 100% of Medical Device Establishment Licences reviewed
    within the 120-day service standards was achieved twice between 2014-15 and
    2018-19. In other years, the proportion of licences reviewed within these
    service standards was higher than 99%.
Key Definition: Medical Device Establishment Licences
are issued to importers and distributors of medical devices in Canada,
  to manufacturers selling medical devices for which they are not the
  licence holder, as well as manufacturers of Class I devices who
  distribute their own devices.
Most post-market processes were documented, but there were gaps in
  the documentation of service standards. In addition,
  inconsistencies in data entry limited the Program’s ability to
  analyze trends from incident report data and proactively detect
  incidents.
The post-market surveillance and the compliance and enforcement functions
  documented the operating processes and assessment criteria for the
  prioritization of medical device incidents, in order to ensure that
  
  high-priority incidents (i.e., 10-day and CMDSNet reports) were examined
  promptly. However, the post-market surveillance function did not document
  its service standards in its internal guidance documents, and the
  compliance and enforcement function did not establish service standards for
  the voluntary reports it received. There was no comprehensive review done
  by the Program to determine if the timelines for data entry, assessment,
  and coding of incident reports had considered all current processes. In
  addition, the service standards for data entry have not been reviewed since
  they were adopted in 2010.
The engagement team expected to find that the processes followed by
  post-market functions would be reflected in the Program’s guidance
  documents. However, all the medical device incident reports examined in the
  Medical Devices System database were missing one or more pieces of the
  scientific evaluation information that was outlined in standard operation
  procedures and work instructions. This information was documented in
  external tracking sheets instead of the database. There were also
  inconsistencies in data entry for the Program’s Medical Devices System
  database that affected data integrity. For example, Special Access Program
  and investigational testing reports (see section 3 for a definition), which
  did not have a specific label in the database, were labelled as 10-day
  reports. This limited the ability to interpret statistical analyses of data
  extracted from the Medical Devices System.
2.3. Safety of Medical Devices Available in Canada
Despite challenges in accomplishing some post-market surveillance
  and compliance and enforcement activities on time, Health Canada
  was generally effective at ensuring the safety of medical devices
  in Canada.
The regulatory process was seen by several external key informants as
  rigorous because of the requirements to be addressed. These informant’s
  perceptions echo results from the 2016 Regulatory Transparency and Openness
  Framework (RTOF) survey, which included stakeholders and members of the
  public. Among stakeholder
Footnote iv
iv
respondents involved with medical devices (n=20), the majority (95%) agreed
  that products regulated by Health Canada were safe. Additionally, the
  majority (75%) of members of the Canadian public with an interest in
  medical devices (n=40) were confident in the products regulated by Health
  Canada
Footnote v
v
.
Several external key informants perceived Health Canada as effective at
  ensuring the safety of medical devices. Moreover, some experts interviewed
  perceived the safety of medical devices sold in Canada to be comparable to
  other countries. Between 2013-14 and 2018-19, Health Canada issued
  approximately 900 recalls, on average, per year. In comparison, Australia,
  which received a similar number of Class II to IV licence applications per
  year (i.e., approximately 2,500 applications in 2017-18, compared to 2,100
  in Canada), issued an average of approximately 600 recalls annually.
A comparison of recalls in Canada and the United States suggests that the
  safety of devices in Canada is similar to the United States. A sample of 60
  recalls
Footnote vi
vi
issued by Health Canada in 2018 was assessed to determine whether these
  recalls were also issued in the United States. If the recall was not issued
  in the United States, the team further examined whether the device subject
  to the Canadian recall was approved for sale by the United States Food and
  Drug Administration. The analysis shows that 70% (42 out of 60) of the
  recalls analyzed occurred in both countries. Of these:
The time when the recall was initiated was comparable in both countries.
    Of the 42 recalls, 16 were initiated in the United States, 14 were
    initiated in Canada and 12 were initiated in both countries at the same
    time
Footnote vii
vii
.
In most cases (30 out of 42 recalls), the recall was posted on Health
    Canada’s website before it was posted on the Food and Drug Administration’s
    website.
The devices most frequently subject to recalls in both countries were in
    the diagnostic category (e.g., immunodiagnostic products) with 10 recalls,
    followed by surgical instruments with eight recalls, and imaging systems
    (e.g., ultrasound equipment) with seven recalls. Two of the recalls sampled
    and found in both countries were for implantable devices.
Of the 60 recalls analyzed, 18 were only issued in Canada. Of these:
Most of the devices were approved for sale in the United States (15 out
    of 18).
Three devices were not approved in the United States. These were subject
    to a recall in Canada due to a: 1) licensing issue, 2) labelling issue, and
    3) a reminder from the manufacturer providing some technical information
    about the device.
Certain recalls issued in Canada were not relevant for the United States.
    For instance, a recall pertained to a packaging issue for a certain lot of
    devices, or the French translation was missing from the product
    information.
None of the 18 recalls issued only in Canada were due to a situation
    where there was a reasonable probability that the use of, or exposure to,
    the recalled device would cause serious adverse health consequences or
    death. In this regard, six out of the 18 recalls were in the Health
    Canada’s hazard classification II, which is related to a situation where
    the use of, or exposure to, a recalled device could cause temporary adverse
    health consequences, or where there is not a significant probability of
    serious adverse health consequences. The other 12 recalls were in the
    hazard classification III, which is related to a situation where the use
    of, or exposure to, a recalled device is not likely to cause any adverse
    health consequences.
The recalls were primarily related to diagnostic devices (eight out of
    18), and two were for implantable devices.
In addition to Canada’s comparability with the United States in terms of
  recalls, Health Canada was sometimes at the forefront internationally when
  issuing warnings and recalls. This was the case with the Essure Permanent
  Birth Control System. Canada was among the first countries to issue a
  Summary Safety Review and warning to health care professionals, advising
  them of potentially serious complications with this device. Canada was also
  one of the first countries to suspend the licence for Biocell breast
  implants.
Key Definition: Recalls
include any action taken by a manufacturer, importer, or distributor of
  a device to recall or correct the device, or to notify users of its
  potential defectiveness.
2.4 Adapting to the Evolution of Medical Devices
The medical device environment is increasingly complex and driven
  by the use of novel technologies.
Ensuring the safety of medical devices is complicated by the fact that the
  medical device environment is increasingly complex, as novel devices are
  being developed using new and innovative technologies, such as digital
  health technology, artificial intelligence, and 3D printing. The life cycle
  of devices is becoming shorter as they are developed and updated more
  rapidly.
According to a few key informants and Health Canada documents, the pace of
  innovation challenged the Department’s regulatory framework, which had
  requirements and timelines built around traditional models of
  manufacturing, pre-market approval, and sales, among other things
Footnote 21
21
. For instance, during the period examined, there was a growing trend
  towards licensing software as a medical device (e.g., online diagnostic
  tools) and there was no mechanism in the current regulations to address
  this change.
With the Medical Devices Action Plan and the Regulatory Review of
  Drugs and Devices, Health Canada made progress in adapting to the
  changing environment.
During the engagement period, Health Canada implemented several initiatives
  and tools to adapt its approach to regulating and monitoring medical
  devices. Many of these initiatives were driven by the 2018 Medical Devices
  Action Plan and the 2017 Regulatory Review of Drugs and Devices
Footnote 22
22
. These initiatives had concrete milestones and their progress was tracked
  by program staff. A detailed examination of the Medical Devices Action Plan
  tracking tool shows that its initiatives were generally on track or
  completed, and that progress updates were accurate and supported by
  evidence (e.g., publications).
Key Definitions
The
2018 Medical Devices Action Plan
focuses on 1)
  improving how devices get on the market; 2) strengthening the
  monitoring and follow-up of devices once used by Canadians; and 3)
  providing more information to Canadians about medical devices.
The
2017 Regulatory Review of Drugs and Devices
aims
  to provide more timely access to drugs and devices for Canadians
  through collaboration with other health care organizations (e.g.,
  Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health).
As part of these initiatives, the MDP built internal expertise and expanded
  the use of outside experts and stakeholders to strengthen its competencies
  in key areas of growth for medical devices. This resulted in:
The development and implementation of a Digital Health Division in 2018
    to support a more targeted and comprehensive pre-market review of medical
    device licence applications related to digital health technologies;
The creation of two new standing scientific advisory committees to obtain
    scientific, technical, and clinical advice on Digital Health Technologies
    (2018) and Health Products for Women (2019); and;
The development of guidance documents on novel medical devices that use
    new and innovative technologies (e.g., 2019 guidance document on  Supporting Evidence for Implantable Medical Devices Manufactured by 3D
    Printing  ).
Health Canada also amended section 23 of the Food and Drugs Act in
  2019 to increase the power of compliance inspectors. The amendment provided
  them with the ability to engage in more activities on the ground (i.e.,
  testing, taking photographs and recordings) and to examine electronic data.
  The Department also implemented regulatory changes, including the mandatory
  reporting of medical device incidents by hospitals (see further details in
  section 6).
In addition, the Compliance and Enforcement Policy for Health Products (Policy
  0001) was revised in December 2018. This revised version was perceived by a
  few internal key informants to be a more appropriate risk-based approach to
  enforcement, as it allows Health Canada to be more assertive in response to
  non-compliance. At the time of the engagement, the Department was also
  reviewing the scope and responsibilities of some of its compliance and
  enforcement activities to ensure that these activities focused on the right
  level of risk, and used resources effectively.
Additionally, Health Canada increased the number of annual foreign
  inspections to 90 (including 15 foreign on–site inspections) a year to help
  address challenges related to the globalization of the medical devices
  environment. This increase was expected to improve the compliance and
  enforcement of manufacturers in other counties, as well as promote
  international alignment and cooperation.
Engagement with international partners helps with sharing expertise
  and harmonizing practices.
Health Canada engaged in several international initiatives and partnerships
  to share expertise and harmonize practices, policies, and regulations with
  other jurisdictions. In particular, Health Canada was an active participant
  in the International Medical Device Regulators Forum (IMDRF). MDP staff
  participated in several working groups, including one dedicated to
  developing a harmonized terminology for reporting medical device incidents.
The MDP considered sex and gender differences, as they relate to
  medical devices.
Through the Health Portfolio Sex- and Gender-Based Analysis Policy
Footnote 23
23
, Health Canada can integrate sex, gender, and diversity considerations
  into its programs, when appropriate, in an effort to better meet the needs
  of different patient groups. This is relevant for the MDP, as evidence
  shows that men and women are affected differently by medical devices due to
  sex and gender disparities
Footnote 24
24
.
In this context, the MDP implemented measures to account for these
  disparities in several of its activities. In addition to creating the
  Scientific Advisory Committee on Health Products for Women in 2019, the MDP
  proposed amendments to the Medical Devices Regulations to provide
  Health Canada with greater authority to require information from
  manufacturers when there is evidence of a problem, including identified
  risks or uncertainties for specific groups (e.g., women, people with
  disabilities, children)
Footnote 25
25
. Also, in 2013, the MDP published a guidance document,  Considerations for Inclusion of Women in Clinical Trials and Analysis
  of Sex Differences  , which outlined key considerations for including women in pre-market
  studies for therapeutic product
Footnote
26
. Health Canada also sponsored a research project that focused on applying
  a sex- and gender-based analysis lens to the medical device life cycle.
The pre-market function examined whether clinical studies data provided
  with medical device licence applications had considered specific population
  groups that might use the device. However, the MDP did not have structured
  guidance for the industry on when and how to include this information.
  Manufacturers were also not required to include this data in their device
  licence applications. As such, there was no available evidence that the MDP
  had conducted systematic data or trends analysis to provide information
  regarding sex and gender considerations related to medical devices.
While Health Canada made strides to adapt to a changing
  environment, some challenges remain to be addressed.
Several internal and external key informants noted that further progress
  was required to adapt the regulatory framework. For instance, there was no
  mechanism to address the growing issue of medical devices offered through a
  subscription or as a service (e.g., online diagnostic tools).
Although controls were in place within the compliance and enforcement
  function to inspect and mitigate risks, should an incident report be
  submitted for an unlicensed medical device, Health Canada did not have the
  means to directly contact individuals living with or using a medical device
  when there was a safety issue. The regulations required manufacturers to
  monitor the use of their devices, submit mandatory incident reports, and
  contact individuals when there was new information concerning device
  safety, effectiveness, or performance. However, there was a lack of clarity
  with respect to responsibilities for contacting individuals using devices
  that were no longer licensed in Canada, or that were sold by a manufacturer
  that did not have an active licence in Canada (e.g., their medical device
  licence was suspended or not renewed).
Some external key informants, including experts, health care professionals,
  and individuals using a medical device, felt there should be a central
  registry of individuals with an implantable device, in order to allow
  Health Canada to inform the individuals directly when there is an incident.
  A similar suggestion was also made by the Scientific Advisory Committee on
  Health Products for Women
Footnote 27
27
.
Although there were ongoing mechanisms for collaboration with international
  regulatory agencies, some internal and international key informants noted
  that more could be done to communicate and collaborate with other
  jurisdictions. In particular, the compliance and enforcement function was
  often unable to engage in international collaboration due to workload
  pressures emerging from domestic priorities.
3.0	Providing Access to Medical Devices in Canada
3.1 Processing of Device Licence Applications
The MDP made progress in finding a balance between ensuring the
  safety of the devices and providing access in a timely manner.
Between 2013-14 and 2018-19, the MDP received an annual average of
  1,499 new applications for Class II medical devices, 424 for Class III,
  and 78 for Class IV. During the same period, the Program also received
  an annual average of 1,382 Class II, 424 Class III, and 311 Class IV
  amendment applications.
During the period, the MDP improved its performance at providing
  decisions on medical device licence applications within service
  standards (i.e., 15 days for Class II licence applications, 60 days for
  Class III and 75 days for Class IV). Calculations undertaken for the
  study show that, between April 1, 2018 and June 30, 2019, almost all
  device licence applications (96%) were processed within service
  standards for all application types.
Additionally, according to program performance data, the MDP’s ability
  to process device licence applications within service standards
  improved over the engagement period. As illustrated in Figure 5, the
  backlog of applications was reduced for Class III and IV devices from a
  high of approximately 18% in 2016-17, to a low of 5% in 2018-19.
At the time of the engagement, the MDP’s service standards for
  reviewing device licence applications did not include the time required
  for administrative processing, nor for technical and regulatory
  screening of applications once received by Health Canada. They also did
  not account for the 45 days added to the review process once
  manufacturers respond to any requests for additional information.
Figure 5: Proportion of Device Licence Applications in Backlog
Figure 5 - Text description
This figure is a vertical bar graph that shows the proportion of licence
    applications in backlog by fiscal year from 2013-14 through 2018-19. The
    following are the results shown:
8% in 2013-14
10% in 2014-15
15% in 2015-16
18% in 2016-17
7.5% in 2017-18
5% in 2018-19
Source of information for this graph are MDB Annual Report 2018-19 and MDB
    Annual Report 2013-14
Several health care professionals, as well as some industry
  representatives and experts, perceive the regulatory process to be
  lengthy. However, when compared to the United States, for instance,
  Health Canada’s service standards for reviewing device licence
  applications were shorter. The United States had a 180-day service
  standard for the scientific review of device licence applications with
  a possible extension for an additional 180 days if the application is
  amended (e.g., more information is provided)
Footnote 28
28
.
A significant proportion of device licence applications did not
  meet regulatory requirements when first submitted to Health
  Canada
According to program performance data, from 2013-14 to 2018-19, between
  39% and 59% of the device licence applications received by the MDP did
  not comply with regulatory requirements at the time of their first
  review decision. According to several internal and external key
  informants, incomplete device licence applications often increased the
  time required for the review process as program staff had to go back to
  the applicant to request additional information. Transactional testing
  demonstrates that 66% of device licence applications were the object of
  at least one additional information request or deficiency letter from
  the MDP to the applicant.
As shown Figure 6, once the applicant provided the additional
  information requested by Health Canada, the percentage of applications
  that remained non-compliant with regulatory requirements dropped to 8%
  or less between 2013-14 and 2018-19.
Figure 6: Proportion of Device Licence Applications that Complied with Regulatory Requirements at First Review and after Additional Information was Requested and Provided
Figure 6 - Text description
This figure is an overlapping vertical bar graph showing results by fiscal year of both the proportion of initial licence application that comply with regulatory requirements at first review and the proportion of applications that became compliant after MDB requested and received additional information. The proportion of initial application that were compliant is as follows:
49% in 2013-14
52% in 2014-15
41% in 2015-16
45% in 2016-17
61% in 2017-18
58% in 2018-19
The proportion of applications that became compliant following the additional request and receipt of information is as follows:
97% in 2013-14
96% in 2014-15
96% in 2015-16
93% in 2016-17
93% in 2017-18
92% in 2018-19
Source of information for this graph is MDP Performance Data
Guidance documents on the application process were challenging
  to find and often not up-to-date.
The MDP published guidance documents on Health Canada’s website
  outlining requirements for all classes of medical devices, certain
  novel technologies (e.g., 3D printed devices), and combination
  products. These aimed to help applicants determine the classification
  of their product and navigate the application process.
The majority of industry key informants mentioned having difficulty
  finding the right information and guidance to support the development
  of their applications. They explained that navigating Health Canada’s
  website was difficult, and that the information available was not
  integrated in a way that helps industry understand the different steps
  of the application process (e.g., there is no roadmap to follow).
  Several industry and a few internal key informants explained that small
  and new manufacturers were more likely to experience challenges with
  the device licence application process, as they were less likely to be
  familiar with the regulatory process or had fewer resources with which
  to prepare their application materials. These perceptions align with
  results from the 2016 RTOF survey, where the majority of stakeholders
  (80%) reported that Health Canada’s information on regulatory
  requirements was not easy to find.
A review of guidance documents available online shows that, while the
  majority of guidance documents were drafted or updated within the last
  few years, a couple have not been updated in at least seven years. For
  instance, the document,  Guidance on Supporting Evidence to be provided for New and Amended
  Licence Applications for Class III and Class IV Medical Devices,
  not including In Vitro Diagnostic Devices (IVDDs)  , was last updated in 2012. Outdated documents may have contributed to
  inaccuracies in application submissions, leading to more back-and-forth
  between applicants and the program. This could also have affected the
  timeliness of device licensing decisions. There is also a risk that
  outdated internal guidance documentation may have caused confusion and
  errors when processing submissions, which could, in turn, have had
  impacts on the efficiency of pre-market processes.
Also, while broad information and evidence requirements for medical
  device licence applications were established for each class of device
  and available to industry stakeholders on Health Canada’s website,
  evidence of a defined process to periodically update these requirements
  was not found. This means that revisions to available guidance
  documents were made on an ad hoc basis.
3.2 Measures to Improve Access to Devices
The MDP’s Special Access Program provided a mechanism for
  Canadians to access medical devices.
According to program documents and a few external and internal key
  informants, challenges in accessing medical devices may also be
  mitigated through the MDP’s Special Access Program. This program allows
  health care professionals to gain access to medical devices that are
  not approved for sale in Canada, for use in emergencies or when
  conventional therapies have failed, are unavailable, or are unsuitable
  to treat a patient. Between 2013-14 and 2018-19, the MDP received an
  annual average of 4,714 applications through the Special Access
  Program, involving approximately 1,800 devices. On average, 95% of
  these applications were reviewed within the service standard of 72
  hours
Footnote 29
29
.
A few external and internal key informants raised concerns that
  accessing the Special Access Program could result in the circumvention
  of the full regulatory process. In this regard, the engagement team
  expected to find adequate controls in place to ensure that applications
  satisfied the criteria established by the Medical Devices Regulations, including the stipulation that
  manufacturers or importers must not use Special Access Program
  authorizations to circumvent regular licensing requirements.
The MDP implemented several controls to prevent the circumvention of
  licensing requirements. For example, in 2016, Health Canada published a
  
  guide informing health care professionals that the Special Access
  Program is not intended to provide early market access, and that
  manufacturers and importers are expected to pursue licensing for
  devices that were repeatedly authorized through the Special Access
  Program.
MDP staff also verified the credentials of health care professionals
  and restricted the number of units authorized per application. However,
  several controls implemented by the MDP relied on whistleblowing or
  self-disclosure (e.g., Health Canada prohibits applications completed
  by manufacturers or importers, and asks manufacturers or importers
  about their intentions to licence devices).
Transactional testing shows that approximately 80% of devices requested
  through the Special Access Program from 2013 to 2018 did not generate a
  subsequent device licence application. This proportion of devices also
  accounted for 73% of frequently-requested devices. A minority of
  applicants and devices accounted for the large majority of Special
  Access Program applications. This suggests that further incorporation
  of data analytics would strengthen Special Access Program controls for
  identifying possible attempts to circumvent regular licence
  requirements by facilitating the identification of risks, trends, and
  high-volume applications. In particular, data analytics may provide a
  supplemental control to help ensure that authorizations granted through
  the Special Access Program comply with the criteria established by the
  regulations, including identifying use of the Special Access Program to
  circumvent licensing regulations.
The MDP recently implemented several measures to mitigate
  challenges with the device licence application process.
In recent years, the MDP has focused on engaging with industry
  representatives to increase their awareness of available information
  and guidance documents regarding the medical device licence application
  process. The Program also developed and implemented several initiatives
  and tools in an attempt to reduce the number of applications that did
  not fulfill regulatory requirements, including:
Pre-submission meetingswith industry stakeholders
    to discuss upcoming device licence applications. The impact of these
    meetings was unknown at the time of the engagement, as only a small
    number of industry representatives requested pre-submission meetings.
    The majority of industry key informants interviewed who participated in
    a pre-submission meeting found them to be helpful, particularly for new
    and novel technologies and devices;
The launch of an e-Learning tool,  Understanding how Medical Devices are Regulated in Canada –
    Premarket Regulation,  to provide guidance on the regulatory requirements for new or
    amended device licence applications. While data was not collected on
    the reach of training, nor on feedback from participants, some industry
    and internal key informants noted that the course was well received;
    and
The creation of the Digital Health Technology Division to facilitate
    the review process for devices involving new technologies. Some
    industry key informants recognized the Division’s efforts to facilitate
    and support the application process, including informational road shows
    and participation at industry conferences.
Harmonizing the MDP’s requirements with those of other
  countries can help improve access to devices  .
According to program documents and interviews with several internal key
  informants, Health Canada was pursuing various initiatives to harmonize
  its requirements for medical device licence applications with those of
  other countries. Mainly organized through the International Medical
  Device Regulators Forum (IMDRF), these initiatives aimed to streamline
  the processes for manufacturers submitting applications in multiple
  jurisdictions. Examples include:
A Table of Contents format to harmonize the format of device licence
    applications across IMDRF member countries. This format was perceived
    by a few internal key informants as a potential way to clarify the
    requirements of a medical device licence application. As of April 1
st
, 2019 manufacturers can choose to use the Table of
    Content format for their Class III and IV licence applications; and
As of January 1
st
, 2019, Canada implemented the Medical
    Device Single Audit Program (MDSAP) as a mandatory requirement for
    manufacturers submitting device licence applications to Health Canada.
    At the time of this engagement, Canada was the only IMDRF member to
    mandate the MDSAP. The United States and Australia
Footnote 30
30
also accepted the MDSAP, but these countries did not implement it as a
    mandatory requirement.
Key Definition:
The
Medical Device Single Audit Program
allows
  manufacturers to complete and submit one certificate of their
  Quality Management System in fulfillment of the regulatory
  requirements of multiple countries.
Concerns were raised by several industry key informants that the
  introduction of the MDSAP may have hindered access to certain medical
  devices. They explained that the increased costs for obtaining the
  MDSAP, as compared to the previous audit certification required by
  Health Canada, may have deterred some manufacturers from renewing their
  establishment licence, or from submitting device licence applications
  for new or amended medical devices. At the time of the engagement, it
  was too early to determine the impact of the MDSAP. According to
  program performance data, between July, 2018 and July, 2019, about 8%
  of the total medical device licences approved by Health Canada were
  cancelled, not renewed or discontinued, which was an increase compared
  to the annual average of 4% between July, 2013 and July, 2018 .
Transaction testing demonstrates that the MDP’s staff reviewed the
  certificates of manufacturers’ Quality Management System in a
  consistent manner when processing medical device licence applications.
  If deficiencies with the certificate were found during the application
  review, they were communicated to applicants via e-mail for Class II
  devices, or in a formal deficiency letter for Classes III and IV
  devices. However, there was a lack of integration between MDSAP audit
  report information and compliance and enforcement activities.
  Observations of post-market non-compliance were received by the
  pre-market function, but not flagged to the compliance and enforcement
  function for action, thereby limiting the Program’s ability to adopt a
  life cycle approach.
The MDP was exploring additional measures to further facilitate
  access to needed medical devices  .
The MDP continued to explore measures to ensure both safety and access
  to medical devices in the midst of a changing environment. It is too
  early to assess the impacts of these measures, as they were still being
  implemented at the time of the engagement. These measures include:
A regulatory pathway for advanced therapeutic products announced in
    Budget 2019. This proposed pathway is designed to support patient
    safety, while increasing the Program’s flexibility to approve novel
    devices that do not clearly align with the current regulatory
    framework; and
The expansion of the Priority Pathway mechanism. This would allow the
    MDP to move certain device licence applications to the head of the
    queue for processing, in order to be more responsive to health care
    system needs and expand the agility of the regulatory system.
Key informants suggested potential opportunities for Health
  Canada to continue improving access to medical devices.
Several external key informants suggested examining the possibility of
  implementing an expedited process for approving amendment applications
  for medical devices that are already licensed for sale in the Canadian
  market, if the amendments are not expected to significantly increase
  the risks related to the device. This suggestion was made based on the
  expectation that the number of amendment applications would increase as
  the pace of technology continues to accelerate and updates to devices
  that are already licensed become more frequent (e.g., updates to
  software used as medical devices). A similar process for expediting
  amendment applications already exists in the United States [i.e., the
  510(k)].
Some external key informants, including representatives from industry
  and health care, also suggested an expedited approval process for
  devices already approved for sale in countries that have regulatory
  processes similar to Canada. These informants further noted that,
  should Health Canada consider this option, it would also have to
  maintain its regulatory autonomy and its accountability to Canadians.
Additionally, some external key informants noted a desire for more
  transparency on the status of medical device licence applications
  submitted to Health Canada. This could be in line with the online
  ‘Submissions Under Review’ database for Health Canada’s pharmaceutical
  program. A similar desire was noted by the majority of respondents
  (76%) from the 2016 Health Products and Food Branch Transparency
  survey, who agreed that the Submissions Under Review list should be
  expanded to include medical devices.
4.0 Communicating with Stakeholders and Canadians
Health Canada improved its communications regarding medical
  devices and increased its engagement of stakeholders.
Health Canada disseminated a number of different types of
  communications products to help industry stakeholders navigate the
  Program, and help health care professionals and Canadians make informed
  decisions about the use of a device (e.g., Dear Health Care
  Professional Letter, recall notices). Communication products produced
  by the Department also included guidance documents (see section 3.3 for
  further details).
Over the last five years, Health Canada has improved its communications
  on medical devices through initiatives such as:
Publishing Regulatory Decision Summaries for new and amended Class
    III and Class IV devices. Approximately 125 new summaries were
    published between March and August 2019;
Increasing public access to medical device clinical data through a
    searchable web portal and to a regularly updated online database of
    medical device incidents, complaints, and recalls;
Providing greater clarity and additional information on medical
    device inspections; and,
Undertaking various engagement activities, including bi-annual
    meetings with key industry representatives, a webinar with health care
    professionals to discuss Health Canada's safety review of breast
    implant-associated anaplastic large cell lymphoma (BIA-ALCL), and
    targeted outreach to patient groups, including meetings with women
    living with breast implants to learn about their experiences.
Key Definition: Regulatory Decision Summaries
explain Health Canada's decision for certain health products
  seeking market authorization.
Several industry representatives and a few health care professionals
  recognized the MDP for its engagement initiatives. Industry
  representatives appreciated the opportunity to engage with Health
  Canada representatives and hoped these types of opportunities will
  continue in the future. These perceptions echo findings from the 2016
  RTOF survey, where the majority of stakeholder respondents (85%) agreed
  that Health Canada did a better job at communicating to Canadians at
  that time than it did ten years ago. Additionally, all stakeholders who
  answered the survey felt that Health Canada was a trustworthy and
  reliable source of health and safety information, while 95% reported
  using Health Canada information to inform their activities and
  decisions.
In addition to various engagement initiatives, Health Canada offered
  stakeholders and Canadians the opportunity to participate in online
  consultations on proposed regulatory changes, as well as the
  development of new or amended policies and guidance documents. In
  2017-18 and 2018-19, it completed 100% of its planned consultation
  projects on medical devices. While industry representatives were
  generally happy with the opportunity to participate in these
  consultations, a few noted that they would have appreciated more
  opportunities to follow up with the MDP after their participation. This
  would have allowed them to provide additional details, if required, and
  get a better understanding of how their feedback was used by the
  Program. In this regard, program documents show that the MDP reviewed
  feedback collected through online consultations and used it, where
  relevant.
To date, the majority of engagement and consultation efforts by the MDP
  were carried out by the pre-market function. As such, there
  remain opportunities to further engage stakeholders in discussions
  related to post-market activities. The compliance and enforcement
  function developed a stakeholder engagement plan, but were unable to
  fully implement it due to a lack of resources.
Non-industry key informants, including members of the Canadian
  public, had a limited awareness of Health Canada’s
  communications related to medical devices.
The majority of key informants who were health care professionals,
  patient associations, or individuals using a medical device stated that
  they were unaware of Health Canada’s communications products on medical
  devices. Those who were aware indicated that they rarely used this
  information to inform their decisions. They relied instead on other
  sources of information, including manufacturers, hospital procurement
  departments, medical journals and publications, media, as well as
  colleagues or other individuals using a medical device. Nevertheless,
  some health care professionals and several individuals using a medical
  device noted that they would prefer to have accessed information from
  Health Canada, as they expected it to be more objective and
  trustworthy.
In addition to being generally unaware of Health Canada’s
  communications products on medical devices, the majority of
  non-industry key informants were also unaware of Health Canada’s online
  consultations on medical devices, or were not involved in any of the
  MDP’s engagement activities. Several external key informants indicated
  that more engagement is essential in order for Health Canada to learn
  about the impacts of medical devices and the needs of non-industry
  stakeholder groups.
Information posted online is often out-of-date and difficult to
  access.
In addition to raising concerns about the lack of timeliness of
  guidance documents (see section 3.1 for further details), some industry
  representatives and a few internal key informants noted that some
  Health Canada guidance documents did not necessarily reflect the
  realities of the current medical device environment (e.g., digital
  health technology, artificial intelligence). This could lead to
  situations where devices with more advanced technologies would not be
  assessed in a manner that reflects how quickly they change.
The lack of timeliness of information from Health Canada was also cited
  by a few external key informants as a reason why they rely on other
  sources of information about medical devices.
Additionally, from 2016-17 to 2018-19, only 33% to 50% of the MDP’s
  Summary Basis of Decisions and 7% to 33% of Regulatory Decision
  Summaries were posted online within program service standards. These
  documents were intended to provide health care professionals and
  Canadians with information that would lead to more informed decision
  making and treatment
Footnote 31
31
.
Key Definition: Summary Basis of Decisions:
explains why Health Canada authorized certain medical devices for
  sale in Canada.
Some external key informants also indicated a need for more plain
  language in Health Canada’s information products to make them more
  accessible to the general public. In this regard, a 2013 study found
  that most of Health Canada’s risk communications products were written
  at a graduate student level, which is well above the average health
  literacy level of the general public
Footnote 32
32
.
Additionally, some external and a few internal key informants indicated
  that greater clarity and context around risk communications would be
  helpful, particularly for incidents and recalls. For instance, they
  explained that having more information on the causes of incidents for a
  particular device (e.g., device malfunction as opposed to a user error)
  would help inform decisions about using a device.
5.0 Program Organization and Governance
5.1 Distribution of Roles and Responsibilities and Governance
Roles and responsibilities across the three program functions
  were not always clearly defined, nor aligned with the nature of
  their mandate.
The high-level roles and responsibilities of the MDP were well defined.
  In particular, the Food and Drugs Act and Medical Devices Regulations clearly outline the roles and
  responsibilities of the Minister of Health in relation to medical
  devices. However, there was a lack of clarity on roles and
  responsibilities at the operational level across the three MDP
  functions. Documents and internal key informants confirmed that the MDP
  did not have a comprehensive framework defining roles and
  responsibilities, nor an integrated risk management and
  information-sharing strategy.
Having clearly defined roles and responsibilities is important, as it
  enables management to coordinate program activities, assume leadership,
  provide accountability, and manage risks. A lack of defined roles and
  responsibilities may create confusion and operational inefficiency,
  such as duplication of efforts across program functions and
  inconsistent processes.
For instance, a few internal key informants noted a challenge with the
  division of responsibilities for processing voluntary incident reports
  between the post-market surveillance function and the compliance and
  enforcement function. While voluntary reports received from the CMDSNet
  were entered, coded, and scientifically evaluated by the surveillance
  function, voluntary reports from other sources were entered by the
  compliance and enforcement function, but not coded or scientifically
  evaluated. This created inconsistencies in data entry, coding, and
  evaluation for voluntary reports. It also led to the creation of
  parallel processes. Of note, when the compliance and enforcement
  function received a voluntary report and there was no subsequent
  mandatory report from the manufacturer, the MDP followed up with the
  manufacturer, triggering the required mandatory report.
There was no evidence found that the roles and responsibilities of the
  compliance and enforcement function were defined for processing
  voluntary incident reports. There was also no evidence found that roles
  and responsibilities were defined in regard to sharing voluntary report
  information with the surveillance function. Additionally, there was no
  requirement for the compliance and enforcement function and the
  post-market surveillance functions to consult each other on process
  changes. It was not possible to determine whether both functions
  fulfilled their roles and responsibilities for the processing of
  incident reports.
In addition to a lack of clarity, the distribution of roles and
  responsibilities across the three MDP functions was not always aligned
  with the nature of their mandate. For instance, the pre-market function
  assumed several responsibilities that were predominantly perceived as
  post-market activities. Under section 39 of the Medical Devices Regulations, Health Canada has the power to
  request additional information from a manufacturer if there are
  reasonable grounds to believe that a licensed device is not meeting
  safety and effectiveness requirements
Footnote 33
33
. At the time of the engagement, the pre-market function requested this
  additional information, even though the surveillance and compliance and
  enforcement functions used it to evaluate an incident. A few internal
  key informants explained that having to go through the pre-market
  function to obtain required information was not an efficient practice.
  To address this challenge, the surveillance function established an
  informal parallel process (i.e., Voluntary Request Letter) to contact
  manufacturer’s directly.
At the time of the engagement, the MDSAP certificate (see section 3.2)
  was requested, managed, and retained by the pre-market function.
  Several internal key informants from the compliance and enforcement
  function noted that their work would benefit from accessing the
  certificate, as it would help identify potential areas of risk and
  guide their inspection work. It was further noted that moving the MDSAP
  to the compliance and enforcement function would help reduce
  duplication of activities between the MDSAP audit and the inspection of
  manufacturers. It would also help ensure that the compliance and
  enforcement function is aware of any cases of non-compliance as soon as
  possible. Moreover, MDP inspectors had more authority (e.g., the
  ability to examine any articles or electronic data to which the Food and Drugs Act or Medical Devices Regulations apply) and conducted more thorough investigations of the systems and
  activities of manufacturers, as compared to the third party auditor’s
  responsible for the MDSAP reviews. At the time of the engagement,
  discussions between the pre-market and compliance and enforcement
  functions were underway to determine where the MDSAP should reside.
The MDP implemented various governance committees to foster
  information sharing across the three functions.
Various governance committees were implemented to oversee program
  operations and foster the exchange of information across the three
  program functions. In particular, a monthly Medical Devices Tri-Lateral
  Committee brought together program managers and directors
Footnote viii
viii
, and provided a forum to discuss issues of mutual interest or
  responsibility. The Tri-Lateral Committee adopted a two-fold approach
  where meetings including managers and directors were followed by a
  directors-only meeting. The MDP also implemented a number of
  operational-level committees, as well as a senior management
committee that provides leadership and focus.
Several internal key informants explained that communication at the
  management level and above generally worked well. They also noted that
  the various committees and meetings that took place between the MDP
  functions (e.g., trilateral meetings, biweekly risk meetings, monthly
  “hot topics” meetings, Director General and director bilateral
  meetings) contributed to the Program’s efficiency, including the
  prioritization of medical device incidents and the identification of
  problems before they happened. A few internal key informants explained
  that there remained opportunities to make the trilateral meetings more
  strategic and to improve the dissemination of information discussed at
  those meetings among a wider group of program staff.
Despite the governance structure put in place, concerns were
  raised over the quality of communications at the working level.
Several internal key informants raised concerns regarding the level and
  quality of communications at the working level across the three MDP
  functions. In particular, they identified a lack of communication as
  one of the main challenges affecting the efficiency of the Program.
Some internal key informants saw these communication challenges as
  negatively affecting the coordination of program activities, resulting
  in missed opportunities for program functions to work together or
  creating delays in program activities. For instance, a lack of
  communication between the pre-market and post-market surveillance
  functions regarding new and novel licensed devices limited
  opportunities for proactive post-market monitoring. Additionally,
  communication challenges between the two post-market functions
  regarding ongoing signal assessments resulted in situations where
  compliance and enforcement inspectors were unaware of upcoming signal
  assessments that could benefit compliance verification activities.
There was no evidence found that the MDP had a horizontal risk
  management framework.
The MDP had a Program Risk Management Committee that discussed emerging
  issues. In addition to the committee, emerging issues were managed
  within every program function on an ad-hoc basis. However, there was no
  evidence found of a horizontal risk management process. While the
  Health Products and Food Branch has a draft Branch Risk Register for
  2018-19, an approved version was not available at the time of the
  engagement, nor were any previously approved versions of this document.
5.2 Creation of a new Medical Devices Directorate
Health Canada implemented a new Medical Devices Directorate
  bringing together pre-market activities with those targeted at
  reviewing incidents involving devices. This new structure is
  similar to the new organizational approaches implemented in the
  United States and Ireland.
As of November 2019, part of the MDP was restructured into a new
  Medical Devices Directorate, which integrated the pre-market function
  and the post-market surveillance functions of the Marketed
  Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Bureau (see section 1.2 and
  Appendix E for details on those divisions). The surveillance function’s
  Health Products Surveillance and Epidemiology Bureau and the compliance
  and enforcement function remained with their original directorates.
The new organizational structure was similar to the approach taken by
  Ireland
Footnote 34
34
in 2018, and the United States’ Food and Drug Administration in 2019.
  According to international key informants and documents from the Food
  and Drug Administration’s website, bringing pre-market and post-market
  functions together was expected to enable staff to leverage each
  other’s knowledge and optimize decision making across the device life
  cycle
Footnote 35
35
. Figure 7 provides a high-level overview of new organizational
  structures implemented in these two countries.
Key informant interviews and documents from the Food and Drug
  Administration’s website suggested that early impacts of their
  reorganization included:
Improved communication between program functions and clarity of roles
    and responsibilities;
More discussions, decisions, and enhanced evidence generation
    throughout the device life cycle; and
Reduced delays in getting safer and more effective innovative
    technologies into the market.
At the time of the engagement, it was anticipated that Health Canada’s
  new Medical Devices Directorate would achieve similar impacts and help
  foster a life cycle approach for the regulation and monitoring of
  medical devices. This is to be accomplished by enhancing the MDP’s
  scientific and policy capacity, modernizing processes to respond to
  rapid innovation cycles, and increasing resources to support
  transparency and stakeholder engagement activities across the medical
  device life cycle
Footnote 36
36
.
5.3 Management of Information
The MDP’s information technology (IT) infrastructure and its
  organization of information challenged program efficiency and
  the ability to take a life cycle approach to regulating and
  monitoring medical devices
.
At the time of the engagement, there was no single repository for
  collecting all the information available on a device. However, the
  tracking methods, when combined, provided information about the
  entirety of activities relating to a device or signal. These methods
  included several tracking sheets within both post-market functions,
  docuBridge, each team’s respective shared folders, various dashboards,
  various forms of internal and external communications, and the Medical
  Devices System.
For instance, the post-market surveillance function documented its
  activities regarding medical device signal assessments in Excel
  tracking sheets, instead of the Medical Device System. It tracked the
  timelines for signal assessments in relation to service standards in a
  tool entitled the Regulatory Activity Tracking Sheet. Additionally,
  compliance and enforcement-related documents and surveillance-related
  documents, including those on CMDSNet, were saved in their respective
  function’s shared drives, and the information was not integrated into
  docuBridge.
Because not all of the data regarding a medical device was entered into
  a single database or repository, a consolidated life cycle report could
  not be generated for specific devices. As explained by some internal
  key informants, program staff had to connect information from various
  sources to piece together the full history of Health Canada’s actions
  related to a device.
Figure 7: Organizational Structure of Medical Device Programs in the United States and Ireland
Figure 7 - Text description
This figure contains two sections, representing information gathered about the medical devices programs in the United States and Ireland.
In the first section, information about the structure in the United States is shown in a bullet list as follows:
Pre-market activities, post-market surveillance, and compliance and enforcement activities were integrated into a single office.
Within the new office, divisions were organised along product lines (e.g., Office of Cardiovascular Devices, Office of Orthopaedic Devices) where staff oversaw a device throughout its full life cycle.
A scientific and clinical policy team also supported the work of the office.
In the second section, information about the structure in Ireland is shown in a bullet list as follows:
Pre-market activities and post-market surveillance were integrated into a new Medical Devices Department.
Compliance remained a separate function located in the Compliance Department.
A regulatory, legislative, and policy development team supported the work of the Medical Devices Department.
Sources of information for this visual are U.S. Food and Drug Administration (2019b) and Ireland’s Health Product Regulatory Authority (2019).
Fragmented information also made it difficult for the Program to
  conduct trend analyses and may have hindered access to some information
  in a timely manner. For instance, when the pre-market or compliance and
  enforcement functions required post-market data to inform their
  activities, they had to spend additional time compiling that
  information from various tracking sheets.
Additionally, a few key informants explained that information on the
  classification of a device was housed in a database held by the
  pre-market function. As a result, this information was not accessed in
  a timely fashion by inspectors when they were inspecting manufacturers.
  Of note, at the time of the engagement, discussions were underway
  between the pre-market and compliance and enforcement functions to
  improve the sharing of this information.
The 2016-21 Health Products and Food Branch Strategic Plan noted a
  commitment to investing in IT initiatives for the MDP
Footnote 37
37
.
Several internal key informants noted that some of the MDP’s IT systems
  (e.g., Medical Devices System and docuBridge) were outdated, difficult
  to use, and not fundamentally designed for the purposes they were used
  for. Moreover, a significant proportion of guidance documents were not
  updated to reflect changes related to IT systems, including the
  establishment of the Regulatory Operations and Enforcement Branch, the
  implementation of docuBridge, and the modernization of the Medical
  Devices System.
A few internal key informants also raised concerns that the IT
  infrastructure used to deliver program activities was not on par with
  today’s technology. For instance, the MDP did not have electronic
  interfaces to intake medical device licence applications or mandatory
  incident reports. Both were submitted to Health Canada using PDF forms
  sent via mail, email, or fax. The use of such methods did not align
  with the high technology world of the medical device industry. It also
  means that information sent to Health Canada (e.g., mandatory or
  voluntary incident reports) had to be processed manually by a team that
  was not adequately staffed to perform these tasks within targeted
  service standards (see section 6).
6.0 Program Resources
Delays completing certain post-market activities were primarily
  attributed to the level of available resources relative to
  workload.
In 2018-19, the MDP’s budget was allocated in the following way:
46% on compliance and enforcement activities;
37% on pre-market activities;
10% on program administration and other program support activities;
    and
7% on post-market surveillance activities.
Overall, the medical devices post-market surveillance function received
  a relatively small share of the program budget.
In the last six years, the number of non-management full-time
  equivalent (FTE) staff working in medical device surveillance decreased
  by approximately eight. This accounted for approximately 30% of the
  post-market surveillance functions non-management FTEs. Part of the
  current staff was also temporarily reassigned to other responsibilities
  (e.g., implementation of initiatives under the Medical Action Plan).
It also appears that the resources allocated were relatively low
  compared to post-market surveillance for Health Canada’s
  pharmaceuticals program. As illustrated in Figure 8, the number of FTEs
  assigned to medical device surveillance was less than a third of the
  number of FTEs for pharmaceutical surveillance, even though the volume
  of incidents to process was greater for medical devices. The difference
  in resources available for the surveillance of medical devices, as
  opposed to pharmaceuticals surveillance was a trend that continued at
  the time of this engagement, according to a few internal key
  informants.
Overall, the insufficient capacity in the post-market surveillance
  function was noted by several internal key informants as a reason for
  the backlog in processing incident reports, the inability to process a
  large volume of reports, the elimination of triaging for incoming
  incident reports, as well as the decreased number of signal assessments
  and reviews completed within service standards (see section 2.2).
Figure 8: Resources and Workload of the Medical Devices and Pharmaceutical Surveillance Functions (2015-16)
Medical Device Surveillance
Pharmaceutical Surveillance
FTEs
9
30
Medical device incidents and adverse drug reactions
        screened
17,133
4,450
Potential signals for assessment
263
173
Source: Health Canada Internal Documents.
In comparison, the number of FTEs in the pre-market and the compliance
  and enforcement functions increased during the engagement period (e.g.,
  eight more inspectors were hired in 2019). However, several internal
  key informants noted that a lack of resources still challenged the
  pre-market, and compliance and enforcement functions. They indicated
  that they were facing increased workload pressures as a result of the
  greater scrutiny of medical devices in the Canadian market, program
  changes (e.g., implementation of the Medical Devices Action Plan), and
  the evolution of the medical device environment (e.g., novel
  technologies). Some internal key informants further raised concerns
  that, without the required resources to mitigate these challenges, the
  Program might not be able to efficiently and effectively review medical
  device licence applications for new technologies and devices, nor
  inspect manufacturers of these devices moving forward.
Mandatory incident reporting introduced in December 2019 will
  likely exacerbate the challenges faced by the post-market
  surveillance functions.
The Protecting Canadians from Unsafe Drugs Act, also known
  as Vanessa's Law, introduced amendments to the Food and Drugs Act
Footnote 38
38
.  Among other things, it introduced the mandatory reporting of adverse
  drug reactions and medical device incidents for approximately 775
  Canadian hospitals regulated through provincial or territorial
  legislation, or operated by the Government of Canada, as of December
  2019
Footnote
39
.
Vanessa’s Law:
Vanessa Young died in 2000, at the age of 15, of a cardiac
  arrhythmia after taking cisapride (Prepulsid®) as prescribed. A
  campaign for increased regulation of therapeutic products
  subsequently led to greater powers for Health Canada to request
  safety data from hospitals and industry about drugs and medical
  devices. Vanessa’s Law was enacted in 2014, and the mandatory
  reporting requirements come into effect December 16th, 2019.
According to an internal cost-benefit analysis, the number of incident
  reports received by the MDP may double as a result of the mandatory
  reporting implementation
Footnote 40
40
. A few internal key informants noted concerns that the surveillance
  function will be unable to meet the demand. The backlog of incident
  reports observed at the time of the engagement could continue to grow
  in the future. Additionally, mandatory reporting may have subsequent
  impacts on the resources and activities of the post-market compliance
  and enforcement function, as inspectors will be required to monitor
  potential under-reporting and inspect hospitals.
At the time of the engagement, with the exception of the cost-benefit
  analysis, Health Canada had not fully analyzed the implications of
  mandatory reporting on program workload. The Department planned on
  addressing the increased volume of incidents reports through resource
  reallocation and workload redistribution in the post-market function
Footnote 41
41
. The compliance and enforcement function will need to continuously
  assess impact on resources and strategy should the number of reports
  increase significantly.
7.0 Conclusions and Recommendations
The medical device environment is complex and evolving, due to the
  development of novel devices using innovative technologies such as
  digital technology, artificial intelligence, and 3D printing. Within
  this complex environment, Health Canada has generally been effective at
  ensuring the safety, effectiveness, and quality of medical devices in
  the Canadian market. It also has generally implemented sufficient
  controls to support the rigor of its work. Overall, the safety of
  medical devices in Canada was found to be comparable to similar
  countries. At times, Canada was among the first countries to initiate
  recalls to address incidents with those devices, as in the cases of
  Essure and the Biocell breast implants.
There were, however, delays in the completion of certain post-market
  activities. While there was no evidence that such delays affected the
  safety of medical devices in the Canadian market, they did affect the
  MDP’s ability to proactively detect and address medical device
  incidents. These delays also represented a risk to the Department, as
  they appear to be mainly caused by a lack of capacity and resources
  within the post-market surveillance functions. Overall, post-market
  surveillance activities received about only 7% of MDP’s budget in
  2018-19. As well, in recent years, the number of staff working in
  medical device surveillance decreased, while it increased in the two
  other program functions.
With the introduction of mandatory incident reporting by hospitals in
  December 2019, it is likely that the workload of the post-market
  surveillance function and the compliance and enforcement function will
  significantly increase. However, at the time of the engagement, the
  workload implications of mandatory reporting were not fully analyzed.
  This represents a risk, as the current challenges faced with the timely
  completion of some surveillance activities will likely be exacerbated
  if capacity issues are not addressed moving forward.
Over the last few years, the MDP implemented several initiatives to
  remain effective in the changing environment of medical devices. The
  Department has made significant strides to adapt both its regulatory
  framework and its post-market activities through initiatives
  implemented via the Medical Devices Action Plan, and the Regulatory
  Review of Drugs and Devices. There remained additional opportunities
  for Health Canada to continue adapting. This included opportunities for
  the MDP to increase its engagement with international counterparts, in
  order to align practices, particularly around compliance and
  enforcement activities. Also, there were opportunities for a more
  systematic consideration of sex- and gender-based differences in the
  review of device licence applications, risk communications, and
  compliance and enforcement activities.
During the engagement period, the MDP improved its communications
  regarding medical devices and its engagement with stakeholders. While
  these efforts were well received by industry key informants,
  improvements are still required for Health Canada to become a go-to
  source of information for health care professionals, patient groups,
  and the Canadian public in general. Furthermore, accessing Health
  Canada’s online communications products was challenging. Information
  available online, including guidance documents for industry, was often
  not up-to-date.
As for program efficiency, available evidence shows that the
  distribution of roles and responsibilities across the three functions
  was not always aligned with the nature of their core activities. This
  led to inefficiency, including the duplication of efforts across
  program functions. Moreover, the MDP did not have a comprehensive
  framework for defining roles and responsibilities. Also, the
  post-market compliance and enforcement function and the group
  responsible for processing medical device incident reports remain with
  their initial organizational structure. It was anticipated that the
  creation of the new Medical Devices Directorate, with the integration
  of the pre-market function and the Marketed Pharmaceuticals and Medical
  Devices Bureau (post-market function), will likely address some of
  these challenges and help foster a life cycle approach to regulating
  and monitoring medical devices.
The MDP’s IT infrastructure and organization of information did not
  support an efficient delivery of activities. Current program data and
  information was recorded in multiples different files and databases
  held by different program functions. This challenged the ability of
  program staff to access information in a timely manner for their
  program activities. Staff had to put together information from various
  files and databases in order to obtain the full history of a medical
  device and actions taken by the MDP related to this device.
Findings discussed in this report led to the identification of the
  following recommendations:
The Health Products and Food Branch should address current
      resource gaps in post-market functions responsible for processing
      incident reports and assessing incidents. The Regulatory Operations
      and Enforcement Branch should consider the subsequent impacts on
      the resource needs of the compliance and enforcement function. As
      well, both Branches should ensure that the MDP has the capacity and
      tools to address the mandatory reporting by hospitals introduced in
      December 2019, and associated enforcement of hospital vigilance
      practices.
MDP’s surveillance activities were challenged by a lack of resources
      and could not always be completed within service standards. The
      introduction of mandatory reporting of medical device incidents by
      approximately 775 Canadian hospitals in December 2019 will likely
      further affect the post-market surveillance function’s ability to
      manage its workload, as the number of incident reports submitted to
      Health Canada may double. Mandatory reporting may also affect the
      resources and activities of the compliance and enforcement function, as
      inspectors will be required to monitor potential under-reporting and
      inspect hospitals. However, at the time of the engagement, Health
      Canada had not fully analyzed the implications of mandatory reporting
      on program workload.
The Health Products and Food Branch and the Regulatory Operations
      and Enforcement Branch should continue their efforts to adapt the
      MDP, through both domestic and international initiatives, to
      address challenges emerging from the rapidly changing life cycle of
      medical devices and the use of novel technologies.
While Health Canada made significant strides to adapt its regulatory
      framework, other challenges remained to be addressed to ensure that the
      MDP remains effective moving forward. For instance, at the time of the
      engagement, there was no mechanism to address the growing issue around
      medical devices offered through a subscription or service (e.g., online
      diagnostic tools), or to track individuals using implanted devices so
      they can be notified directly by Health Canada if there is an incident.
The Health Products and Food Branch and the Regulatory
      Operations and Enforcement Branch should consider and document how
      to further integrate sex- and gender-based analysis plus (SGBA+)
      into the life cycle of medical devices, including providing
      guidance to applicants and increasing awareness of MDP staff.
Evidence shows that men and women are affected differently by medical
      devices due to sex and gender disparities. While Health Canada had
      progressed in its efforts to integrate sex and gender considerations
      into the MDP, there were additional opportunities to further integrate
      these considerations in all of program activities, where relevant.
The Health Products and Food Branch and the Regulatory
      Operations and Enforcement Branch should maintain and scale up
      communication and engagement efforts with industry stakeholders,
      health care professionals and organizations, and patient groups. It
      is also recommended that the Health Products and Food Branch
      improve the timeliness and accessibility of program information
      available online. This includes ensuring that guidance
      documentation is reviewed and updated as required across all of the
      MDP's operations, including on the Government of Canada website.
Health Canada’s efforts to increase communication and engagement with
      stakeholders were well received by industry representatives. However,
      Health Canada was not a go-to source of information for health care
      representatives, patient groups, and the population in general. There
      was also a need to improve the timeliness and accessibility of online
      information. In particular, outdated guidance documents may have
      contributed to inaccuracies in application submissions for medical
      device licences. Industry key informants also mentioned having
      difficulty finding required information and guidance to support the
      development of their applications.
The Health Products and Food Branch and the Regulatory
      Operations and Enforcement Branch should ensure that roles and
      responsibilities at the operational level are clearly defined and
      distributed and that program risks are identified and managed.
Roles and responsibilities of operational-level staff were not clearly
      defined across the three MDP functions. The MDP also did not have a
      comprehensive framework defining roles and responsibilities and an
      integrated risk management and information-sharing strategy. Challenges
      with roles and responsibilities may be addressed, in part, with the
      implementation of the new Medical Devices Directorate announced in late
      2019, which will integrate the pre-market function and the function
      responsible for the assessments of medical device incidents. However,
      the compliance and enforcement function and the Health Products
      Surveillance and Epidemiology Bureau will remain with their original
      directorates.
The Health Products and Food Branch and the Regulatory Operations
      and Enforcement Branch should ensure that a data management approach
      supports the monitoring of medical devices throughout their life cycle.
The MDP’s information was fragmented across several repositories. This
      challenged the Program’s efficiency and ability to take a life cycle
      approach to regulating and monitoring medical devices.
Management Response and Action Plan
Recommendations
Management Response and Planned Actions
Deliverable
Completion Date
Accountability/ Responsibility
Recommendation 1
The Health Products and Food Branch should address
          current resource gaps in post-market functions
          responsible for processing incident reports and
          assessing incidents. The Regulatory Operations and
          Enforcement Branch should consider the subsequent
          impacts on the resource needs of the compliance and
          enforcement function. As well, both Branches should
          assess the capacity and tools required to address
          the mandatory reporting by hospitals introduced in
          December 2019, and associated enforcement of
          hospital vigilance practices.
Management agrees with the recommendation*
*All timelines subject to change as a result of
          the COVID-19 pandemic
Medical device incident reporting is a key element
          of Health Canada’s ability to monitor, identify,
          assess, and respond to safety issues identified by
          Canadians, hospitals, medical practitioners, and
          manufacturers. Investments have been made in
          response to the new mandatory reporting
          requirements by hospitals. We will continue to
          evaluate the return on these investments as well as
          gaps that remain to address the post-market Medical
          Devices Program (MDP), including data intake and
          data management functions, scientific assessments,
          coding, evaluating, and case management to ensure
          that they have both the capacity and tools to
          deliver on program functions.
1.1 HPFB and ROEB will continue to assess the
          capacity and tools in the post-market functions
          required to deliver effectively on mandated program
          activities.
Examples of achievements to date:
ROEB has streamlined how it receives and
            processes voluntary medical devices problem reports
            and recall reports, which include formalized
            compliance and enforcement actions to mitigate
            risks to Canadians.
With respect to mandatory problem reporting from
            hospitals, ROEB has used compliance promotion as a
            tool to encourage increased reporting for more
            timely identification of health and safety risks so
            that compliance and enforcement actions can be
            taken where required.
In June 2020, ROEB ceased posting low-risk Type
            III medical devices recalls, ensuring resources are
            focused on higher risks to Canadians.
a) A TOR for the team leading this work will be
        developed.
October 2020
COMPLETED
Executive Directors, Bureaus of ITA, SAP, PM, MDD
        (HPFB)
b) An implementation plan will be developed,
          including a plan to update guidance documents.
December 2020
c) A capacity gap analysis will be completed.
March 2021
d) An interim progress report will be completed.
December 2021
e) A final report will be completed.
June 2022
Recommendation 2
The Health Products and Food Branch and the
          Regulatory Operations and Enforcement Branch should
          continue their efforts to adapt the MDP, through
          both domestic and international initiatives to
          address challenges emerging from the fast changing
          life cycle of medical devices and the use of novel
          technologies.
Management agrees with the recommendation*
Health Canada continuously works with domestic and
          international partners to:
(a) assess, manage and communicate the health and
          safety risks and benefits associated with
          challenges emerging from the fast-changing life
          cycle of medical devices and the use of novel
          technologies.
(b) optimize the use of real-world evidence across
          the product life cycle with the aim of improving
          access to, and appropriate use of, medical devices.
          These relationships are critical as we develop and
          implement innovative approaches that improve the
          efficiency and sustainability of Canadian health
          care systems.
The Program will continue to leverage and build on
          its solid foundation for cooperative domestic and
          international partnerships to address emerging
          challenges and issues such as International Medical
          Device Regulators Forum (IMDRF), Medical Device
          Single Audit Program (MDSAP) and Regulatory
          Cooperation Council (RCC).
The MDP will continuously be adapted to address
          emerging issues and technologies so that the health
          and safety of Canadians is protected.
2.1 HPFB and ROEB will continue to strengthen
          domestic and international outreach and will
          produce bi-annual progress reports
Examples of achievements in the context of the
          pandemic include:
Beginning in March 2020, HPFB and ROEB led a
            series of webinars on the COVID-19 Interim Order
            requirements, with tailored sessions for testing
            devices, ventilators, personal protective
            equipment, swabs, and the decontamination of
            respirators for various audiences (e.g., industry,
            health care providers, provinces and territories).
Beginning in March of 2020, HPFB and ROEB
            initiated collaboration with international partners
            in the context of COVID-19 regarding several
            topics, including commercial respirators and face
            coverings, minimum scientific requirements for
            serology tests, fraudulent KN95 respirators, and
            the adaptation of the Medical Device Single Audit
            Program to allow for virtual audits.
Health Canada strengthened collaboration
            opportunities during the pandemic with the Public
            Health Agency of Canada, provinces and territories,
            and key external stakeholders (e.g., Medtech
            Canada, the Council of Canadian Innovators).
            Information was shared on issues such as medical
            device shortages, the coming into force of new
            Interim Order regulations, and substandard medical
            devices (e.g., Personal Protective Equipment).
Biannual (will submit last report June 2021)
Director, Bureau of Policy and International
          Programs, MDD (HPFB)
2.2 HPFB and ROEB will continue to implement the
          Health and Biosciences Roadmap commitments that
          pertain to medical devices, including the items
          below.
2.2.1 Advanced Therapeutic Pathways (ATP), which is
          currently under implementation, to adapt to the
          fast-changing life cycle of medical devices and, in
          particular, develop an efficient regulatory
          framework for AI-related medical devices.
Note – the overall project lead for ATP is not
          within the Medical Devices Program.
a) Biannual progress reports on MDP’s contributions
          will be provided.
Biannual (will submit last report June 2021)
Executive Director, Bureau of Evaluation, MDD
          (HPFB)
b) Pathway to be implemented - MDP to contribute to
          ATP Pathway Guidance documents, including use of
          regulatory sandboxes.
September 2021
Director, Compliance Policy and Regulatory Affairs
          (ROEB)
2.2.2 Clinical Trial Modernization (CTM), which
          will include new provisions to facilitate research
          in Canada
Note – the overall project lead for CTM is not
          within the Medical Devices Program.
Example of an achievement to date:
In October 2020, ROEB’s clinical trial inspection
          program conducted the first inspection of a medical
          device clinical trial as part of a pilot program.
          Two more inspections are scheduled to be conducted
          this year. The purpose of piloting these
          inspections is to gather data and information,
          which will lay the foundation for the
          implementation of a formal approach to these
          inspections.
a) Interim reports on progress to be provided
          bi-annually.
Biannual (will submit last report December 2021)
Director, Bureau of Policy and International
          Programs, MDD (HPFB)
b) New or Revised Regulations to be developed and
          approved.
March 2022
2.2.3 Agile Regulations for Medical Device and
          Establishments licensing, which will include an
          analysis of the classification regime for
          lower-class devices, terms and conditions, and the
          use of foreign reviews and decisions.
a) Interim reports on progress to be provided
          bi-annually.
Biannual (will submit last report December 2022)
Director, Bureau of Policy and International
          Programs, MDD (HPFB)
b) New or Revised Regulations to be developed and
          approved.
March 2023
Recommendation 3
The Health Products and Food Branch and the
          Regulatory Operations and Enforcement Branch should
          consider how Sex- and Gender-Based Analysis Plus
          (SGBA+) could be applied to program activities.
Management agrees with the recommendation*
The Department is committed to ensuring the
          integration of a sex- and gender-based perspective
          in developing and delivering on programs including
          the MDP.
In the context of the Medical Devices Action Plan
          (MDAP), the Department created a Scientific
          Advisory Committee on Health Products for Women to
          assist with identifying concrete SGBA+ solutions
          applicable to the Program’s activities. The
          Department will continue to engage with this
          Committee to help inform on SGBA+ considerations in
          program activities.
3.1 HPFB and ROEB will integrate SGBA+ into
          training programs.
a) ROEB to integrate a SGBA+ lens into the
          “Foundations of Inspection and Regulations” course
          during the next review cycle, and provide training
          to staff, specifically to facilitators, developers,
          and working group members who are involved in
          inspector training.
June 2021
Director, Program Development and Training (ROEB)
b) To increase awareness of SGBA+ and its
          importance throughout the device life cycle, HPFB
          will require that staff members (e.g., Evaluators
          and Policy Analysts) complete mandatory SGBA+
          training, either online or through face-to-face
          presentations. A completion report will be
          provided.
June 2021
Director, Bureau of Planning and Operations, MDD
          (HPFB)
3.2 HPFB and ROEB will support the researcher
          selected through the CIHR funding opportunity
          “SGBA+ Health Policy-Research Partnership Grant”.
          This researcher will be conducting various analyses
          to assess how SGBA is integrated throughout the
          medical device life cycle.
A report will be submitted to HPFB and ROEB
          detailing recommendations for how SGBA+ could be
          better integrated throughout the medical device
          life cycle.
a) ROEB will provide an analysis of whether SGBA+
          related risk factors exist in the context of
          inspection activities and assess the need to
          develop mitigation and monitoring strategies.
June 2021
Director, Compliance Policy and Regulatory Affairs
          (ROEB)
b) HPFB will determine recommendations that will be
          implemented, and will develop an implementation
          plan.
December 2021
Director, Bureau of Policy and International
          Programs, MDD (HPFB)
3.3 As recommended by the SAC-HPW committee
          members, the Program will address how manufacturers
          should consider SGBA+ factors when providing
          evidence for medical device licence applications.
          In particular, the guidance documents in the
          following sub-sections will reflect SGBA+
          considerations.
a) Guidance document on Clinical Evidence
          Requirements
March 2021
Director, Bureau of Policy and International
          Programs, MDD (HPFB)
b) Guidance documents on Artificial Intelligence.
December 2021
Recommendation 4
The Health Product and Food Branch and the
          Regulatory Operations and Enforcement Branch should
          maintain and/or scale up communication and
          
          engagement efforts with industry stakeholders,
          health care professionals/ organisations, and
          patient groups. It is also recommended that the
          Health Product and Food Branch improve the
          timeliness and accessibility of program information
          available online. This includes ensuring that
          guidance documentation is reviewed and updated as
          required across all of the MDP's operations,
          including on the Government of Canada website.
Management agrees with the recommendation*
Canadians rely on medical devices to maintain and
          improve their health and well-being. As reported by
          the International Consortium of Journalists,
          following the launch of the Medical Devices Action
          Plan, Canada has one of the best regulatory systems
          in the world for medical devices, with some of the
          most stringent requirements.
The Department has taken numerous steps in the area
          of communication and engagement, including:
engaging with industry stakeholders through
            bi-annual bilateral meetings and annual conferences
conducting foresight exercises to encourage open
            discussion, issue resolution, and compliance with
            the regulations
developing and implementing innovative approaches
            that improve the efficiency and sustainability of
            Canadian health care systems.
On December 16, 2019, Health Canada became the
          first regulator worldwide to issue regulations that
          require hospitals to report all serious adverse
          drug reactions (ADRs) and medical device incidents
          (MDIs). Health Canada led a significant national
          outreach effort throughout 2019 related to the new
          requirements. This involved 250 educational events
          with health care professionals, including
          face-to-face presentations and 12 webinars in both
          official languages to hospital-based health care
          professionals and administrators.
Health Canada published a guidance document, new
          reporting forms, web site reporting page and online
          educational modules to support hospitals’
          interpretation and understanding of the new
          requirements. Because of this focused engagement
          effort with stakeholders and over 800 hospitals
          across Canada, Health Canada has observed the
          number of reports from hospitals increase from
          month-to-month.
The Department also developed and implemented a
          client strategy and consulted with health care
          professionals and patient groups to optimize
          communications, including the web sites and online
          incident reporting tools. The feedback received
          will help inform the Department’s ongoing efforts
          to effectively communicate and engage on program
          activities.
4.1 The Department has received the results of the
          TBS Medical Devices Web Optimization project,
          including a project prototype.
Examples of achievements in the context of the
          pandemic include:
The prototype’s experimental designs have already
          been applied to create a Health Canada landing page
          for
COVID-19 medical device
information. In addition to guidance documents and
          notices, key information that is available online
          for Canadians includes:
List of authorized testing devices
Testing devices under evaluation
List of authorized medical devices other than testing
List of medical devices for exceptional importation and sale
Additional planned updates include publication of a
          COVID-19 application wizard, a review of the
          internet architecture of drugs and health products,
          creation of service initiation pages for the active
          licence listings (MDALL and MDEL). HPFB and ROEB
          will continue to implement the proposed changes and
          engage with stakeholders to inform of changes.
Interim reports on progress to be provided
          quarterly
Quarterly (will submit last report December 2022)
Director, Bureau of Planning and Operations, MDD
          (HPFB)
4.2.1 HPFB & ROEB will also assess the total
          number of guidance documents posted on its web site
          to determine the number of documents requiring
          updates, and which ones have been completed.
March 2021
Director, Bureau of Policy and International
          Programs, MDD (HPFB)
4.2.2 Based on the assessment, HPFB and ROEB will
          develop a plan to update the documents for approval
          by the MDP Trilat.
September 2021
4.3 HPFB and ROEB will continue to engage, create
          and implement an annual stakeholder engagement and
          compliance promotion plan, including bilateral
          meetings with industry associations.
Here is an example of achievement in the context of
          the pandemic:
The biannual bilat meetings with Medtech Canada
            took place in May and November 2020.
ROEB has established biweekly engagement sessions
            with stakeholders (e.g., Medtech Canada and the
            Council of Canadian Innovators) to promote
            information sharing and drive industry compliance.
4.3.1 MDD’s 2021 Stakeholder Engagement Plan will
          be updated and approved by the MDD-DMC
December 2020
Director, Bureau of Planning and Operations, MDD
          (HPFB)
4.3.2 MDCP 2021 stakeholder engagement plan to be
          updated and approved by MDCP-DMC
December 2020
Director, Medical Devices Compliance , MDCCD (ROEB)
4.3.3 Report on engagement activities issued
          quarterly
Quarterly (will submit last report September 2021)
Director, Bureau of Planning and Operations, MDD
          (HPFB)
4.4 HPFB and ROEB will continue engaging with
          stakeholders through Scientific and Patient
          advisory committees (engagement with stakeholders):
Scientific Advisory Committee – Medical Devices
            for Use in the Cardiovascular System
Scientific Advisory Committee – Digital Health
            Technologies
Scientific Advisory Committee – Health Products
            for Women (This committee met on October 29-30,
            2020).
Meeting minutes will be provided.
Last minutes provided by September 2021
Director, Bureau of Policy and International
          Programs, MDD (HPFB)
Recommendation 5
The Health Products and Food Branch and the
          Regulatory Operations and Enforcement Branch should
          ensure that roles and responsibilities at the
          operational level are clearly defined and
          distributed and that Program risks are identified
          and managed.
Management agrees with the recommendation*
HPFB and ROEB will continue to work to build on the
          existing operating frameworks to clarify roles and
          responsibilities further at the operational level
          for the Program.
HPFB responded to the many challenges and
          opportunities of medical devices development by
          creating a new, stand-alone Medical Devices
          Directorate (MDD) in January 2020. The new
          Directorate takes a life cycle approach to
          regulating medical devices, by bringing together
          specific post-market functions with the pre-market
          functions. This created an organization that is
          dedicated to the regulation of medical devices and
          facilitates the integration of risk management.
5.1 HPFB and ROEB will collaborate to update the
          existing inter-branch RACI (Responsible,
          Accountable, Consulted and Informed) and MOU
          documents. Both branches will collaborate to define
          roles and responsibilities at the operational level
          within the Medical Devices Program and update SOPs
          accordingly. Documents will be approved by the MDP
          Trilat.
a) An updated RACI matrix will be developed.
June 2021
Director, Bureau of Planning and Operations, MDD
          (HPFB)
b) An updated HPBF-ROEB MOU will be developed.
December 2021
c) Related SOPs will be updated.
June 2022
Recommendation 6
The Health Products and Food Branch and the
          Regulatory Operations and Enforcement Branch should
          ensure that a data management approach supports the
          monitoring of medical devices throughout their life
          cycle.
Management agrees with the recommendation*
Health Canada is working to strengthen further the
          data management approach, which would support the
          monitoring of medical devices throughout their life
          cycle. This data management approach includes
          different components including: IT plans,
          transparency principles, service standards, and
          records management, all to address client
          expectations.
Investments have been made in IT projects as part
          of the Branch IT strategy, including a new and
          modernized medical device incident reporting
          system. These investments are intended to enhance
          efficiency, but will require ongoing stakeholder
          engagement and systems stabilization to achieve
          this goal.
In addition, HPFB and ROEB will work towards a
          fully integrated and coordinated data management
          approach, across the medical device life cycle,
          which builds on the Branch IT investments.
6.1 In light of the creation of the new Medical
          Devices Directorate (MDD), HPFB and ROEB will
          leverage and improve existing processes to ensure
          full integration and coordination of medical
          devices data across the life cycle.
a) Robotic Process Automation implemented to
          streamline processes, including the medical device
          licence renewal.
August 2021
Director, Bureau of Planning and Operations, MDD
          (HPFB)
b) The MDP will complete the conversion from
          Impromptu 7.5 to Cognos 11 to harmonize reporting
          across the device life cycle.
An example of an achievement to date:
In October 2020, Health Canada initiated the
              contracting process to replace the inspection and
              licensing database for medical device
              establishments. The objective is to create
              efficiency in the licensing process and strengthen
              oversight of the medical device supply chain. This
              will better position Health Canada to monitor
              compliance in regulated industries and take action,
              where required, to protect the health and safety of
              Canadians.
March 2022
Appendix A – Joint Engagement Scope and Methodology
This joint audit and evaluation engagement was carried out by Health
  Canada’s Office of Audit and Evaluation. The purpose was to examine the
  MDP’s activities from April, 2013 to August, 2019, and the engagement
  applied a sex- and gender-based analysis plus (SGBA+) lens where
  relevant. The Internal Audit division’s testing of MDP transactions
  focused on the period from April, 2018 to September, 2019.
The MDP’s cost recovery model was out of scope for the engagement
  because a revised model will be implemented on April 1
st
,
  2020. The Internal Audit division also did not examine Medical Device
  Establishment Licence inspection activities under the Regulatory
  Operations and Enforcement Branch, as the division recently completed
  an Audit of Inspection Activities. However, these inspection activities
  were examined in the evaluation to generate a comprehensive assessment
  of all the MDP’s activities.
This was the first internal audit of the MDP, which was conducted in
  conformance with the  International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal
  Auditing.  The MDP was previously evaluated in 2013-14.
The audit component of the engagement examined the following criteria:
Governance, Controls and Risks
Roles and responsibilities related to the MDP are
    established and followed.
Departmental pre-market process controls are
    adequate.
Departmental post-market controls are in place for
    medical device incidents so that high risks to the
    health of Canadians are prioritized and mitigated.
Sex- and gender-based analysis is considered and
    implemented in the management of the MDP.
The Department is tracking progress towards
    commitments made in Health Canada’s Action Plan on
    Medical Devices.
The evaluation component of the engagement examined the following
  themes and questions:
Program Impacts and Scope of Activities
How effective has the MDP been in supporting
    Canadians in making informed decisions about medical
    devices and that Canadians have access to safe,
    effective, and quality medical devices?
Is the scope of those activities in line with Health
    Canada’s mandate?
How do the benefits to society achieved by the MDP
    compare to its costs?
Adapting to Change
Is the MDP positioned to address both current
    demands, as well as those emerging from a fast-changing
    and increasingly complex environment?
Are there other regulatory tools that Health Canada
    needs to adapt to a changing environment?
Efficiency of Program Organization
To what extent have the organizational structure,
    activities, processes, and resource allocations allowed
    the Program to run efficiently?
What alternatives exist to the current organizational
    model?
Is the Program optimizing resources through
    international and domestic collaborations?
Methodology
Data for this engagement was collected using the following methods:
INTERVIEWS
With 73 key informants, including:
26 Health Canada staff involved with the MDP;
8 experts, academics, and Scientific Advisory
    Committee members;
14 healthcare professionals or health associations;
10 industry members;
11 individuals, or family members, using a medical
    device; and
4 representatives of other countries.
DOCUMENT REVIEW
Included program files, policies, regulations,
  guidelines, records of decision, etc. Results from the
  Regulatory Transparency and Openness Framework survey
  and the Health Products and Food Branch Transparency
  survey were also included as part of the document
  review.
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS
Reviewed the organizational structure of the medical
  device programs of six other regulatory agencies (e.g.,
  the United States FDA, France’s National Agency for the
  Safety of Medicines and Health Products) and
  interviewed representatives from the FDA, Ireland’s
  Health Product Regulatory Authority, and Australia’s
  Therapeutic Goods Administration.
DATA ANALYSIS AND TRANSACTIONAL TESTING
Examined a sample of transactions from each of the MDP
  functions, as well as performance data collected by the
  Program.
FINANCIAL DATA REVIEW
Examined financial data for each MDP function and
  across the Program.
CASE STUDIES
Examined the cases of two medical devices to better
  understand the process for approving, monitoring, and
  recalling devices in Canada: (1) the Essure Permanent
  Birth Control device, and (2) the Paradigm Insulin
  Pump. The evaluation also conducted a case study of the
  R2D2 Project – Digital Health Technologies, in an
  effort to assess its early impacts on the MDP.
LITERATURE REVIEW
Examination of literature regarding risk
  communications, the evolution of the medical devices
  sector in Canada, and stakeholder engagement.
Limitations and Mitigation Strategies
The following table outlines the limitations encountered during the
  implementation of the data collection methods selected for this
  engagement. Also noted are the mitigation strategies implemented to
  ensure that engagement findings could be used with confidence in
  guiding program planning and decision making.
Limitation
Impact
Mitigation Strategy
There was only one data point available from the 2016
          Regulatory Transparency and Openness Framework (RTOF)
          regarding Health Canada’s efforts to improve access to
          timely, useful and relevant health and safety
          information. As well, the survey had very low response
          rate
Inability to consistently compare past and present
          stakeholder perceptions and inability to generalize
          these perceptions to the entire group of program
          stakeholders or the Canadian public.
Forty-seven key informant interviews with a variety of
          the MDP’s stakeholders using questions validated by the
          Program to ensure the interviews addressed their
          information needs. These interviews validated some of
          the findings from the 2016 RTOF survey, and whether
          perceptions changed over time.
External key informant interviews were only possible
          with a small number of individuals from different
          stakeholder groups.
Findings from the interviews are not generalizable to
          the broader stakeholder groups or the Canadian public.
Data from the key informant interviews were
          triangulated with other sources of data (e.g.,
          documentation or program data) where possible.
Information on the social and financial benefits, as
          well as the costs related to medical devices was often
          not publicly available.
A roll-up of the social and financial impacts of the
          MDP’s activities was not possible due to a lack of
          available data.
Key informant interviews and case studies were used to
          collect lived experience perspectives on the positive
          and negative impacts of medical devices, as well as
          perceived impacts on the health care system. A few
          databanks and documents were also used to draw examples
          of the health and financial impacts of select medical
          devices on the Canadian health care system.
Appendix B- Internal Audit Summary
AUDIT OBJECTIVE:
To provide assurance that the Program had sufficient controls to ensure
  that its mandate was fulfilled, as well as to assess sex- and
  gender-based analysis (SGBA+) integration into the lifecycle of the
  Program.
AUDIT SCOPE:
This engagement will examine both pre- and post-market activities from
  April 2013 to August 2019, and will apply a SGBA+ lens where relevant.
  The testing of business transactions will cover FY 2018-19 onwards.
AUDIT CONCLUSION:
Overall, we found that the Program had implemented sufficient controls
  in most areas to ensure that its mandate of ensuring medical devices
  approved for the Canadian market were safe, effective, and of high
  quality was fulfilled. While there were efforts demonstrating
  consideration of SGBA+, the Program will benefit from continuing its
  work to integrate SGBA+ in the life cycle of medical devices.
Controls were generally effective for pre-market side activities and
  active post-market surveillance was taking place. We found that defined
  roles and responsibilities were unclear at the operational levels, and
  insufficient capacity for post-market activities, outdated guidance
  documentation, and a lack of horizontal data analytics methodology
  hindered the Program’s overall efficiency and created backlogs.
CRITERIA
CONCLUSION
RISK
RESIDUAL RISK
RECOMMENDATION
1. Roles and responsibilities related to the Medical
          Devices Program were established, followed, and aligned
          with operational requirements.
We found that senior management committees were in
          place and the broad roles and responsibilities of the
          Program were defined; but there was not a clear
          framework for roles and responsibilities that would
          provide more precision at the operational level between
          the directorates. There was also a lack of an
          integrated risk management approach across the Program.
2
Minor Risk
Unclear roles and responsibilities and a lack of an
          integrated risk management strategy is affecting the
          Program’s efficiency. With the rapid changes in this
          environment, the impact on the Program’s efficiency may
          increase in the future.
Recommendation 5
2. Departmental pre-market processes controls were
          adequate.
We found processes and controls were adequate. Guidance
          documentation was available to guide Program staff in
          the intake, screening, evaluation, and approval of
          medical device licences and applications for medical
          device licences. Many internal and external guiding
          documents, however, were significantly outdated and did
          not reflect current operational processes. Further
          incorporation of data analytics could strengthen
          Special Access Program controls.
2
Minor Risk
Outdated documentation and difficulties for
          stakeholders in accessing information can lead to
          inaccuracies in application submissions and, therefore,
          affect the timeliness of licensing decisions. Outdated
          guidance documents have the potential to mislead
          Program staff when reviewing submissions, particularly
          new hires who are unfamiliar with the process.
Recommendation 4
2
Minor Risk
Lack of continued and consistent use of data analytics
          and monitoring of the Special Access Program
          applications impedes identification and monitoring of
          higher-risk applications, such as most frequently
          requested devices, most frequent applicants or
          companies, or most frequent unique combinations of
          device and applicant. This, in turn, may create a risk
          of circumvention of the medical devices regulations.
Recommendation 6
3. Departmental post-market controls were in place for
          medical device incidents so that high risks to the
          health of Canadians were prioritized and mitigated.
We found the Program had established adequate
          post-market controls to monitor medical devices after
          they were licensed, to process incidents based on the
          risk level, and to ensure their continued safety and
          effectiveness. However, there were data entry delays
          exceeding service standards that were attributed to
          insufficient capacity. We found that data within the
          Program was fragmented into several databases, document
          repositories, and tracking sheets, which limited
          directorates’ ability to work collaboratively, and
          posed a risk to data integrity. A significant
          proportion of guidance documents were not up-to-date.
3
Moderate Risk
Fragmentation of data between directorates creates an
          obstacle to effective and efficient inter-team
          communication, collaboration, and access to
          information. The fragmentation affects the Program as a
          whole.
Recommendation 6
3
Moderate Risk
Lack of workload analysis, workforce needs analysis,
        and a staffing plan is negatively affecting the
        Program’s ability to fulfill its mandate.
Recommendation 1
2
Minor Risk
Outdated guidance documentation hinders the efficiency
        of post-market operations, as they do not reflect
        Program changes, including the establishment of ROEB,
        the implementation of DocuBridge, and the modernization
        of the Medical Devices System.
Recommendation 4
4. Sex- and gender-based analysis is considered and
        implemented in the management of the Medical Devices.
We found that the Program considered and incorporated
        sex- and gender-based analysis + into various
        activities. However, it had not been implemented
        consistently for Program management to allow
        integration of this analysis into the life cycle of
        medical devices.
2
Minor Risk
Without the implementation of consistent Sex- and
        Gender-Based Analysis + analysis into the life cycle of
        medical devices, it is difficult to assess risk factors
        and how diverse groups of women, men, and non-binary
        people are affected by a variety of medical devices on
        the Canadian market.
Recommendation 3
Appendix C- Summary of Evaluation Findings
Evaluation Questions
Indicators
Summary of Findings
Recommendations
Program Impacts and Scope of Activities
How effective has the MDP been in supporting Canadians
          in making informed decisions about medical devices and
          that Canadians have access to safe, effective, and
          quality medical devices?
Targeted industries indicating they are informed of
            the regulatory requirements for medical devices
Description of activities undertaken to consult and
            coordinate with partners and stakeholders
Proportion of planned projects included in the annual
            Consultation Plan undertaken each fiscal year
Number and proportion of communication products
            disseminated by the MDP within service standards
Partners and stakeholders are aware of the various
            communication products disseminated
Partners and stakeholders found the information about
            medical devices they were looking for from Health
            Canada
Partners and stakeholders perceive the communication
            products disseminated by the MDP as timely, useful, and
            relevant to support their decision making
Evidence that the MDP’s communication products and
            the methods in which they are disseminated respond to
            the needs of partners and stakeholders
Partners and stakeholders, including patients, use
            the information provided by the MDP to support decision
            making in relation to one or more medical devices
Descriptions of the reasons why partners and
            stakeholders, including patients, use sources of
            information other than Health Canada when making
            decisions regarding a medical device
Evidence and perceptions regarding what works and
            what needs to be improved to better inform Canadian
            about the risks of medical devices
Number and proportion of medical device applications
            (Class II, III and IV) that comply with legislation,
            regulatory frameworks, policies, and guidelines
Perceived and documented factors that influence the
            extent to which medical device applications comply with
            legislation, regulatory frameworks, policies, and
            guidelines
Number and proportion of Medical Devices
            Establishment Licence (MDEL) applications reviewed
            within Health Canada’s service standards
Number and proportion of high-risk cases (i.e.,
            priority 1 cases) initially identified as non-compliant
            that resulted in achieved compliance.
Number and proportion of medical device manufacturers
            inspected that are deemed to be in compliance with the Food and Drugs Act and its associated
            Regulations
Number and proportion of medical device applications
            reviewed in accordance with Health Canada’s service
            standards
Number of medical device incident reports submitted
            to Health Canada
Number and proportion of total surveillance
            activities conducted within Health Canada’s service
            standards
Number of unsafe medical devices that are recalled
            when required
Expert opinion on the safety of medical devices
            approved for use in Canada
Evidence that the safety of medical devices sold in
            Canada is comparable to other similar countries
Factors that facilitate or hinder the MDP’s ability
            to ensure Canadian have access to safe, effective and
            quality medical devices
Health Canada was generally effective at ensuring the
          safety, effectiveness, and quality of medical devices
          in the Canadian market. The Department was perceived to
          be a trusted regulator and available data suggests that
          the safety of medical devices in Canada is comparable
          to that of other countries. However, delays in
          processing medical device incident reports affected the
          Program’s ability to proactively detect such incidents.
          The MDP also experienced delays in completing the
          assessment of medical device incidents. While, these
          challenges represent a risk for the Department, there
          was no evidence that they affected Health Canada’s
          ability to ensure the safety of medical devices.
The MDP made progress in balancing safety with access
          to medical devices. While the Program processed the
          majority of device licence applications within services
          standards, most of those applications did not meet
          regulatory requirements when submitted to Health
          Canada. They required additional information, which may
          have increased their processing time. The reasons why
          the majority of device licence applications did not
          meet program requirements when first submitted are
          unclear. Publicly available guidance documents
          outlining these requirements are difficult to find and
          are sometimes outdated. At the same time, the Program
          implemented various measures to improve industry’s
          understanding of the regulatory process (e.g., an
          e-learning course).
In addition to guidance documents for industry, Health
          Canada disseminates a number of different types of
          communications products to help health care
          professionals and Canadians make informed decisions
          about the use of a device. Most of the MDP’s risk
          communications were disseminated within service
          standards. The MDP improved its communications
          regarding medical devices and its engagement with
          stakeholders. The Department also completed 100% of
          their planned consultations regarding medical devices
          in 2017-18 and 2018-19. While these efforts were well
          perceived by industry, improvements are still required
          for Health Canada to become a go-to source of
          information for health care professionals, patient
          groups, and the Canadian public in general. Accessing
          Health Canada’s online communications products is often
          challenging, and information available online is not
          always up-to-date.
Recommendation 1
Recommendation 4
Is the scope of those activities in line with Health
          Canada’s mandate?
Description and scope of the MDP’s main activities:
            (1) regulation; (2) outreach; (3) assessments; (4)
            surveillance; (5) compliance and enforcement
Evidence outlining the degree to which the scope of
            the MDP activities aligns with Health Canada’s mandate,
            including the mandates of the Health Products and Food
            Branch and the Regulatory Operations and Enforcement
            Branch
Comparison between the scope of MDP activities and
            other regulatory activities delivered by Health Canada
The MDP’s activities cover the life cycle of a medical
          device from providing regulatory guidance to
          manufacturers during their research and product
          development, through to the review of device licence
          applications, as well as monitoring, prevention, and
          intervention for devices that are licensed for sale in
          Canada. Overall, the MDP’s activities are similar in
          scope to other Health Canada regulatory programs (e.g.,
          pharmaceuticals). They also align with the Department’s
          mandate and stewardship role of protecting Canadians
          and facilitating access to products that are vital to
          their health and well-being.
How do the benefits to society achieved by the MDP
          compare to its costs?
Financial cost of delivering the MDP
Financial costs of the MDP for industry when trying
            to access the Canadian marketplace for medical devices
Benefits for Canadians and outcomes achieved
            generated by the MDP
Many Canadians are dependent on medical devices to
          improve their health and quality of life, as these
          devices allow them to engage in everyday activities.
          Medical devices also provide economic benefits for the
          health care system, as the cost of devices may be less
          than the cost of surgery or other forms of treatment
          (e.g. the cost of a drug secreting stent compared to
          coronary bypass surgery).
(Note: evaluation conclusions in this area are limited
          due to a lack of data).
Adapting to Change
Is the MDP positioned to address both current demands
          as well as those emerging from a fast-changing and
          increasingly complex environment?
Description of the evolution of the medical devices
            sector in Canada
Evidence and perceptions that the MDP has the tools
            and resources necessary to adapt to a rapidly changing
            and increasingly complex environment
Evidence that the MDP employs advice related to
            emerging issues, as provided by the scientific advisory
            committees for medical devices
Evidence of the early impacts and perceived benefits
            of ongoing efforts to modernize the MDP
Evidence that the MDP adapts to current demands,
            emerging needs, and a changing environment
Health Canada made significant strides in adapting its
          regulatory framework to remain effective at regulating
          such rapidly changing and increasingly complex devices.
          For instance, the MDP developed and implemented a new
          Digital Health Division and created two new scientific
          advisory committees, amended the Food and Drugs Act to increase the power of
          compliance inspectors, and proposed regulatory
          amendments that would strengthen the Program’s ability
          to evaluate potential issues with medical devices. The
          MDP also developed several new guidance documents for
          industry, increased engagement with its stakeholders
          including patients and progressed in its efforts to
          integrate sex and gender considerations. As many of
          these initiatives were recently implemented it was too
          early to determine their impact on the Program.
Recommendation 2
Recommendation 3
Are there other regulatory tools that Health Canada
          needs to adapt to a changing environment?
Evidence and perceptions regarding opportunities for
            new or improved regulatory tools to support the MDP’s
            ability to adapt to a changing environment
While Health Canada made significant strides to adapt
          its regulatory framework, other challenges remain to be
          addressed to ensure the MDP continues to meet the
          demands of the changing environment. For instance,
          there is no mechanism to address the growing issue
          around medical devices offered through a subscription
          or service (e.g. online diagnostic tools, or to track
          individuals using implanted devices so they can be
          notified directly by Health Canada if there is an
          incident. There are also opportunities to further
          integrate sex and gender considerations in all of the
          program activities, where relevant.
Efficiency of Program Organization
To what extent have the organizational structure,
          activities, processes, and resource allocations allowed
          the Program to run efficiently?
Evidence and perceptions of the benefits and
            efficiency challenges associated with the current
            organizational model of the MDP
Evidence and perceptions regarding factors affecting
            the efficiency of the program model
Evidence that resources (i.e., financial, human, IT
            systems) put in place support an efficient delivery of
            the Program
Various factors impacted the MDP’s ability to function
          efficiently including a lack of clarity regarding the
          roles and responsibilities across the three MDP
          functions, as well as communications at the operational
          level. At times this led to inefficiency, including the
          duplication of efforts across program functions.
          Additionally, the MDP’s information is stored across
          several repositories, which means that it has to be
          consolidated from various sources in order to
          understand the full history of Health Canada activities
          in relation to a device. There was also a lack of
          integration between MDSAP audit information and
          compliance and enforcement activities, which further
          limited the program’s ability to adopt a life cycle
          approach.
An insufficient capacity also challenged the
          post-market surveillance function’s ability to process
          incident reports and complete signal assessments within
          service standards. The implementation of mandatory
          reporting of medical device incidents by approximately
          775 Canadian hospitals will likely further affect the
          post-market surveillance function’s ability to manage
          its workload, as the number of incident reports
          received may double. Mandatory reporting may also
          impact the resources and activities of the compliance
          and enforcement function, because inspectors will be
          required to monitor potential under-reporting and
          inspect hospitals. At the time of the engagement Health
          Canada had not fully analyzed these implications for
          the MDP’s workload.
Recommendation 1
Recommendation 5
Recommendation 6
What alternatives exist to the current organizational
          model?
Evidence on alternative organizational structures,
            including their strengths, weaknesses, and
            applicability to the Canadian context
As of November 2019, part of the MDP was restructured
          into a new Medical Devices Directorate, which
          integrates the pre-market function and the post-market
          surveillance function’s Marketed Pharmaceuticals and
          Medical Devices Bureau. This new directorate aligns
          with approaches taken by Ireland and the United States.
          The early impacts of the new medical devices programs
          in these two countries include improved communications,
          reduced delays getting devices into the market, and a
          greater ability to employ a life cycle approach.
It is anticipated that Health Canada’s new Medical
          Devices Directorate will have a similar impact and help
          foster a life cycle approach for the regulation and
          monitoring of medical devices.
Recommendation 5
Is the Program optimizing resources through
          international and domestic collaborations?
Evidence of coordination and collaboration between
            MDP and its national and international partners and
            stakeholders, and their impact on the efficiency of the
            MDP
Health Canada engages in several international
          initiatives and partnerships, including the
          International Medical Device Regulators Forum (IMDRF),
          to share expertise and harmonize practices, policies,
          and regulations with other jurisdictions. It is also
          harmonizing its requirements for medical device licence
          applications with other countries with the
          implementation of a Table of Contents and the MDSAP.
Recommendation 2
Appendix D – Logic Model
Logic Model - Text description
This figure, read from bottom to top, is a logic model that describes the
    organization of the program to meet the outcomes.
Target Population
Industry/private sector; market authorization holders; registered
    establishments licence holders; health professionals and practitioners;
    hospitals; and, Canadian public
Activities: Actions Undertaken include:
Review, amend, develop and/or implement regulatory framework and
      agreements;
Conduct outreach and engagement activities with targeted industry
      partners and stakeholders; respond to inquires and provide information to
      Canadians;
Conduct scientific and regulatory-based assessments of Medical Device
      Industry submissions and site-licence applications;
Conduct surveillance and monitoring of Medical Device products safety on
      the Canadian market; and,
Conduct compliance and enforcement activities (industry inspections,
      compliance verifications, investigations, etc.) and compliance promotions.
These activities then lead to the following Outputs, Products and Services:
Legislations; regulations, proposals/amendments; standards; policies;
      guidelines; memoranda agreements;
Information (e.g. data, publications, notifications, responses to public
      inquiries, etc.) and consultations;
Applications review; risk-benefit assessment; investigational testing
      authorizations; market authorizations; special access program
      authorizations; establishment licences;
Data analysis and sourcing; signal prioritization; safety reviews;
      regulatory and non-regulatory recommendations; post-market plans; risk
      communications; health risk assessments; and,
Compliance, monitoring and enforcement report; risk management and
      mitigation plans; responses and decisions to identified risks (stop sale,
      recalls, licence & registration suspension/cancellation, seizure,
      prosecution).
The outputs then lead Short-term Outcome(s), Change of Awareness/Capacity:
Industry is informed of regulatory requirements for medical devices;
Program is delivered taking a coordinated approach with partners and
      stakeholders; and
Partners, stakeholders and Canadians are informed of the risks and
      benefits of medical devices.
These short-term outcomes then lead to Medium-term Outcome(s),Change in
    Behaviour:
Industry is compliant with pre-market and post-market regulatory
      requirements; and,
Partners, stakeholders and Canadians use the information provided by the
      program to inform their decisions.
These medium-term outcomes then lead to Long-term Outcome(s), Change of
    State:
Canadians have access to safe, effective and quality medical devices
These long-term outcomes then lead to Impact(s), Result(s) for Canadians:
Protecting Canadians from unsafe products, food and public health threats
The source for this impact statement is
Draft Healthier Canadians Charter – Health Protection Outcome
.
Appendix E – MDP Key Roles and Responsibilities at the Time of the Engagement
Health Products and Food Branch (HPFB):
Therapeutic Product Directorate (TPD):
responsible for regulating medical devices for human use under the authority of the Food and Drugs Act and Medical Devices Regulations.
Medical Device Bureau (MDB):
develops policy related to medical devices, reviews applications for Class II to IV medical devices to permit their importation and sale in Canada, authorizes investigational testing, gives access to non-marketed devices through the Special Access Program when needed, and supports the post-market monitoring and surveillance activities of MHPD by conducting risk assessments of post-market incidents.
Marketed Health Products Directorate (MHPD):
develops post-market surveillance policy, conducts clinical and epidemiology post-market safety surveillance, carries out risk management activities, including the issuance of risk communications, and conducts regulatory oversight of advertising.
Health Product Safety and Effectiveness Information Bureau (HPSEB):
responsible for verification reviews of mandatory problem reports and voluntary reports through the CMDSNet.
Marketed Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Bureau (MPMDB):
responsible for signal detection, signal assessment, and other types of safety assessment, as well as the development of recommendations in response to identified safety issues, including deciding on the need for risk communications and coordinating related content development.
Regulatory Operations and Enforcement Branch (ROEB):
Medical Devices and Clinical Compliance Directorate (MDCCD):
manages national compliance and enforcement programs to ensure the safety and quality of many therapeutic products, including medical devices.
Medical Device Compliance Program (MDCP):
focuses on the safety and quality of medical devices on the market and on manufacturers of Class I devices, as well as importers and distributers of Class I-IV devices. This program includes the Medical Device Compliance and Licensing Unit, (MDCLU) the Medical Device Inspection Program (MDIP), and the Medical Device Compliance and Enforcement Program (MDCEP).
Policy, Planning and Analytics Unit (PPAU):
provides strategic and operational policy, planning and data analytics support to help guide MDCCD compliance and enforcement activities and decision making.
Endnotes
Footnote 1
Health Canada (2019). Final Report: Fees for Drugs and Medical Devices. Retrieved from:
https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/publications/drugs-health-products/fees-drugs-medical-devices.html#exec
Return to footnote
1
referrer
Footnote 2
Food and Drugs Act, RSC 1985, c F-27. Retrieved from:
https://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/f-27/
Return to footnote
2
referrer
Footnote 3
Medical Devices Regulations, SOR/98-282. Retrieved from:
https://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/regulations/sor-98-282/
Return to footnote
3
referrer
Footnote 4
Snowdon, A, Zur, R, Shell,J. Transforming Canada Into a Global Centre for Medical Device Innovation and Adoption. London, ON: The Ivey Centre for Health Innovation and Leadership. 2011. Retrieved from:
..\..\..\J-Evaluation Data Collection and Analysis\Preliminary findings\Analysis Files\2.2. IVEY_Transforming CAN into a Global Centre.pdf
Return to footnote
4
referrer
Footnote 5
Canadian Institute for Health Information(.n.d.). Patient Cost Estimator. Retrieved from:
https://www.cihi.ca/en/patient-cost-estimator
Return to footnote
5
referrer
Footnote 6
Diabetes Canada (n.d.). Why action is needed to prevent amputations in Ontario. Retrieved from:
https://diabetes.ca/DiabetesCanadaWebsite/media/Advocacy-and-Policy/Advocacy%20Reports/Amputation_Prevention_Infographic_ON_8-5x11_3.pdf
Return to footnote
6
referrer
Footnote 7
Health Canada (2011a). Guidance Document for Mandatory Problem Reporting for Medical Devices. Retrieved from:
https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/drugs-health-products/reports-publications/medeffect-canada/guidance-document-mandatory-problem-reporting-medical-devices-health-canada-2011.html
Return to footnote
7
referrer
Footnote 8
Government of Canada (2014). Paradigm Insulin Pumps and Paradigm Insulin Infusion Pump (2014-01-17). Retrieved from:
https://www.healthycanadians.gc.ca/recall-alert-rappel-avis/hc-sc/2014/39013r-eng.php
Return to footnote
8
referrer
Footnote 9
Health Canada (2019a). Medical Devices. Retrieved from:
https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/drugs-health-products/medical-devices.html
Return to footnote
9
referrer
Footnote 10
Health Canada (2018a).Drug and medical device highlights 2018: Helping you maintain and improve your health. Retrieved from:
https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/publications/drugs-health-products/drug-medical-device-highlights-2018.html
Return to footnote
10
referrer
Footnote 11
Health Canada (2016a). Medical Device Active Licence Listing (MDALL). Retrieved from:
https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/drugs-health-products/medical-devices/licences/medical-devices-active-licence-listing.html
Return to footnote
11
referrer
Footnote 12
Health Canada (2019b). Medical Devices Directorate. Retrieved from:
https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/corporate/about-health-canada/branches-agencies/health-products-food-branch/medical-devices-directorate.html#_Bureau_of_Investigational
Return to footnote
12
referrer
Footnote 13
Health Canada (2015). How Drugs are Reviewed in Canada. Retrieved from:
https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/drugs-health-products/drug-products/fact-sheets/drugs-reviewed-canada.html
. Health Canada (2019c). Biologics, Radiopharmaceuticals and Genetic Therapies. Retrieved from:
https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/drugs-health-products/biologics-radiopharmaceuticals-genetic-therapies.html
Return to footnote
13
referrer
Footnote 14
Health Canada (2011). About Mission, Values, Activities. Retrieved from:
https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/corporate/about-health-canada/activities-responsibilities/mission-values-activities.html
Return to footnote
14
referrer
Footnote 15
Health Canada. (2018b). Annual trends for the adverse reaction case reports of health products and medical device problem incidents to Health Canada (2008-2017). Retrieved from:
https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/publications/drugs-health-products/annual-trends-adverse-reaction-case-reports-health-products-medical-device-problem-incidents.html
Return to footnote
15
referrer
Footnote 16
Health Canada (2019d). Canadian Medical Devices Sentinel Network. Retrieved from:
https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/drugs-health-products/medeffect-canada/medeffect-canada-canadian-medical-devices-sentinel-network-pilot-project.html
Return to footnote
16
referrer
Footnote 17
Patient safety Institute (2019). Mandatory Reporting of Serious Adverse Drug Reactions and Medical Device Incidents by Hospitals. Retrieved from:
..\..\..\J-Evaluation Data Collection and Analysis\Preliminary findings\Analysis Files\Patient Safety Insitute_MDI reporting.ppt.
Health Canada (2019e). Report a medical device problem: reporter. Retrieved from:
https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/drugs-health-products/medeffect-canada/adverse-reaction-reporting/medical-device.html
Return to footnote
17
referrer
Footnote 18
Health Canada. (2018b). Annual trends for the adverse reaction case reports of health products and medical device problem incidents to Health Canada (2008-2017). Retrieved from:
https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/publications/drugs-health-products/annual-trends-adverse-reaction-case-reports-health-products-medical-device-problem-incidents.html
Return to footnote
18
referrer
Footnote 19
Health Canada. (2018b). Annual trends for the adverse reaction case reports of health products and medical device problem incidents to Health Canada (2008-2017). Retrieved from:
https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/publications/drugs-health-products/annual-trends-adverse-reaction-case-reports-health-products-medical-device-problem-incidents.html
Return to footnote
19
referrer
Footnote 20
Health Canada. (2011b). Risk communication - Protecting Canadians through information. Retrieved from:
https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/drugs-health-products/reports-publications/medeffect-canada/risk-communication-protecting-canadians-through-information-health-canada-2011.html
Return to footnote
20
referrer
Footnote 21
Government of Canada. (2019c). Health and biosciences sector regulatory review roadmap. Retrieved from:
https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/corporate/about-health-canada/legislation-guidelines/acts-regulations/targeted-regulatory-reviews/health-biosciences-sector-regulatory-review-roadmap.html#agile
Return to footnote
21
referrer
Footnote 22
Government of Canada. (2019c). Health and biosciences sector regulatory review roadmap. Retrieved from :
https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/corporate/about-health-canada/legislation-guidelines/acts-regulations/targeted-regulatory-reviews/health-biosciences-sector-regulatory-review-roadmap.html#agile
Return to footnote
22
referrer
Footnote 23
Health Canada (2017). Health Portfolio Sex and Gender-Based Analysis Policy. Retrieved from:
https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/corporate/transparency/corporate-management-reporting/heath-portfolio-sex-gender-based-analysis-policy.html
Return to footnote
23
referrer
Footnote 24
Government of Canada (2019d). Regulations Amending Certain Regulations Made Under the Food and Drugs Act (Post-market Surveillance of Medical Devices), Canada Gazette, Part 1, vol.153, no.24, p.2731, June 15, 2019. Retrieved from:
http://gazette.gc.ca/rp-pr/p1/2019/2019-06-15/html/index-eng.html
Return to footnote
24
referrer
Footnote 25
Government of Canada (2019d). Regulations Amending Certain Regulations Made Under the Food and Drugs Act (Post-market Surveillance of Medical Devices), Canada Gazette, Part 1, vol.153, no.24, p.2731, June 15, 2019. Retrieved from:
http://gazette.gc.ca/rp-pr/p1/2019/2019-06-15/html/index-eng.html
Return to footnote
25
referrer
Footnote 26
Health Canada (2013). Guidance Document: Considerations for Inclusion of Women in Clinical Trials and Analysis of Sex Differences. Retrieved from:
https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/drugs-health-products/drug-products/applications-submissions/guidance-documents/clinical-trials/considerations-inclusion-women-clinical-trials-analysis-data-sex-differences.html
Return to footnote
26
referrer
Footnote 27
Health Canada (2019g). Scientific Advisory on Health Product’s for Women Summary: Findings, Advice, 2019-05-16-17. Retrieved from:
https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/drugs-health-products/drug-products/scientific-expert-advisory-committees/health-products-women/summary-findings-advice-2015-05-16-17.html
Return to footnote
27
referrer
Footnote 28
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (2019a). PMA Review Process. Retrieved from:
https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/premarket-approval-pma/pma-review-process
Return to footnote
28
referrer
Footnote 29
Health Canada (2016c). Medical Devices Bureau Annual Performance Report April 1, 2015 through March 31, 2016.
..\..\..\J-Evaluation Data Collection and Analysis\Preliminary findings\Analysis Files\254.1 MDB Annual Performance Report 2015-2016.pdf
. Health Canada (2019j). Medical Devices Bureau Annual Performance Report April 1, 2018 through March 31, 2018
..\..\..\J-Evaluation Data Collection and Analysis\Preliminary findings\Analysis Files\254.4 MDB YEARLY REPORT - 2018-19.pdf
Return to footnote
29
referrer
Footnote 30
Emergo by UL (2019). Australia: The Regulatory Process for Medical Devices. Retrieved from:
https://www.emergobyul.com/resources/australia-process-chart
Return to footnote
30
referrer
Footnote 31
Health Canada (2018). Summary Basis of Decision (SBD). Retrieved from:
https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/drugs-health-products/drug-products/summary-basis-decision.html
Return to footnote
31
referrer
Footnote 32
LeBrun, M., DiMuzion, J., Beauchamp, B., Reid, S., & Hogan, V. (2013). Evaluating the health literacy burden of Canada’s public advisories: A comparative effectiveness study on clarity and readability. Drug Safety, 36(12):1179-87. doi: 10.1007/s40264-013-0117-8.
Return to footnote
32
referrer
Footnote 33
Medical Devices Regulations, SOR/98-282. Retrieved from:
https://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/regulations/sor-98-282/
Return to footnote
33
referrer
Footnote 34
HPRA (2018). Annual Report 2018. Retrieved from:
https://www.hpra.ie/docs/default-source/publications-forms/corporate-policy-documents/annual-report-2018.pdf?sfvrsn=5
Return to footnote
34
referrer
Footnote 35
U.S. Food & Drug Administration. (2019b). Reorganization of the Center for Devices and Radiological Health. Retrieved from:
https://www.fda.gov/about-fda/center-devices-and-radiological-health/reorganization-center-devices-and-radiological-health
Return to footnote
35
referrer
Footnote 36
Health Canada (2019k). The Medical Devices Directorate: Focused – Agile – World Class. Retrieved from:
https://www.raps.org/RAPS/media/news-images/regulators/Executive-Summary-MDD-EN-(1).PDF
Return to footnote
36
referrer
Footnote 37
Health Canada (2016d). Health Products and Food Branch 2016-2021 Strategic Plan. Retrieved from:
https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/corporate/about-health-canada/reports-publications/health-products-food-branch/health-products-food-branch-strategic-plan-2016-2021.html
Return to footnote
37
referrer
Footnote 38
Government of Canada (2019a). Health Canada launches consultations to improve the safety of medical devices. Retrieved from:
https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/news/2019/06/health-canada-launches-consultations-to-improve-the-safety-of-medical-devices.html
Return to footnote
38
referrer
Footnote 39
Government of Canada (2019b). Regulations Amending the Food and Drug Regulations (Serious Adverse Drug Reaction Reporting — Hospitals), P.C. 2019-746, June 9, 2019, SOR/19-190, s.30(1.3), Canada Gazette, Part II, vol.153, no.13, p.3137, June 26, 2019. Retrieved from:
http://www.gazette.gc.ca/rp-pr/p2/2019/2019-06-26/html/sor-dors190-eng.html
Return to footnote
39
referrer
Footnote 40
Government of Canada (2019b). Regulations Amending the Food and Drug Regulations (Serious Adverse Drug Reaction Reporting — Hospitals), P.C. 2019-746, June 9, 2019, SOR/19-190, s.30(1.3), Canada Gazette, Part II, vol.153, no.13, p.3137, June 26, 2019. Retrieved from:
http://www.gazette.gc.ca/rp-pr/p2/2019/2019-06-26/html/sor-dors190-eng.html
Return to footnote
40
referrer
Footnote 41
Government of Canada (2019b). Regulations Amending the Food and Drug Regulations (Serious Adverse Drug Reaction Reporting — Hospitals), P.C. 2019-746, June 9, 2019, SOR/19-190, s.30(1.3), Canada Gazette, Part II, vol.153, no.13, p.3137, June 26, 2019. Retrieved from:
http://www.gazette.gc.ca/rp-pr/p2/2019/2019-06-26/html/sor-dors190-eng.html
Return to footnote
41
referrer
Footnotes
Footnote i
In November, 2019, part of the MDP was reorganized into a new Medical Devices Directorate.
Return to footnote
i
referrer
Footnote ii
The CMDSNet is a network representing more than 260 hospitals and
        facilities across Canada. Although reporting is voluntary, some
        internal key informants noted that the CMDSNet helped to fill the
        gaps in surveillance and was instrumental in getting incident
        reports from the health care sector.
Return to footnote
ii
referrer
Footnote iii
The receipt date and processing date were compared for each
        incident report to assess whether it was processed within service
        standards.
Return to footnote
iii
referrer
Footnote iv
Stakeholders are defined as individuals, groups, or organizations,
        who are external to the Government of Canada and have a specific
        interest in, have some influence on, or are affected by a given
        policy, program, regulatory initiative, or service from Health
        Canada.
Return to footnote
iv
referrer
Footnote v
The RTOF Survey was conducted in 2016 by Health Canada. The
        questionnaire was sent to all individuals or organizations that
        self-registered with Health Canada to receive information or
        invitations for consultations on various health-related topics.
        Results presented in this report pertain only to the individuals
        and organizations that reported an interest in medical devices. The
        results should be interpreted with caution due to the small number
        of respondents. Considering that the respondents self-registered
        with Health Canada, the survey results cannot be generalized the
        entire population or a larger group of medical device stakeholders.T
Return to footnote
v
referrer
Footnote vi
The sample was constructed with the first five recalls made for the
        months of January, March, May, July, September, and November, and
        the last five recalls made for the months of February, April, June,
        August, October, and December.
Return to footnote
vi
referrer
Footnote vii
Difference between the “start date” reported on Health Canada’s website and the “date initiated by firm” reported on the U.S. Food and Drug Administration Web site.
Return to footnote
vii
referrer
Footnote viii
At the time of the engagement, Membership of the Medical Devices Tri-Lateral Committee included the directors of the Medical Device Bureau, the Health Products Surveillance and Epidemiology Bureau (HPSEB), the Marketed Pharmaceutical and Medical Devices Bureau (MPMDB), and the Medical Device Compliance Program (MDCP). A representative from Health Canada’s Office of Policy, Risk Advisory and Advertising also attended the committee to provide a policy lens when required.
Return to footnote
viii
referrer
Page details
Report a problem on this page
Date modified:
2021-03-29