Results at a Glance Evaluation of Health Canada’s Health Care Policy Contribution Program (HCPCP) 2013-14 to 2017-18
Introduction
The purpose of this evaluation was to assess the relevance and  effectiveness of the Health Care Policy Contribution Program (HCPCP) for the  period of 2013-14 to 2017-18. The evaluation was required by the Financial  Administration Act (FAA) and the Treasury Board of Canada’s Policy on Results  (2016).
Background
Launched in 2002, the HCPCP is a national program that provides  contribution funding to projects that address health care system  priorities.
What the  evaluation found
HCPCP  priorities have evolved over time and there are continuing needs within the health care system related to current priority areas, including palliative  care, home care, mental health, and health care system innovation.
Projects  were generally effective in producing and disseminating knowledge products.  Direct measurement of awareness was limited, but there was other evidence  related to stakeholder awareness, including the involvement of some target  audiences in knowledge product development, and the subsequent use of some of  these products.
Some target  audiences were using knowledge products stemming from the projects. Use was  varied, ranging from the development of frameworks and guidance documents based  on knowledge products, to participation in training programs.
Some projects led to improvements in the health care system, ranging from the adoption of professional standards, practices, and policies, to more physicians with  rural and remote experience; however, evidence was limited on the impacts of  these changes. Several of the projects that were able to demonstrate progress  towards longer-term outcomes were continuations of previously funded projects,  sometimes with multiple earlier phases.
Areas for consideration
Given that  the redesign of the HCPCP is ongoing, this evaluation presents areas for consideration that the program can continue to build upon or take into account  as it moves forward, rather than providing recommendations.
At the  project level, collaboration with relevant partner organizations and strong  project leadership were seen to be the most crucial elements for ultimate  project success, along with longer-term contribution agreements, evidence-based  planning, and support from Health Canada (e.g., encouraging buy-in from  stakeholders and providing project guidance and advice).
At the  program level, Health Canada’s role in knowledge translation and strategic  direction, including greater use of project performance and progress reports,  as well as more program support for innovative projects, were identified as  areas for improvement.
About this evaluation
This  evaluation was conducted by the Office of Audit and Evaluation between December  2017 and August 2018.  Data collection  methods included: focused literature review, document review, internal and  external key informant interviews, and case studies.
Page details
Report a problem on this page
Date modified:
2019-01-29