Summary of the Evaluation of Trans Mountain Expansion (TMX) Phase IV Coordination
About TMX Phase IV Coordination
In June 2019, the Government of Canada (GOC) approved the Trans Mountain Expansion (TMX) project. This decision included a commitment to implement eight accommodation measures and responses to 16 recommendations of the Canadian Energy Regulator designed to mitigate or avoid potential effects associated with TMX and to build the capacity of and long-term relationships with Indigenous peoples. The GOC allocated a total of $31.6M to support the federal government’s post-decision (Phase IV) administration of TMX.
While each responsible department remains accountable for the delivery of its own accommodations and recommendations, Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) was allocated $17.5M of this total to lead the whole-of-government coordination across these initiatives. Partner departments - i.e., Fisheries and Oceans Canada (DFO), Canadian Coast Guard (CCG), Transport Canada (TC) and Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC) - have also established their own TMX Secretariats to support departmental coordination.
What The Evaluation Found
Planned  vs Actual Delivery
We found that the GOC has established suitable governance mechanisms to coordinate the  implementation and delivery of the TMX Phase IV activities. While the  organizational structure and titles have changed over time to account for  evolving roles, NRCan’s two key  coordination structures have been mostly operating as planned since 2019.  However, the workload related to TMX  coordination is not perceived as sustainable and partner departments report  having underestimated the level of effort that would be required for  coordination and reporting.
Effectiveness  of NRCan’s Strategic Policy and Coordination Team (NRCan-SPC)
NRCan-SPC was responsible for supporting  oversight and coordination among federal partners, and for tracking progress on  implementation of TMX Phase IV. We found that NRCan-SPC has created effective  tools and processes to support federal coordination. Key governance bodies are  well supported. While partner departments do not always agree on decisions,  NRCan-SPC is perceived to be open and transparent in working to resolve  cross-cutting issues. NRCan-SPC has also helped facilitate and expedite  regulatory approvals. Nevertheless, federal representatives perceived  inefficiencies in the processes used to create and update coordination tools  and improvements are required to ease the flow of information, including for  external communications.
Effectiveness  of NRCan’s Phase IV Partnership Office (NRCan-P4PO)
NRCan-P4PO was  responsible for facilitating coordination among federal partners and tracking  progress on implementation of accommodation measures and other custom  commitments to Indigenous groups. We found that NRCan-P4PO has been mostly  effective in this coordination role. It has played an innovative role helping  partner departments navigate complexity, address more sensitive issues  impacting a small number of Indigenous groups, and providing a coordinated federal  voice on whole-of-government issues.
NRCan-P4PO also  fulfilled its role for initial outreach to the 129 Indigenous groups with  specific eligibility to access to some or all TMX Phase IV accommodation  measures. However, its engagement strategy was finalized relatively late in the  implementation of Phase IV and key communications products (e.g., P4PO  newsletter and TMX Indigenous Portal) were either delayed or underused. Related  performance metrics and tracking systems do not provide information on the meaningfulness  of engagement.
Respondents from (a  limited sample of) Indigenous groups generally rated the effectiveness of  NRCan-P4PO’s engagement as “poor” to “fair”. Despite a few successful attempts  to triage and streamline the GOC’s engagement, NRCan-P4PO has not fully  fulfilled its intended role as a “single window” for Indigenous engagement. For  various valid reasons, partner departments have continued to develop or  maintain their own relationships and are interacting directly with Indigenous  groups. Indigenous respondents also perceived room to improve skillsets for  engagement (e.g., tailored communications) and reported challenges with  building and maintaining relationships, exacerbated by frequent federal staff  turnover. As a result, the majority of federal and Indigenous respondents  agreed that the federal approach to engagement on TMX has not been effective in  reducing engagement fatigue. NRCan-P4PO recognized this issue and has made  attempts to respond, but there is room for further improvement.
Facilitating  and Impeding Factors
TMX is a high  profile, complex and time-sensitive major project for which GOC post-decision  activity is unprecedented in scale or scope. Phase IV implementation was also  adversely affected by several unforeseen events (e.g., COVID-19 and major  natural disasters). While the evaluation found issues in the efficiency of  processes and achievement of results, federal coordination on TMX has been  reasonably effective in consideration of the broader context of the challenges  faced in implementation.
NRCan’s  effectiveness was impeded by the federal decision-making and accountability  regime for TMX. Specifically, NRCan was given the mandate and accountability  for coordination but does not have the authority to direct the actions of partner  departments. Regardless, the existence of a coordination function, facilitated  by the quality of support from NRCan and senior management, was a factor  critical to successes achieved.
Ongoing  Need for TMX Phase IV Coordination
The construction of  the twinned TMX pipeline is currently expected to be completed in 2023. The  evaluation found general agreement on the continued need for GOC coordination,  at least as long as TMX Phase IV accommodation measures are still being implemented  and/or construction is ongoing.
The coordination function’s location is not perceived to be important provided it  continues to ensure the Crown’s commitments made during Phase III consultations  and Phase IV are being met. That said, there is strong support for maintaining  NRCan-SPC. For senior managers, the key question relates not to continued need  for NRCan-SPC but rather the resource levels required to sustain oversight and  coordination.
However, the  evaluation found that the role of NRCan-P4PO could be reduced now that  accommodations are in progress and partner departments have built their own  direct relationships with Indigenous groups.
Lessons  Learned
The evaluation  identified the areas for improvement that could support ongoing delivery of TMX  Phase IV (e.g., clearer delineation of roles and responsibilities, increased  sustainability of federal workload, improved coordination for Indigenous  engagement). The evaluation also identified lessons related to post-decision  engagement on major projects, as well as a need to manage the precedent set by  TMX and further advance reconciliation with Indigenous peoples. Corporate  knowledge built during the implementation of TMX Phase IV should be preserved  and related lessons learned from current and past program reviews should be  reviewed collectively and shared across the federal government to inform future  initiatives.
Recommendation
Management Response and Action Plan
NRCan’s ADM    Nòkwewashk should work with partner departments to
review and streamline    the level of effort
required to support sustainable coordination. This    should include a review of internal tools and processes (e.g., frequency and    mix of coordination products) to reduce burden and provide a more holistic    view of expected input and related timelines.
Management response:
Nòkwewashk concurs with this recommendation, and has already taken steps    to streamline products, activities, and processes to reduce the workload    burden on TMX Partner Departments.
Actions include:
In Spring 2022, Nòkwewashk undertook a collaborative review of all    coordination and communication products that require interdepartmental input;    as well as all interdepartmental governance meetings. Representatives from    the five TMX Partner Departments were asked to rank each of the products and    meetings based on their overall effectiveness at supporting coordinated    implementation. On the basis of this collaborative review, products have    either been maintained, reduced in scope or frequency, or discontinued.    Similarly, this review led to the consolidation of several recurring working    level meetings in to one interdepartmental working group.
The result of this review was a simplified but comprehensive    governance structure; and a reduced list of effective interdepartmental    products that will be carried forward.
Nòkwewashk will repeat this exercise every fiscal year in    collaboration with TMX Partner Departments, with an aim to only maintain    coordination and communication products and governance meetings that are the    most effective at supporting coordinated implementation.
Position responsible:
Manager, TMX Implementation
Timing:
Review of products to take place annually, at the end of each fiscal year to program sunset. Final review expected    by April 1, 2025.
To    increase their utility, NRCan’s ADM Nòkwewashk should work with partner    departments to
refine and strengthen the    federal government’s approach to external communications
on TMX Phase IV implementation. This would include clearer delineation of    roles and responsibilities and process improvements that result in more    timely and tailored communications, particularly for Indigenous groups.
Management response:
Nòkwewashk concurs with this recommendation, and will work to strengthen    and refine communications on TMX Implementation, within the constraints of    its significantly reduced capacity. Nòkwewashk will continue to provide    coordination support for future communications regarding the TMX initiatives    as a whole. TMX Partner    Departments are responsible for proactive, two-way communications with    Indigenous groups regarding the individual initiatives under their purview.
Actions include:
Nòkwewashk will work with TMX Partner Departments and Natural    Resources Canada’s Communications and Portfolio Sector to refine the federal    government’s approach to communications, including further streamlining    approvals processes for communications products under its purview (i.e., the    TMX Website and the Indigenous Portal) to ensure more timely and efficient    updates. The revised communications approach will include:
Well delineated roles,    responsibilities, and accountabilities;
Mechanisms for resolving    disputes regarding content;
Clear, firm timelines    for input and approvals; and
Focus on developing    accessible, plain language content.
A full update of the TMX Website and Indigenous Portal is planned to    take place before March 31, 2023.
Position responsible:
Manager, TMX Implementation
Timing:
April 1, 2023
NRCan’s ADM Nòkwewashk should
revise its    approach to Indigenous engagement
in ways that build trust and cultivate meaningful    relationships with Indigenous groups (e.g., frequent check-in calls from    engagement officers). This engagement should be more proactive and include    measures to mitigate the negative impact of staff turnover on maintaining    relationships.
Management response:
Nòkwewashk concurs with this recommendation, and building trust and    meaningful, and long-term relationships with Indigenous groups is at the core    of its mandate.
Nòkwewashk is in the process of establishing long-term,    place-based mechanisms for developing and strengthening these relationships    that are not tied to individual projects or programs.
Nòkwewashk will continue to conduct    proactive engagement related to TMX through existing mechanisms such as the    TMX Indigenous Advisory and Monitoring Committee. However, NRCan has limited    resources to carry out its role in coordinating post-decision implementation    of TMX and its related initiatives, and will no longer maintain its Phase IV    Partnerships Office. Nòkwewashk’s role in carrying out proactive engagement    specifically related to the TMX Project and associated initiatives through    the Phase IV Partnerships Office has been wound down in favour of broader, place-based,    engagement focused on long-term relationship-building. Nòkwewashk will    continue to play an important role in being supportive and responsive to    Indigenous groups that raise complex or cross-cutting issues related to the    TMX Project.
Actions include:
In Budget 2022, Nòkwewashk received funding to expand the Indigenous    Partnerships Office (IPO). The expansion of IPO is focused on establishing    ‘regional hubs’ of staff across Canada focused on taking a place-based    approach to building and sustaining relationships with local Indigenous    communities across Canada.
Nòkwewashk also received funding through Budget 2022 to continue to    support the TMX Indigenous Advisory and Monitoring Committee to facilitate a    collaborative, inclusive, and transparent approach to monitoring and    oversight of TMX.
Nòkwewashk will continue    to be responsive and supportive to Indigenous groups regarding complex or    cross-cutting issues related to the TMX Project.
Position responsible:
ADM Nòkwewashk, NRCan
Timing:
Actions will be ongoing. Review of progress to date to be completed by April    1, 2025.
NRCan’s ADM Nòkwewashk should develop
performance    metrics
for TMX Phase IV    implementation that are more meaningful to Indigenous groups.
Management response:
Nòkwewashk concurs with this recommendation, and has adjusted its    performance indicators to reflect its role in supporting ongoing Indigenous    engagement related to TMX implementation to the extent possible given the    dedicated resources available.
Actions include:
As part of its performance measurement strategy, Nòkwewashk has    adjusted its performance indicators to measure:
Supportiveness and    responsiveness to Indigenous groups on TMX-related matters;
Ability to support    fulfillment of custom commitments to Indigenous groups made during the Phase    III consultations; and
Level of satisfaction    from Indigenous groups with the effectiveness of support provided by    Nòkwewashk during implementation.
Nòkwewashk will work with Indigenous groups directly to ensure that    performance metrics and indicators are meaningful to Indigenous groups for    any new or renewed program proposal put forward.
Position responsible:
ADM Nòkwewashk, NRCan
Timing:
Performance indicators must be fulfilled    by program sunset (March 2025). Final    reporting expected by June 30,    2025.
NRCan’s ADM Nòkwewashk should work with partner    departments to
improve the definition and communication of roles and    responsibilities
for coordination    of TMX Phase IV implementation, including working collaboratively to develop    dispute resolution mechanisms.
Management response:
Nòkwewashk concurs with this recommendation, and will work with TMX    Partner Departments to ensure there is a mutual understanding of roles and    responsibilities.
Actions include:
In March 2022, Nòkwewashk shared updated Terms of Reference for each    of its governance committees, revised in collaboration with TMX Partner    Departments.
NRCan will review these Terms of Reference on an annual basis, with    the next review scheduled for March 2023.
The updated terms of reference should:
Establish clear and    predictable objectives for interdepartmental work;
Ensure topics and issues    are able to be brought forward and resolved through the governance structure;
Establish clear    expectations for all parties around timing for input, reviews, and approvals;    and
Be accompanied by a clear and predictable forward agenda.
Position responsible:
Director General, Regulatory Coordination, Consultation, and Indigenous    Economic Inclusion, Nòkwewashk
Timing:
Annual update of Governance TORs to program sunset (next scheduled for March 2023). Final review expected by April    1, 2025.
About the Evaluation
The evaluation examined the extent to which TMX Phase IV coordination structures were implemented as planned and could demonstrate progress towards intended results. It also assessed the ongoing relevance of NRCan’s TMX Phase IV coordination and identified lessons learned from early implementation that could be used to improve future performance. The scope of the evaluation focused on NRCan’s lead in coordination from June 2019 to December 2021, with consideration for the role of partner departments in facilitating intended results. The scope excluded the performance of specific accommodations or CER responses linked to TMX and activities that took place during earlier phases of TMX (e.g., Phase III consultations). NRCan’s Evaluation Division collaborated with partner departments to design and complete this evaluation. The evaluation was conducted in accordance with the Treasury Board (TB) Policy on Results (2016) and related Standards on Evaluation.
Report a problem on this page
Please select all that apply:
A link, button or video is not working
It has a spelling mistake
Information is missing
Information is outdated or wrong
I can't find what I'm looking for
Other issue not in this list
Submit
Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries,
contact us
.
Date modified:
2023-03-06