Horizontal  Evaluation of the Major  Projects Management Office Initiative (MPMOI)
Audit and Evaluation Branch
Natural Resources Canada
Presented to the Performance Measurement, Evaluation and Experimentation Committee (PMEEC)
November 5, 2020
Table of Contents
Acronyms
Executive summary
Introduction
Program   Information
Legislative   Context
Evaluation   Objective, Methods, and Limitations
Findings
Relevance
Performance – Effectiveness
Performance – Efficiency
Conclusions and recommendations
Evaluation Team
Appendix 1 Logic Model for the MPMO Initiative
Appendix 2 Logic   Model for the Interim Strategy for Pipelines and Other NEB Reviews
Appendix 3  Program   Resources
Appendix 4 Detailed Evaluation Methodology
Appendix 5 Reference   List
ACRONYMS
ADM
Assistant Deputy Minister
BC EAO
British Columbia Environmental Assessment Office
CCARs
Crown Consultation and Accommodation Reports
CEAA 1992
Canadian Environmental Assessment Act, 1992
CEAA 2012
Canadian Environmental Assessment Act, 2012
CEA Agency
Canadian Environmental Assessment Agency
CEAR
Canadian Environmental Assessment Registry
CIAR
Canadian Impact Assessment Registry
CIRNAC-ISC
Crown - Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada - Indigenous Services Canada
CNSC
Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission
DFO
Fisheries and Oceans Canada
DG
Director General
DM
Deputy Minister
DM MPMO
Deputy Ministers’ Major Projects Management Office Committee
EA
Environmental assessment
ECCC
Environment and Climate Change Canada
EEP
Energy East Pipeline
FTE
Full-time equivalent
GHG
Greenhouse gas
GIC
Governor in Council
IA
Impact assessment
IAA
Impact Assessment Act
IAAC
Impact Assessment Agency of Canada
IAMC
Indigenous Affairs Monitoring Committee
IARP
Impact Assessment and Regulatory Process
IPO-West
Indigenous Partnerships Office-West (previously named MPMO-West)
MPMO
Major Projects Management Office
MPMOI
Major Projects Management Office Initiative
NEB
National Energy Board
NGTL
NOVA Gas Transmission Limited
NPA
Navigation Protection Act
NRCan
Natural Resources Canada
OIC
Order in Council
PFP
Participant Funding Program
RA
Responsible authority
SARA
Species at Risk Act
TC
Transport Canada
TMX
Trans Mountain Expansion
Executive summary
About the Evaluation
This report presents the findings,  conclusions and recommendations of the horizontal evaluation of the Major  Projects Management Office Initiative (MPMOI, or the Initiative), including the  Interim Strategy on Pipelines and Other National Energy Board (NEB) Reviews(the Interim Strategy). Initiated in  2007, the MPMOI is a federal horizontal initiative  involving 12 federal regulatory departments and agencies, led by Natural  Resources Canada (NRCan), the objective of which is to improve the  accountability, transparency, timeliness, and predictability of the regulatory  system for major resource projects. The two primary components of the Initiative  include:
funding provided to partner  departments and agencies to maintain the capacity needed to support timely and  robust technical analyses and Indigenous consultations; and
the Major Projects Management Office (MPMO, or  the Office), housed within NRCan, which serves as a central coordinating body  for reviews of major resource projects across Canada.
Introduced in fiscal year 2016-17, the  Interim Strategy consists of measures designed to ensure major resource project  reviews led by the NEB align with principles announced by the Government of  Canada in January 2016. These, in turn, respond to an earlier government commitment,  first articulated in 2015 Speech from the Throne to introduce environmental  assessment (EA) processes that improve engagement with Indigenous peoples and  the use of scientific evidence while reducing environmental impacts. The  Strategy sought to work towards achieving these goals until the federal  government could review Canada’s EA processes and the previous government’s  changes to the
Fisheries Act
and the
Navigable Waters Protection Act
, and modernize the NEB.
The review led to the introduction of Bills  C-68 and C-69 in February 2018, both of which since received royal assent on June  21, 2019 and came into force on August 28, 2019. The bills propose changes to  legislation that significantly affect how the MPMOI operates and is structured.  For the purposes of this evaluation, the most substantial of these changes involves  replacing the Canadian Environmental Assessment Agency (CEA Agency) with the Impact  Assessment Agency of Canada (IAAC or the Agency) through Bill C-69. The Agency has  become the primary authority responsible for conducting impact assessments  (IAs), which will be more comprehensive than traditional EAs, considering not  merely a project’s potential environmental impacts, but also its social,  health, and economic implications, as well as impacts on Indigenous peoples and  other diverse communities.
This evaluation responds to a Treasury Board commitment for a  comprehensive, horizontal evaluation of the MPMOI in 2017–18 to inform future  renewal. The evaluation was conducted by NRCan’s Audit and Evaluation Branch  (AEB) in accordance with the 2016 Treasury Board of Canada’s
Policy on Results
(2016), and covers the  three-year period spanning 2015–16 to 2017–18. Data collection for the  evaluation was conducted between July 2018 and February 2019, and consisted of  a comprehensive document and administrative data review, as well as a series of  key informant interviews with internal and external partners and stakeholders. The  MPMOI was last evaluated in 2012.
What the Evaluation Found
Relevance
The evaluation found an ongoing need  for the federal government to allocate resources to maintain the scientific,  technical and Indigenous consultation capacity necessary to support reviews of  major resource projects, as well as a continued need for the roles and  responsibilities currently held by the Office. However, the evaluation found little  consensus about what, if any, of these roles and responsibilities the Office itself  should perform in the future, particularly in light of recent legislative  changes and other ongoing developments. Revisiting and clarifying the MPMO’s  mandate and its roles and responsibilities at this time is critical to avoid overlap/duplication  among program partners and other stakeholders, as well as to identify and  address any possible gaps.
Activities  delivered through the MPMOI are consistent with the federal government’s  existing and proposed statutory roles and responsibilities as they relate to  EAs and regulatory reviews, as well as with its duty to consult (and  accommodate, as applicable) Indigenous peoples when a project may negatively impact  Aboriginal or treaty rights.  However, Bill C-69, including the implementation of a new Impact Assessment and  Regulatory Process (IARP) could affect the allocation of roles and  responsibilities among some federal departments and agencies, particularly  those of the Office, which are not currently established in legislation.
The MPMOI and the  Interim Strategy align with current federal priorities, including environmental  protection, action on climate change, reconciliation with Indigenous peoples,  and promotion of positive economic outcomes, and with the priorities and core  responsibilities of participating federal departments and agencies.
Achievement of expected results
Program partners are engaging in all  intended activities, and there is some evidence of progress towards achievement  of certain outcomes. However, limited performance measurement data and diverse  stakeholder perspectives precluded the evaluation from reaching firm  conclusions.
Improved coordination of the regulatory review process.
The MPMO and other Initiative partners engaged in a range of  activities to coordinate the regulatory review process. Initiative partners  worked with provincial regulators and proponents at the project level to  coordinate activities during reviews and resolve issues encountered along the  way, while at the horizontal level supporting the MPMOI’s governance structure  and the development of Bill C-69. It is however unclear to what extent the  major gains in coordination had been made prior to the evaluation period, or  whether improvements since that time resulted from the coming into force of the
Canadian Environmental Assessment Act,  2012
(CEAA 2012) rather than the MPMOI.
Improved timeliness, predictability, quality, transparency and  accountability of regulatory reviews.
The  evaluation found evidence that federal partners are successfully meeting  legislated time limits for regulatory reviews; providing the specialized or  expert information and knowledge required to inform EAs; considering scientific  evidence in review decisions and using it to inform conditions imposed upon project  proponents; and maintaining a variety of internal and public-facing tools to monitor, track, and  report on performance. On the other hand, project timelines remain highly  variable, and it is unclear whether the time needed for a project to advance  from initial application to final assessment decision has declined since the  last evaluation. It is also uncertain whether scientific  evidence is more likely to be considered now as compared to before the  evaluation period, or how commonly various reports and tools are used and  whether the information they provide is meaningful to stakeholders.
More coordinated, consistent and meaningful Indigenous and public  consultations.
Activities were undertaken through  the Initiative and the Interim Strategy to improve the coordination,  consistency and meaningfulness of Indigenous and public consultations.  Moreover, there is evidence that Indigenous peoples and other members of the  public are participating in consultations, and that review decisions attempt to  account for Indigenous and public input and to accommodate concerns, where  appropriate. While many opportunities for improvement were identified during  the evaluation, the evidence suggests the coordination, consistency and  meaningfulness of Indigenous consultations has improved over time. The Federal  Court of Appeal recognized significant improvements in the Crown consultation  process, relative to consultations conducted during earlier project reviews, in  its decision to overturn the approval of the Trans Mountain  Expansion in
Tsleil-Waututh  Nation v. Canada.
Program efficiency
The Deputy Minister (DM) and Assistant  Deputy Minister (ADM) committees, which are the key elements of the MPMOI  governance structure, are a main strength of the Initiative. There may be  opportunities to clarify the roles and responsibilities of the senior manager  committees, particularly with respect to focus (i.e., horizontal policy issues  or project-level issues), committee involvement in issues resolution, and  nature of NRCan participation.
Due to limited information on resource  use, outputs, and expected outcomes, the evaluation could not reach a definitive  conclusion as to whether the MPMOI and the Interim Strategy are operating  efficiently. Key informants gave numerous (and often contradictory) suggestions  for improving effectiveness and efficiency, but there is no evidence that any  of these would be more efficient or effective at achieving expected outcomes.
Although some performance information is collected,  monitored and used internally to support decision-making, it is not always  appropriate or sufficient to demonstrate effectiveness and efficiency. Key  weaknesses include:
Limited financial and human resource  information, including limited linkage of this information to  Initiative/Strategy activities;
Performance measures that are inappropriate  or insufficient for demonstrating progress towards outcomes, or that may not be  meaningful to external partners/stakeholders; and
Limited functionality of the MPMO Tracker  with regard to providing aggregate information about projects undergoing  review.
There are opportunities to: improve the collection  of performance measurement and financial and human resource information; ensure  that performance indicators are relevant and valid for measuring expected  outcomes; and improve the functionality of public-facing project monitoring  systems.
Recommendations and Management Response
Recommendation 1.
NRCan should work with participating departments and agencies to ensure continuation of relevant activities currently performed by the MPMO. This process should be informed by a comprehensive review of the Office’s mandate, roles and responsibilities relative to the roles of other participating departments and agencies and/or external stakeholders, and should include the following task:
Determine what entity or entities (including the MPMO itself) should carry out roles and responsibilities currently performed by MPMO going forward, with explicit reference to any pertinent legislative (i.e., Bill C-69) or other developments occurring or anticipated to occur at the time the determination is made, and update the mandate as required.
Management Response and Action Plan
NRCan management agrees.
With the coming-into-force of Bill    C-69 and introduction of the new
Impact    Assessment Act
(IAA), many of the Office’s roles and responsibilities    related to coordination of the federal regulatory process for major projects    now reside with IAAC. Other roles, for example, with respect to coordination    of crown consultation, now lie with the Agency, lifecycle regulators, or    regulators.
Regarding responsibility for    horizontal policy issues, the mandate and authorities of the Agency as set    out in the IAA, is to administer, coordinate, and develop policy directly    related to the IAA.
NRCan has undertaken a comprehensive    review of the Office’s former functions and horizontal coordination    requirements and identified which entity or entities have responsibility for    these roles in the new legislative and regulatory context.
NRCan, working with participating    departments and agencies, is pursuing a revised mandate for the Office, which    takes into consideration the new legislation, the results of the review, as    well as the broader context of Government priorities related to Canada’s    natural resource sector.
Responsible Manager / Organization
: ADM, MPMO
Target Date:
September 30, 2020
Recommendation 2.
NRCan should    collaborate with participating departments and agencies to improve    performance measurement for the MPMOI. To ensure responsible departments and    agencies can demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of the MPMOI and    IARP, the following steps should be taken (at a minimum):
Revise the logic model for the Initiative
to ensure that it clearly articulates activities, outputs and    expected outcomes (immediate, intermediate, and long-term). This may include    revising, removing, or adding activities, outputs and expected outcomes to    ensure clarity and avoid repetition.
Develop and implement a set of performance measures
corresponding to the    outcomes identified in the revised logic model.
The performance measures    should enable monitoring of progress towards outcome achievement; process    indicators should not be relied upon as evidence of outcome achievement, and    indicators should be meaningful and relevant to Initiative stakeholders and    partners.
Strengthen monitoring and reporting tools or practices
, to facilitate consistent collection of performance information    across departments and agencies, and enable a clear understanding of progress    towards outcomes or enable course correction if the desired change is not    seen. This should include establishing baselines or benchmarks for expected    outcomes, and identifying clear targets and dates to achieve these targets.
Improve tracking of financial and human resource information
. This should include:
Actual resource use from new    and existing department and agency budgets for major resource project reviews    (including trends over time); and
Allocation of financial and    human resources to various activities, corresponding to the activities    identified in the revised logic model.
Improve public-facing project monitoring systems
to ensure that stakeholders and interested members of the public    can obtain and understand information about major resource projects under    federal review. This should include providing easier access to information    about project assessments (including the rationale behind review decisions),    as well as improving the functionality and timeliness of public-facing    monitoring systems to ensure accessibility of project-level and aggregated    information about major resource projects progressing through the federal    review system.
With the    passing of Bill C-69 and the implementation of the IARP, the Agency should    also consider these improvements to performance measurement and collaborate    with participating departments and agencies to ensure they are addressed for    this new horizontal initiative.
Management Response and  Action Plan
NRCan  management agrees.
NRCan acknowledges the importance of quality  performance measurement to inform program management, improve performance and  provide transparent, clear and useful information on results achieved.
As the horizontal MPMO Initiative led by  NRCan sunsetted at the end of fiscal year 2019-20, it is no longer relevant to  make revisions to the performance measurement for the existing MPMOI.
NRCan will ensure that measures to support  the evaluation of effectiveness and efficiency are a key component of any new  program proposal put forward.
With  the coming into force of Bill C-69, IAAC has assumed responsibility for  horizontal results tracking and reporting on the new IARP, including monitoring  and reporting on performance measures, and tracking of financial and human  resources.
Responsible Manager /  Organization
ADM,  MPMO
Target Date
N/A
Management Response and  Action Plan
The  Impact Assessment Agency of Canada (IAAC or the Agency), sees value in this  recommendation and is taking the following actions.
With the implementation of the IAA, the  Agency was created to lead all federal impact assessments and be the sole Crown  consultation coordinator for federal projects assessed under the new IARP. This  consolidated responsibilities that were formerly distributed across agencies  and departments into a single place. As such, many of the coordination and  reporting activities that had previously been the responsibility of NRCan’s  MPMO were transferred to IAAC. This includes responsibilities associated with  performance measurement as the lead organization responsible for monitoring and  reporting on the Horizontal Results Framework (HRF) for the IARP horizontal  initiative resulting from Bills C-69 and C-68.
The following steps have been undertaken by  IAAC (previously the Canadian Environmental Assessment Agency) to address the  considerations identified in this recommendation:
Revise the logic model for the initiative and develop and implement  a set of performance measures corresponding to the outcomes identified in the  revised logic model
In 2018, IAAC collaborated with eight other  federal departments and agencies to develop a HRF for the IARP horizontal  initiative. This HRF was approved by Deputy Heads from each of the nine federal  departments and agencies, including: IAAC, Canada Energy Regulator (previously  the National Energy Board), NRCan, Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC),  Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada (CIRNAC), Indigenous  Services Canada (ISC), Health Canada, Transport Canada, and the Fisheries and  Oceans Canada (DFO). The HRF was approved by the Treasury Board of Canada  Secretariat in December 2018.
In fiscal year 2019-20, with the  coming-into-force of the IAAon  August 28, 2019, the Agency further collaborated with the above-mentioned  departments and agencies to review targets, dates to achieve targets, and where  necessary, to strengthen performance indicators. These updates will be  published with the 2020-21 Departmental Plan (DP).
Strengthen monitoring and reporting tools or practices, and improve  tracking of financial and human resource information
The Agency collects financial and  non-financial performance information bi-annually, to be published on the  Agency’s website as part of the Departmental Results Report (DRR) and DP  processes. The first publication of performance information will be with the  2018-19 DRR.
Moving forward, IAAC will continue to  collaborate with partner organizations to ensure ongoing monitoring of  performance of the horizontal initiative, and the availability of financial and  non-financial performance information to support annual reporting in the DRR  and DP, as well as to support future evaluations.
Improve public-facing project monitoring systems
On coming into force of the IAA, the Agency  launched a modern, user-focused, public Registry serving as a one-stop shop for  information related to IAs. The first release of the new Registry offers new  tools and enhanced functionality in order to provide Canadians with greater  access and transparency to information related to designated projects and the IA  process, regional and strategic assessments, as well as regulatory/permitting  processes of designated projects. It will increase Canadians’ access to the  science and evidence behind project proposals, and make available  easy-to-understand summaries of decisions. The Registry is also equipped with a  collaborative platform to capture a wide range of views from stakeholders  through a digital portal in support of increased transparency of information  and public engagement.
Additional  system improvements will continue to be implemented in response to user needs  and allow time to build interconnectivity with systems maintained by other  government departments, such as the Open Science and Data platform.
Responsible Manager /  Organization:
Vice-president, Operations
Vice-president, External Relations and  Strategic Policy Sector
Vice-president - Corporate Services Sector
Target Date:
March  31, 2020
Introduction
This report presents the findings, conclusions and recommendations of  the horizontal evaluation of the Major Projects Management Office Initiative  (MPMOI, or the Initiative), including the Interim Strategy on Pipelines and  Other National Energy Board (NEB) Reviews(the Interim Strategy). The evaluation covers the period from 2015–16 to  2017–18. Data collection for the evaluation was conducted between July 2018 and  February 2019. It responds to a Treasury Board commitment for a comprehensive,  horizontal evaluation of the MPMOI in 2017–18 to inform future renewal. The  evaluation was conducted in accordance with the Treasury Board of Canada’s
Policy on Results
(2016).
Program Information
Context
The resource sector constitutes an important pillar of the Canadian  economy. In 2017, the energy, minerals and metals, and forest sectors directly  and indirectly supported over 1.82 million (M) jobs across Canada and accounted  for about 17% of the country’s nominal gross domestic product (GDP) (NRCan, 2018a). As of June 2018, 418 major resource projects with combined capital  costs of $585 billion (B) were planned over the next ten years or were already  under construction (NRCan, 2018a).
Canadian natural  resource producers act as price-takers in international markets and, as such,  they are affected by price fluctuations associated with cycles in global supply  and demand. Changes in the number, value and status of major resource projects  over the years are often the result of a wide range of external economic  factors (NRCan, 2018a).
Origins and background  of the MPMOI
A
major resource      project, under the MPMOI,
is a large-scale resource project which is      subject to an environmental assessment by a Review Panel or by a      Responsible Authority under the
Canadian      Environmental Assessment Act, 2012
. Industry sectors with major      resource projects typically include large scale mineral and metal mining,      oil sands development, and energy generation, transmission and      transportation (Program documentation).
The MPMOI is a federal horizontal initiative  involving 12 federal regulatory departments and agencies, led by Natural  Resources Canada (NRCan). When it was established in 2007, the Initiative aimed  to improve the accountability, transparency, timeliness, and predictability of  the regulatory system for major resource projects by addressing a number of  shortcomings of the review process that existed at that time. These included  insufficient scientific, technical and Indigenous consultation capacity and  lack of coordination among federal departments and agencies, leading to  duplication, lengthy review timelines, and Indigenous consultations that often  did not meet minimum legal requirements. Following the establishment of the MPMOI,  the
Cabinet Directive on Improving the  Performance of the Regulatory System for Major Resource Projects
was  established to provide guidance to the Initiative (Government of Canada, 2007).
The MPMOI consists  of two main components. One key component is the provision of funding to  partner departments and agencies to augment their internal scientific,  technical and Indigenous consultation capacity to support timely and robust  technical analyses and Indigenous consultations. These include the Canadian Environmental Assessment  Agency (CEAA),  Fisheries and Oceans Canada (DFO), Transport Canada (TC), Environment and  Climate Change Canada (ECCC), and Crown-Indigenous  Relations and Northern Affairs Canada-Indigenous Services Canada (CIRNAC-ISC).
The second key  component is the Major Projects Management Office (MPMO, or the Office), housed  within NRCan, which serves as a central coordinating body for reviews of major resource  projects across Canada. The MPMO’s roles include:
providing  overarching project management and accountability for major resource projects,  in order to ensure timely and predictable processes;
overseeing the implementation of the whole-of-government approach  to Crown consultation, which requires consultation on major resource projects  to be integrated into federal environmental assessment (EA) and regulatory  review and approval processes; and
providing horizontal leadership across the Government of Canada to  advance policy, regulatory, and legislative improvements to the federal EA and regulatory  system for major resource projects.
Table 1 below provides details about the  roles and responsibilities of the MPMO (the roles and responsibilities of  funded departments and agencies aside from NRCan are  described in further detail below).
Table
1 : Roles and responsibilities of the MPMO
Roles
Responsibilities
Providing overarching project    management and accountability for individual major resource project reviews, in order to ensure timely and predictable processes
Providing a single point of entry into the federal    regulatory system
Engaging in early discussions and information    exchanges with project proponents on proposed major resource projects
Developing, in collaboration with federal entities    and after consultation with the project proponent, a consensus-based Project    Agreement for each major resource project
Coordination of federal government participation in    NEB reviews
Implementing and managing a transparent monitoring    and tracking system to provide information to stakeholders on major resource    projects progressing through the regulatory system
Overseeing the implementation of the    whole-of-government approach to Crown consultation on major resource projects
Working with CEAA, CIRNAC-ISC and other federal departments and agencies to ensure that the federal government fulfills its consultation responsibilities in a consistent and adequate manner
Acting as the Crown Consultation Coordinator for consultations carried out for NEB-regulated MPMOI projects
Undertaking post-NEB hearing consultations with  Indigenous groups prior to the Governor in Council (GIC) decision on a project, in    order to ensure that there is a mechanism for the Crown to consider    outstanding or unresolved Indigenous concerns, and reduce legal risk pertaining to the Crown’s duty to consult
Maintaining the official record of Indigenous/Crown consultation for the Government of Canada for NEB-regulated MPMOI projects
Delivering a Participant Funding Program (PFP) for NEB reviews with the objective of ensuring that Indigenous concerns and interests are taken into consideration before, during, and after the federal    environmental process and regulatory review
Footnote
1
Providing horizontal leadership across    the Government of Canada to advance policy, regulatory, and legislative improvements    to the federal regulatory system
Supporting the Deputy Ministers’ Major Projects    Management Office Committee (DM MPMO) in fulfilling its mandate to improve the performance    of the regulatory system
Leading or contributing to collaborative research    and policy analysis on initiatives to improve the performance of the    regulatory system, such as legislative options, cost recovery, Indigenous    consultation, cumulative effects, and regional assessment processes
MPMOI Activities and Partners
For the period covered by this evaluation (2015–16 to 2017–18), the MPMOI consisted of the  following five activities delivered by six funded departments and agencies.
Scientific and technical expert capacity
. Internal scientific and technical expert capacity to support  assessment of environmental impacts and to support regulatory processes under  departments’ respective legislation; development of conditions for managing  environmental effects; engagement in regulatory review and decision-making  processes; and provision of risk-based oversight over the project lifecycle.
Indigenous consultations
. Internal  capacity to support efforts to meet the legal duty to consult with Indigenous  groups, including participating in CEAA consultations during EAs, as  appropriate. The intent is to address potential adverse impacts to asserted or  established Aboriginal and treaty rights. This activity also included NRCan  (MPMO) serving as the Crown Consultation Coordinator for major resource projects  under NEB review.
Proponent support and system integration.
Through this activity, NRCan (MPMO) delivers a single window for  proponents and provides overarching project management during major resource  project reviews. Partner departments and agencies also support proponents throughout  the EA process and during their respective regulatory processes, although they  do not necessarily receive MPMOI funding to do so.
Policy and reporting.
This activity  supports delivery of a coordinated, five-year forward horizontal policy agenda.  The forward policy agenda examined a number of subjects, including Indigenous  engagement, cumulative effects, and enhanced monitoring.
Legal support
. Through this  activity, funded partners work with the Department of Justice to proactively  manage legal risk for projects.
As already noted, in addition to NRCan, five other departments and  agencies receive funding through the MPMOI. Their specific roles and responsibilities  in delivering the MPMOI are as follows:
CEAA
conducts EAs of major resource projects as a Responsible Authority  (RA) under the
Canadian Environmental  Assessment Act 2012
(CEAA 2012), which includes facilitating public and  Indigenous participation in the assessment process and managing involvement by federal  expert departments. It also serves as Crown Consultation Coordinator for  Indigenous groups during EAs it manages, assesses project impacts on Aboriginal  right and title, and provides support to review panels, as appropriate.
DFO
serves as an RA for transitional EAs started prior to CEAA 2012. It  also helps proponents understand their responsibilities under the
Fisheries Act
and the
Species at Risk Act
(SARA), and  collaborates broadly to identify measures that minimize projects’ impacts on  fish and fish habitat. Other activities include reviewing and making decisions  relative to applications for authorizations, monitoring the effectiveness of  mitigation and offsetting measures, and addressing its Crown consultation  responsibilities in relation to its decisions. DFO also participates in Crown  consultation activities led by other RAs. DFO also provides subject matter  expertise during the EA process led by other RAs, as requested.
TC
participates in review activities under the
Navigation Protection Act
(NPA), such as assessing a project’s  impacts to navigation, helping proponents understand their responsibilities  under the NPA, issuing approvals, conducting follow-up, monitoring the  effectiveness of mitigation and compensation measures, participating in Indigenous  consultations, and collaborating with federal and provincial stakeholders to  improve the performance of the regulatory system.
ECCC
provides subject matter expertise during the EA and regulatory  permitting process (e.g., the expected impact of projects on wildlife/wildlife  habitats, water quantity/quality, etc.). It also provides support on climate  modelling and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions during the EA process,
Footnote
2
and supports or undertakes consultations with regard to regulatory decisions  under the
Fisheries Act
, the
Migratory Birds Convention Act
, SARA and  the
International River Improvements Act.
CIRNAC-ISC
provides project support and expertise, while contributing to  modernizing policies and regulations that relate to the review of major resource  projects. This includes supplying training, guidance, and policy advice to  program partners to promote a whole-of-government approach to Indigenous  consultation, negotiating consultation arrangements/protocols with Indigenous  groups and developing Memoranda of Understanding with provinces and  territories. It also involves collaborating with federal and provincial  stakeholders to improve the performance of the regulatory system, and  supporting the MPMO horizontal governance structure. Other activities include  leading Strategic Environmental Assessments (EA) in offshore Arctic waters, in  partnership with northern organizations.
Table 2 provides an overview of the  funded activities and the departments and agencies that received funding to deliver them.
Table 2 : MPMOI funded activities and partners
Activity
NRCan (MPMO)
CEAA
ECCC
DFO
CIRNAC-ISC
TC
Scientific and technical expert    capacity
-
X
X
X
X
X
Indigenous consultations
X
-
X
X
X
X
Proponent support and system    integration
X
-
-
-
-
-
Policy and reporting
X
X
X
X
X
Legal support
X
-
X
X
-
X
NOTE:
The table accounts only for MPMOI-funded  activities, and excludes activities undertaken by program partners over the    evaluation period using resources acquired from alternative sources.
Several federal departments and agencies participate in the Initiative, but  did not receive funding to deliver it. These include: Department of Justice;  Privy Council Office; Health Canada (HC); Parks Canada Agency; and NRCan  (excluding the MPMO). In addition, under CEAA 2012, the NEB and the Canadian  Nuclear Safety Commission (CNSC) have responsibility to undertake EAs for  transmission projects and nuclear projects respectively, and did not receive  funding as part of the MPMOI.
Legislative Context
Since the MPMOI was  established in 2007, the legislative and regulatory regime for major resource  projects in Canada has evolved considerably. At the time the MPMOI was  established, there were 40 RAs involved in federal reviews of major resource  projects, no legislative time limits for reviews, and thousands of assessments  completed each year. Major changes were made to the  system in 2012, and further legislative changes were proposed in 2018 and  passed in 2019.
2012  changes
Changes were made  in 2012 to improve the timeliness and predictability of the review process;  reduce duplication of project reviews; strengthen environmental protection; and  enhance Indigenous consultations (NRCan, 2012b). Examples of changes include:
CEAA 2012 reduced the number of RAs from  40 to three—CEAA, the NEB, and the CNSC; set specific  timelines for EAs; and focused assessments on major projects with greater  potential for significant adverse environmental effects.
Regulatory time limits or service  standards were set for key regulatory permitting  processes, including the
Fisheries Act
, SARA, NPA (formerly the
Navigable Waters Protection Act
), the
Canadian  Environmental Protection Act
and the
Nuclear Safety and Control Act
.
Steps were taken to better integrate Indigenous consultations into       the new EA and regulatory processes.
Project reviews  operated under this system for the period covered by this evaluation.
2018 New  Impact Assessment and Regulatory Process (IARP)
In the  December 2015 Speech from the Throne, the Government of Canada committed to  review EA processes under the CEAA 2012 with the stated goal of expanding  engagement with Indigenous Peoples and the general public, increasing  consideration of scientific evidence, and ultimately minimizing environmental  impacts (Government of Canada, 2015). Pursuant to this commitment, Responsible Ministers were then mandated  to carry out or support reviews of Canada’s EA processes and of the previous  government’s changes to the
Fisheries Act
and the NPA, as well as to modernize the NEB (Prime Minister of Canada,  2015d, 2015a, 2015e, 2015c, 2015b).
The Government  of Canada launched the reviews of federal EA and regulatory processes in June  2016 and, in February 2018, introduced legislation (Bill C-68 and Bill C-69)  that amend key sections of the
Fisheries  Act
and the NPA, and repeal and replace CEAA 2012 and the
National Energy Board Act
. Both bills received  royal assent on June 21, 2019 and came into force August 28, 2019.
The bills provide changes to legislation  that constitute the foundation of the MPMOI. Changes to the project review  system include early project planning to improve project design; improved rules  to provide greater clarity for proponents, as well as more predictable and  timely reviews; increased public participation in impact assessments; and early  and regular partnership and engagement with Indigenous peoples in the review  process.
Key elements of Bill C-69 include the  following:
Part 1 of the Bill enacts the
Impact Assessment Act
(IAA)(repealing CEAA 2012), and establishes  the Impact Assessment Agency of Canada (IAAC or the Agency) as the primary  authority responsible for impact assessments (IAs). The new agency is  responsible for leading the federal assessment of all designated major resource  projects under the principle of “one project, one review”.
Footnote
3
It is responsible for assessing a project’s social, health, environmental, and  economic impacts including longer term impacts, as well as impacts on  Indigenous peoples and other diverse communities through gender-based analysis  plus (GBA+).
Footnote
4
It is also responsible for coordinating Crown consultations for these  designated projects. The Act also establishes an enhanced process for assessing  environmental effects of projects on federal lands for which the federal  government is making decisions.
Part 2 enacts the
Canadian Energy Regulator Act
and repeals  the
National Energy Board Act
,  establishing the Canadian Energy Regulator (CER), with the role of regulating  the exploitation, development and transportation of energy within Parliament’s  jurisdiction.
Part 3 amends the NPA to become  the
Canadian Navigable Waters Act
.  Amendments include requiring the Minister of Transport to consider any adverse  effects on the rights of Indigenous peoples of Canada in making decisions.
Bill C-68 “amends the
Fisheries  Act
and other Acts in consequence” and is aimed at: restoring lost  protections and incorporating modern safeguards; providing better certainty for  industry; ensuring the long term sustainability of aquatic resources; making  sure that the
Fisheries Act
provides  strong and meaningful protection of fish and fish habitat; and promoting  reconciliation with Indigenous peoples.
Budget 2018 invested about $1B over five years to: support the  proposed new IA system and CER; increase scientific capacity in federal  departments and agencies; implement the changes required to protect water, fish  and navigation; and increase Indigenous and public participation, as outlined  in Bills C-68 and C-69.
It should be noted that Budget 2018 did not  include funding for the MPMO. Instead, a decision was made that funding renewal  for the Office would be considered separately and would include reviewing the  Cabinet Directive that created the Office and the Initiative (
Improving the Performance of the Regulatory System for Major Resource Projects
). This was  intended to identify MPMO activities that would no longer occur at the  MPMO for resource projects subject to the proposed new impact assessment regime  (e.g., Indigenous consultation on major pipelines), as well as the need for continuation of any current activities of the Office  that are consistent with the proposed system. This work will be completed in  2019-20.
Interim Strategy for Pipelines and Other NEB Reviews
In addition to  examining the funded activities of the MPMOI, the evaluation covered activities  funded under the
Interim Strategy for  Pipelines and Other NEB Reviews
. The objective of the Interim Strategy was  to support Government commitments to restore public confidence in EA processes  while the broader review of those processes, described in the preceding  section, took place.
The Interim  Strategy consisted of specific measures to ensure that reviews of major  resource projects subject to NEB review aligned with principles announced by  the Government of Canada in January 2016. The interim principles were to guide  EAs for all major resource projects while the review of federal EA processes  was underway.
The interim  principles were as follows:
No proponent would be asked to return to the starting line;
Decisions would be based on science and traditional knowledge of  Indigenous peoples;
The views of the public and affected communities would be sought  and considered;
Indigenous peoples would be meaningfully consulted and where  appropriate, impacts on their rights and interests will be accommodated; and
Direct and upstream GHG emissions linked  to the projects under review would be assessed.
As already  noted, the Interim Strategy consisted of specific measures to ensure that  reviews of major resource projects subject to NEB review aligned with the  interim principles. A summary of these measures is provided in Table 3. NRCan,  TC, and the NEB received funding under the Interim Strategy to implement these  measures.
Overall, for  projects subject to NEB review, the Interim Strategy was designed to address  over-reliance on the NEB review process as a means of satisfying the duty to  consult with Indigenous peoples, while expanding the scope and opportunities  for public participation. It was also intended to demonstrate commitment to  establishing nation-to-nation relationships with Indigenous groups, while  ensuring sufficient funding to support meaningful Indigenous participation in  the NEB review process or Crown consultations.
Table 3 : Specific measures under the Interim Strategy
Measures under the Interim Strategy
Projects
Trans Mountain Expansion
Energy East Pipeline (EEP)
Footnote
5
Enbridge Line 3 Replacement
NOVA Gas Transmission Limited (NGTL) Gas Pipeline System Expansion
NGTL Towerbirch Pipeline Expansion
Manitoba-Minnesota Transmission Line
ITC Lake Erie Connector
Expanded Crown consultations throughout the review process, including funding to support Indigenous participation through NEB and NRCan Indigenous PFPs
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Administering an online questionnaire for Canadians to share their views
X
X
X
X
X
X
-
Project-specific assessment of upstream GHG emissions
X
X
X
X
X
-
-
Appointment of a Ministerial Representative to engage communities,    including Indigenous communities potentially affected by the project, to seek    their views and report back to the Minister of Natural Resources
X
-
-
-
-
-
-
Help facilitate expanded public input into the NEB review process,    including public and community engagement activities by recommending the    appointment of temporary members to the NEB
-
X
-
-
-
-
-
Expected Results of the MPMOI and the Interim Strategy
According to  the logic model for the MPMOI (see Appendix 1), its activities are expected to  promote consistent whole-of-government approaches to Indigenous consultations,  allow for integrated and coordinated EAs and regulatory reviews, and improve  the federal EA and regulatory review process as well as increase the transparency  and accountability of the process. This is expected to ensure Canada’s  responsibilities around Indigenous consultations are fulfilled in a consistent,  adequate, and meaningful fashion, and that EAs and regulatory reviews are  high-quality, predictable, and timely. The MPMOI’s long-term outcome is to  improve the performance of the federal EA and regulatory review process for  major resource projects, thereby promoting responsible resource development in  Canada.
The logic  model for the Interim Strategy (see Appendix 2) indicates the Strategy is  expected to help promote improved understanding of concerns voiced by the  public and Indigenous groups, thereby facilitating efforts to accommodate them,  where necessary. Ultimately, the Interim Strategy is expected to pave the way  for decision-making around federally-regulated pipeline projects that are  inclusive and effectively use evidence from Indigenous consultations and public  engagement.
Table 4   provides the expected results from both logic models.
Table 4 : Expected results of the MPMOI and the Interim Strategy
Outcome
MPMOI
Interim Strategy
Immediate    outcomes
Consistent, whole-of-government approach to    Indigenous consultations
Integrated and coordinated EA and regulatory reviews
Increased transparency and accountability of the    federal EA and regulatory process
Improved federal EA and regulatory review process
Implementation of the Interim Measures, e.g.:
deeper    consultations with Indigenous groups
expansion of    the NEB and NRCan Participant Funding Programs (PFPs)
appointment of    temporary NEB members
Intermediate    outcomes
Indigenous consultation responsibilities are fulfilled in a consistent, adequate and meaningful manner
High quality, predictable and timely EA and regulatory reviews
Improved understanding of concerns being brought    forward by the public and Indigenous groups
Indigenous concerns are accommodated as appropriate
Long-term outcomes
Improve the performance of the federal EA and    regulatory review process for major resource projects to support responsible    resource development in Canada
Decision-making processes for federally regulated    pipeline projects are inclusive and demonstrate effective use of evidence    from Indigenous consultations and public engagement
Governance
The Deputy Ministers’ Major Projects Management Office Committee (DM MPMO) serves as the governance body for the MPMOI, including  for activities funded through the Interim Strategy. It is chaired by the Deputy  Minister (DM) of NRCan and includes, but is not limited to, DMs or equivalents  from each of the five federal regulatory departments and agencies (CIRNAC-ISC, CEAA,  DFO, ECCC, and TC), the President of the CNSC, and the Chief Executive Officer  of the NEB. The Committee supports participating departments and agencies in meeting their mandate  objectives; supports resolution of project-specific issues; oversees  key policies, processes and procedures; tracks and monitors projects; and facilitates  communication among departments and agencies.  Individual DMs communicate Committee decisions to their respective departments  and agencies. The DM MPMO typically meets monthly.
A parallel  Assistant Deputy Minister (ADM) committee structure also exists, which meets one  to two times per month. The ADM Committee mirrors the DM MPMO and meets to  discuss the same issues and, where appropriate, resolve them prior to the DM  MPMO committee.
The MPMO  supports the MPMOI governance structure by providing secretariat support to the  ADM Committee and the DM MPMO.
In addition,  Director General (DG) level meetings with representation from the above  organizations were convened regularly during the period covered by this  evaluation to coordinate activities and decision-making on key files.
Resources
For the period covered by this evaluation  (2015-16 to 2017-18), for delivery of the MPMOI, and the Interim Strategy,  departments and agencies were allocated approximately $94.0M. This is in  addition to approximately $180M of existing departmental resources that these  departments and agencies allocate to required lines of business related to  major resource project reviews. This consisted of:
MPMOI.
A total of $81.0M was allocated to the MPMOI  from 2015-16 through 2017-18. This is in addition to existing resources  totaling approximately $164.9M that was allocated to the reviews of major resource  projects for these departments, for a total of $245.9M for the period covered  by the evaluation.
Interim Strategy.
A total of $13.0M was allocated to the Interim Strategy from 2016-17  through 2017-18. This is in addition to existing resources totaling  approximately $15.7M, for a total of $28.7M for the period covered by the  evaluation.
Details regarding resources allocated for  both the MPMOI and Interim Strategy are provided in Appendix 3.
Evaluation Objective, Methods, and Limitations
The evaluation assessed the relevance  and performance (effectiveness and efficiency) of the MPMOI, including the  Interim Strategy, in response to a Treasury Board commitment for evaluation to  inform future renewal. The evaluation examined the activities of program  partners spanning a three-year period, from roughly 2015–16 to 2017–18.
It is important to  recognize that although legislative changes provided for in Bill C-69 were not the  focus of the evaluation, this study’s scope was extended to include an assessment  of the ongoing and future need for the MPMOI in general  and for the MPMO in particular  within this new context. All findings in this regard reflect  the Evaluation Team’s interpretation of the implications of Bill C-69 as it  stood on June 20, 2018 when it was passed in the House of Commons.
Given the  similarity in expected results between the MPMOI and the Interim Strategy, and  to facilitate an efficient approach to reporting, an integrated set of three  outcomes was established for purposes of the evaluation. These outcomes, which  were approved by the Horizontal Evaluation Advisory Committee for this  evaluation, were as follows:
Improved coordination of the  regulatory review process for major resource projects;
Increased timeliness,  predictability, quality, transparency and accountability of regulatory reviews;  and
More coordinated, consistent  and meaningful Indigenous and public consultations.
The evaluation  used the following lines of evidence:
Document and data  review.
This involved reviewing and synthesizing a  wide range of internal and publicly-available documents and data sources (e.g.,  prior studies of the MPMOI, departmental  reports, Speeches from the Throne, Mandate Letters, Budget Plans, program  planning documents and financial data, internal communications, meeting  materials, and documents relating to specific projects in the MPMOI portfolio  and relating to Bill C-69).
Key informant interviews.
This involved 52  semi-structured key informant interviews with 68 individuals. These key  informants included 26 interviews with 38 management and staff from  participating departments (internal stakeholders), including DMs,  and an additional 26 interviews with 30 external partners and stakeholders.  External key informants included industry proponents and associations, Indigenous  communities and organizations, non-governmental organizations, and  representatives of provincial/territorial governments and provincially-based  federal agencies.
Although case  studies were originally planned to be conducted as part of the evaluation,  ultimately a decision was made to proceed instead with a larger number of  interviews in order to obtain perspectives from a broader range of stakeholders  and partners. Appendix 4 provides a more detailed description of the evaluation  approach.
The evaluation  encountered several challenges and limitations during the execution of this  study and implemented strategies to mitigate their impact wherever possible. An  overview is presented in Table 5.
Table 5: Limitations to  the Evaluation and Mitigation Strategies
Limitations
Mitigation Strategies
The evaluation took place during a period of    significant transition in the legislative and regulatory regime for federal    EA and regulatory reviews. This presented particular challenges in the    context of the key informant interviews, which were conducted over several    months during or immediately following which numerous developments occurred,    including the development and passing of legislation (e.g. Bill C-69) and a    Federal Court of Appeal Decision overturning the approval of the Trans    Mountain Expansion, that are likely to have implications for the MPMOI.    Depending on when key informants were interviewed, these developments may    have influenced the interview responses.
In addition to simply noting the unique    circumstances during which this evaluation took place, the evaluation took    steps to ensure that the Evaluation Team had a strong grasp of ongoing    developments and staying up-to-date on relevant events as they occurred. Key    informant interview data was analyzed with attention to the timing of the    interviews.
The evaluation encountered numerous gaps in, and    limitations with respect to, performance measurement and financial and human    resource information.
The evaluation relied, wherever, possible on    publicly available sources of information, although these often lacked the    breadth and depth required to provide unequivocal responses to the evaluation    questions. Qualitative data was used to supplement the available performance    measurement information.
The evaluation encountered some difficulties in securing    interviews with industry and Indigenous key informants.
Extra effort was made to ensure as much    participation as possible by industry and Indigenous key informants, within    the context of the evaluation timeline and resources. For example, the evaluation    reached out to a large number of potential key informants and identified    additional key informants when initial efforts to secure interviews were    unsuccessful.
There was significant diversity of opinion among key    informants. As a result, it was difficult to extract common themes in    interview responses. This challenge was compounded by the relative lack of    performance measurement information, which made it difficult to validate the    interview findings.
In the context of this evaluation, the significant    diversity of key informant opinion is a notable finding in itself.    Notwithstanding data limitations, the evaluation relied on objective sources    of information wherever possible, and did not draw conclusions on the basis    of key informant information alone.
Findings
Relevance
Is there a continued need for the  MPMOI and its main components?
Summary:
There is a continued need for departments and agencies to provide      scientific, technical and Indigenous consultation capacity to support major      resource project reviews.
There is also widespread agreement that there is a continued need      for the roles and responsibilities currently performed by the MPMO. Given recent      legislative (i.e., Bill C-69) and other ongoing developments, it is      essential to revisit and clarify the Office’s mandate at this time,      including which bodies are best positioned to maintain these roles and      responsibilities in the future. At present, it appears at least some of      these will reside with the new Agency created by Bill C-69 (for example,      serving as Crown Consultation Coordinator for      designated projects), but any      gaps should be proactively identified and addressed.
Regardless of the  changes provided by Bill C-69, there is a clear ongoing need for scientific,  technical and Indigenous consultation capacity, as well as a continued need for  the roles and responsibilities currently performed by the Office. Some of the  Office’s roles and responsibilities will reside with the new Agency, but gaps could  remain. There is a need to revisit and clarify the mandate of the Office now  that Bill C-69 has come into force.
Continued need for scientific,  technical and Indigenous consultation capacity
Virtually all key informants agreed  that there will be a continued need to fund scientific, technical and  Indigenous consultation capacity, even with Bill C-69 becoming law. The  provision of capacity funding through the MPMOI was originally intended to  support departments in fulfilling  regulatory responsibilities associated with the conduct  of EAs and other review activities (e.g., DFO’s and TC’s responsibilities under  the
Fisheries Act
and NPA,respectively) while improving system  performance, and, subsequently, to satisfy requirements laid out in CEAA  2012. Stakeholder perspectives suggest the need for these resources is not  merely ongoing, but may conceivably become more pronounced with Bill C-69 due  to the additional factors considered in assessments relative to CEAA 2012. These  include, for example, health, social, and economic impacts,  and any interactions thereof; assessments would also need to consider a broader  range of potential impacts on Indigenous peoples than is now required, as well  as issues relating to sex and/or gender and their intersection with other  identity factors (Government of Canada, 2018b, p. 15). These changes are likely to affect the level and types of  expertise needed within federal departments and agencies to support the proposed  new IA process.
The federal government recognized the  need for ongoing capacity funding in Budget 2018 by committing to increased  scientific and technical capacity in federal departments and agencies, and  increased Indigenous and public participation (see page 5 above).
Continued need for the  Office (MPMO)
Overall, most key informants believed  there was an ongoing need for the roles and responsibilities performed by the  Office, regardless of whether the changes proposed by Bill C-69 were to become  law. However, a few internal and external key informants were of the view that  the need for a central coordinating body began to diminish in relevance as a  result of CEAA 2012, and is likely to diminish further if a single entity  becomes responsible for leading all IAs of designated projects under Bill C-69.  Notably, internal key informants (i.e., departments and  agencies involved in delivering the Initiative) were more likely than external respondents  to believe there has been value-added in the roles and responsibilities  performed by the Office in the past and that there is a continued need for them  going forward.
Key informants who believe there is an  ongoing need for the roles and responsibilities of the Office had differing  views on where the Office should be housed in the future. Many believe most or all of the Office’s roles and responsibilities  could, should, or would be transferred to IAAC. However, some raised concerns  about potential gaps in coverage as well as potential conflicts of interest  that could result. A few internal and external key informants warned about  potential conflicts of interest that could result if the new Agency, as the  regulatory authority, was not limited to providing procedural guidance, but was  also responsible for (or perceived to be) collaborating with, advocating for  and/or liaising on behalf of project proponents during the review process. That  said, it is important to note that a few internal and external key informants  raised concerns about conflict of interest in relation to the Office’s current  location within NRCan, suggesting that it may be biased in favour of proponents  as a result of the department’s economic development mandate. However, others  suggested that NRCan’s relatively minor regulatory role limits the potential  for conflict of interest.
A brief examination of the Office’s  current roles and responsibilities against the proposed functions of the Agency  suggests that while some of the Office’s current functions may fall to IAAC,  some gaps may remain.
Footnote
6
A detailed review of the roles and responsibilities of the Office  against the proposed roles and responsibilities of the new Agency is required.  The following mandated roles and responsibilities of the Office as described in  the Program Profile (Table 1) are key areas that need to be reviewed:
Providing overarching project  management and accountability for major resource projects, in order to ensure  timely and predictable processes;
Overseeing the  whole-of-government approach to Crown consultation; and
Providing horizontal leadership  across the Government of Canada.
It is important to note that now that Bill  C-69 has been passed into law, the responsibilities of the new Agency will only  extend to new projects entering the review system. There would remain a number  of projects that entered the system under CEAA 2012 that have not yet completed  the review process and that may continue to move through the federal system  under existing assessment processes. NRCan data indicate that as of April 2018,  there were a total of 89 projects in various phases of the process, including  two in the pre-EA phase, 58 in the EA phase, and 29 in the regulatory phase.  There may, therefore, be a need for the Office to continue performing its  existing roles and responsibilities in relation to these projects.
Is the MPMOI consistent with  existing and proposed federal roles and responsibilities?
Summary:
The activities delivered through the MPMOI are consistent with the      federal government’s existing statutory roles and responsibilities relating      to provision of scientific, technical and Indigenous consultation support      during EAs and regulatory reviews. To the extent that the changes under      Bill C-69 do not fundamentally alter the federal government’s role in the      EA and regulatory review process, the activities delivered through the      Initiative are also broadly consistent with proposed federal roles and      responsibilities. Bill C-69 affects the allocation of roles and      responsibilities among some federal departments and agencies, particularly      those of the Office, which are not currently established in legislation.
This evaluation echoes  the 2012 evaluation’s conclusion that the federal government’s role in the  MPMOI is appropriate given its statutory and regulatory responsibilities around  EAs and regulatory reviews, as well as its duty to consult Indigenous peoples (NRCan, 2012a). Under CEAA 2012, CEAA, CNSC, and NEB manage  the EA process for designated projects (i.e., those with the greatest potential  for adverse environmental impacts) (CEAA, 2015a). Most of these projects fall  under the responsibility of CEAA, but the CNSC and NEB are responsible for those  regulated under the
Nuclear Safety and  Control Act,
and the
National Energy  Board Act
and
Canada Oil and Gas  Operations Act
, respectively. CEAA 2012 also continued  a role in the EA for various other federal departments and agencies as expert federal  authorities. In particular, section 20 of CEAA 2012 requires federal  authorities that are in possession of specialist or expert information or  knowledge with respect to a designated project that is subject to an EA to make  that information or knowledge available, upon request.
The  Crown has a duty under Subsection 35(1) of the
Constitution Act, 1982
to consult Indigenous peoples when a project  may adversely impact Aboriginal or treaty rights, in order to understand those  impacts and find ways to accommodate Indigenous peoples’ continued exercise of  those rights (Ariss, Fraser, & Somani, 2017). Paragraph 5(1)(c) of CEAA 2012  further requires that EAs account for projects’ impacts upon Indigenous  peoples’ health and socioeconomic circumstances, physical and cultural  heritage, use of lands and resources for traditional purposes, and significant  structures, sites, or objects (Government of Canada, 2012).
MPMOI activities and measures undertaken  through the Interim Strategy are designed to assist program partners in  fulfilling their legislated roles and responsibilities. For instance, resources  for scientific and technical expertise support the obligation of federal  authorities to provide specialist or expert information or knowledge with  respect to designated projects subject to EAs, while funding for Indigenous  consultation capacity helps program partners fulfill their duty to consult  meaningfully with Indigenous peoples during project reviews. Although the  Office’s responsibilities are not established in legislation but rather laid  out in the
Cabinet Directive
, enhanced coordination among program partners should in principle  promote an efficient and effective process, including achievement of the  legislated time limits laid out in CEAA 2012.
Bill  C-69 includes legislative  changes that affect aspects of Canada’s regulatory regime for some major  projects (Government of Canada, 2018a). These changes do not fundamentally alter the federal government’s  role in the EA and regulatory review process. Therefore, the activities  delivered through the MPMOI remain broadly consistent with federal roles and  responsibilities. As described in the section on Continued Need, however, the  passing of Bill C-69 and the implementation of the IARPs may lead to new or revised  roles and responsibilities or reallocation of existing roles and  responsibilities, among some federal departments and agencies involved in the  MPMOI. In particular, Bill C-69 may affect the allocation of roles and  responsibilities among federal departments and agencies, particularly those of  the Office, which are not established in existing legislation.
Is the MPMOI aligned with current federal government priorities?
Summary:
The MPMOI and the Interim Strategy align with current federal priorities, including environmental protection, action on climate change, reconciliation with Indigenous peoples, and promotion of positive economic outcomes. They also generally align with the priorities and core responsibilities of participating federal departments and agencies.
At  its inception, the MPMOI was designed to address government priorities relating  to economic growth, the health and safety of Canadians, and conservation of the  environment. The 2007
Cabinet Directive
noted that:
The Government of Canada is  committed to addressing the challenges facing the federal regulatory system for  major resource projects in order to help improve Canada’s competitiveness and  enable more effective examination and mitigation of environmental, human health  and social impacts. Providing a more efficient and effective regulatory system  is key to creating the conditions for an innovative and prosperous economy,  protecting the health and safety of Canadians and conserving the environment (Government of Canada, 2007).
In  a similar vein, in its most recent Speech from the Throne in December 2015, the  Government of Canada emphasized that “a clean environment and a strong economy  go hand in hand” (Government of Canada, 2015). The Speech also articulated the  government’s vision for a new EA system, specifically highlighting  environmental protection, consultation with Indigenous peoples, public input,  science-based decision-making, and restoration of public trust as major  priorities and central elements of its vision. In 2016, the government further  emphasized the priority it places on reconciliation with Indigenous peoples by  officially adopting the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous  Peoples.
The  vision articulated by the federal government in the 2015 Speech was  subsequently reflected in the 2016 interim principles, as well as in the  Interim Strategy. Program documents indicate that the  introduction of the Interim Strategy was driven by the perceived need to  achieve balance among environmental, Indigenous, and economic priorities in  developing Canada’s natural resources, and that it was intended to help promote  this objective in the immediate term until more permanent measures could be put  in place. Ultimately, the federal government’s vision culminated in the  development of Bill C-69. Further to this (as already noted above), Budget 2018  allocated about $1B over five years to support Bill  C-69 as well as Bill C-68.
Most internal key informants regard  the Initiative and the Interim Strategy as well-aligned with current federal  priorities, noting that they are intended to balance environmental, economic and  other objectives and that these priorities were explicitly laid out in the  interim principles and in Bill C-69.
The Initiative  and the Interim Strategy also align well with Ministerial mandates and the priorities  and core responsibilities of participating federal departments and agencies.  While Mandate Letters do not explicitly mention the Initiative or the Interim  Strategy, they do contain frequent references to the government’s efforts to  review and implement changes to the EA and regulatory processes, and, more  generally, to the objective of promoting a “renewed, nation-to-nation  relationship with Indigenous Peoples, based on recognition of rights, respect,  co-operation, and partnership” (Prime Minister of Canada,  2015a, 2015c, 2015d, 2015e, 2016a, 2017, 2018a, 2018b). Since the Interim Strategy was intended to support Ministers in  fulfilling their assigned mandates until the government could complete its EA  review and institute legislative changes based on the results, it is reasonable  to conclude these mandates are aligned with the Interim Strategy. Alignment  with program partners’ priorities and core responsibilities is evidenced by the  finding that their roles and responsibilities under the Initiative (see page 3 above) align  with their respective Departmental Results Frameworks (NRCan, 2018c).
Performance – Effectiveness
To what extent has the MPMOI, including the Interim  Strategy, achieved its expected outcomes? To what degree did the MPMO  contribute?
Improved  coordination of the regulatory review process
Summary:
During the period covered by this evaluation, the Office and other       Initiative partners engaged in a range of activities to coordinate the       regulatory review process at both the project-level and at a       horizontal-level within government. At the project level, Initiative       partners worked with provincial regulators and proponents to coordinate       activities during the review process. The use of Project Agreements –       which were to be developed by the Office for all major resource projects       in consultation with other Initiative partners and project proponents, and       which were originally envisioned as the primary mechanism for achieving       project-level coordination and accountability – has been superseded in       most instances by departmental and agency guidelines and policies which       outline common standards and processes. At the horizontal level, the       Office contributed to improved coordination through its support for the       Initiative governance structure, through its role in supporting the       development of the draft Bill C-69, and through the provision of policy       advice.
The evaluation was unable to conclude definitively on the extent to       which coordination has improved since 2015-16 (the first year covered by       the evaluation). This is because of a lack of baseline information and       clear performance indicators to assess progress, as well as diverse       perspectives among key informants on the extent to which this outcome has       been achieved.
The evaluation found that the Office  and other Initiative partners undertook a range of activities to improve the  coordination of the regulatory review process for major resource projects, at  both the project level and at a horizontal level within government, during the  period covered by this evaluation. An overview of activities undertaken at each  level is presented below, along with evidence regarding their impacts on system  coordination.
Project-level coordination
Initiative partners engaged in a  variety of activities to achieve project-level coordination during the period  covered by the evaluation, as the following examples illustrate.
Approval conditions established  by the federal government for the Enbridge Line 3 Replacement Project included  development of an Indigenous Advisory and Monitoring Committee (IAMC) and  Economic Pathways Partnership (NRCan, 2016d). The Office managed the process of implementing the approval  conditions before this responsibility was transferred to the Indigenous  Projects Office-West (IPO-West). This role included working with the proponent  and representatives of CIRNAC-ISC and the NEB to establish the objectives and  structure of these initiatives and stakeholders’ roles and responsibilities.
The Office and other Initiative  partners collaborated with provincial governments on a number of project  reviews carried out over the evaluation period, particularly in British  Columbia (BC):
Phase IV consultations undertaken as part of the reviews of the  Towerbirch Expansion Project and the Trans Mountain  Expansion (TMX) Project involved coordination between  the Office and the British Columbia Environmental Assessment Office (BC EAO) (MPMO, 2016c; MPMO & BC EAO, 2017).
The Office collaborated with initiative partners to ensure a  harmonized approach to federal departments’ participation in NEB reviews. This  included holding joint meetings with the proponent to inform what federal  authorizations might be and what expertise would be relevant to the NEB review.  It also included taking a common approach to participation in NEB hearings and  filing evidence.
CEAA and the BC EAO engaged in information-sharing and collaborated  on several components of the EA for the Murray River Coal Project, including  the review of technical information and participation in joint meetings with  some Indigenous groups (CEAA, 2016a, p. 33).
Initiative partners collaborated with the BC government to study and  identify ways to mitigate the possible impacts of several proposed projects on  the health of provincial Southern Mountain Caribou populations. MPMO served as the lead on caribou-related work until  recently, but currently supports ECCC in this endeavour by
facilitating the preparation of  documents and briefs;
participating in regular  check-in calls and corresponding on dockets with ECCC; and
contributing to socio-economic  analyses intended to inform decisions  regarding protection and recovery for caribou.
In the  case of the Sisson Tungsten-Molybdenum Mine, a transitional comprehensive study  under the
Canadian Environmental  Assessment Act
(CEAA 1992), the MPMO liaised with the four implicated  departments (CEAA, ECCC, DFO and NRCan) to facilitate discussions on how to  approach the drafting of key EA documents to support the final EA decision.  This was an important function for ensuring an efficiently coordinated review  process.
In the  case of  the Muskrat Falls Hydroelectric development project, the MPMO took on the  coordination role on behalf of federal departments with respect to the  Independent Expert Advisory Committee. This committee was created as a result  of concerns raised about the potential for methylmercury contamination  resulting from the project in downstream waters. The MPMO represented the  federal government during proceedings of this committee and provided a liaison  function between that committee and interested Departments. This provided an  effective means to ensure Departments were aware of issues raised at the  committee while eliminating duplication of effort.
More generally, internal and external  key informants noted instances in which the Office has improved coordination at  the project level by liaising with Initiative partners on behalf of provincial  regulators and/or proponents, and in helping to ensure permits and approvals  are issued in a timely manner.
When the MPMOI was initially  conceived, the Office was responsible for developing consensus-based Project  Agreements for each major resource project that outline federal departments’  and agencies’ roles and responsibilities during the regulatory review process,  thereby promoting project-level coordination and accountability (MPMO, 2014, 2017). Presumably for this reason, the MPMOI’s current performance  measurement framework proposes tracking both the proportion of projects with  signed Project Agreements (63% of the 89 projects in the MPMOI portfolio as of  April 2018 (n=56) were supported by completed Project Agreements), as well as  the proportion that are published online and monitored through the MPMO Tracker.
The use of Project Agreements has  evolved over time, largely because time limits are incorporated into  legislation and departmental/agency guidance and policies, reducing the need to  specify them elsewhere. Correspondingly, the program responded to a  recommendation from the 2012 evaluation to reduce administrative burden by  transitioning from tailored to generic instruments. For similar reasons, the  systematic review and updating of Project Agreements and the tracking of fulfillment  of roles and responsibilities outlined therein has fallen off. However, Project  Agreements remain important for projects where the NEB is the designated RA,  where they clarify the roles and responsibilities of the Office and the NEB,  primarily with respect to the Crown consultation process.
Horizontal  coordination
The evaluation also found evidence  that the Initiative, and the Office in particular, have contributed to  horizontal policy and system-level coordination by supporting the MPMOI governance  structure; coordinating activities related to the federal review of EA and  regulatory processes, which facilitated the development of Bill C-69; and  leading policy analysis on a range of subjects.
Many internal key informants believe  the Office has made important contributions to horizontal coordination through  its support for the MPMOI governance structure. A 2016-17 study conducted by  NRCan on the MPMOI governance structure found that a large percentage of DMs or  their delegates consistently described being satisfied or very satisfied with  the advancement of advice on horizontal issues (NRCan, 2016b, 2017b). More specifically, survey respondents shared the view that the  committee structure effectively supports the flow of information to senior  managers and the advancement of advice on horizontal issues and that these, in  turn, were essential given the complexity of the federal review system for  major resource projects.
There is also evidence that the Office  played an important role in coordinating activities related to the Government’s  review of EA and regulatory processes leading to the development of Bill C-69.  More specifically, the Office:
Developed,  analysed and reported on an online survey of Canadians in 2016, intended to  help inform the Government’s review of environmental and regulatory processes;
Led the development of a discussion paper outlining the  proposed policy and program changes under consideration, along with an  engagement plan for the public release of the discussion paper in June 2017;
Led the  planning of a facilitated DM retreat in March 2017; and
Carried  out work planning throughout winter 2017-18 to align departmental and agency  activities associated with the proposed legislation  (e.g., legislative drafting, announcement, communications strategy and  engagement, etc.).
Finally, the Office led policy analysis on  a range of subjects over the evaluation period, including opportunities to  extend work in relation to cumulative effects in areas characterized by significant  resource development activity (e.g., by facilitating access to geospatial data);  species at risk (e.g., in relation to the application of conservation  agreements under SARA in federal EAs); enhanced monitoring across the project  lifecycle; and enhancing Indigenous engagement in project reviews as well as  Indigenous communities’ capacity to share in the benefits of resource  development. Several internal stakeholders spoke specifically to the value of  the Office’s role in contributing to the review of EA and regulatory processes by  addressing key issues and policy questions through collaboration with other  program partners.
Improved  coordination
Overall, the evaluation found examples of  project-level and horizontal coordination, as described above. The evaluation  also attempted to determine whether coordination improved between 2015-16 and  2017-18 but could not definitively draw a conclusion. This is, in part, because  of the lack of baseline information and clear performance indicators for  assessing progress in this regard. Moreover, key informants expressed diverse  perspectives on the matter. Overall, internal key informants were more inclined  than external key informants to believe that coordination – especially  horizontal coordination – has improved over the period covered by this  evaluation, citing the Office’s support for the governance structure and its  contribution to the development of Bill C-69 to support their point of view. Others  (including both internal and external key informants) believe the Office adds  another layer of bureaucracy to the federal review system for major resource  projects; that its roles and responsibilities are not clear relative to other  Initiative partners or external stakeholders; or that it has few levers at its  disposal to hold federal partners accountable for the achievement of program  outcomes. A few (both internal and external) noted that the major gains in  coordination had been made prior to 2015-16, and were primarily because of the  implementation of CEAA 2012.
Improved  timeliness, predictability, quality, transparency and accountability of  regulatory reviews
Summary:
Due to limited data and divergent perspectives from key informants,       the evaluation could not conclusively determine if timeliness,       predictability, quality, transparency and accountability of regulatory       reviews has improved over the evaluation period. Overall, internal key       informants were more likely to perceive improvements compared to external       key informants. A significant majority of external key informants as well       as some internal key informants believe there continue to be opportunities       for improvement:
Timeliness       and predictability.
Although federal partners are meeting legislated time limits, the total       time elapsed between the initial project application and project       regulatory decisions has not necessarily declined, and is highly variable       across projects. Some industry representatives suggested that timelines       may have increased, and predictability may have declined, with the       introduction of the Interim Strategy requiring additional consultations       and calculation of upstream GHG emissions.
Quality.
Initiative partners are providing the       specialized or expert information or knowledge required to inform EAs.       Available documentation suggests scientific evidence is considered in       review decisions and affects conditions imposed, and estimates of GHG       emissions have been developed for projects under the Interim Strategy. Key       informants have mixed reviews regarding the extent to which consideration       of scientific evidence improved over the evaluation period, with a few describing opportunities to further enhance how scientific information is       scoped, validated, or applied during major resource project reviews.
Transparency       and accountability.
There is evidence of various internal and public-facing tools to monitor,       track, and report on performance. It is also evident that the desire to increase Canadians’ trust in the review system for       major resource projects was a       motivating factor underpinning many aspects of the design of the Interim       Strategy and Bill C-69.
The evaluation could not determine if the timeliness,  predictability, quality, transparency and accountability of regulatory reviews  has improved during the period covered by this evaluation. Objective evidence  to support conclusions is limited and key informants offered a variety of  perspectives on the extent to which this outcome has been achieved.
Timeliness and  predictability
Under CEAA 2012, an EA must be completed within a legislated  timeframe (365 days for EAs conducted by CEAA and 24 months for EAs conducted  by review panels). The time taken by the proponent to respond to a request from  CEAA or a review panel (e.g., to prepare an environmental impact statement) is  not counted in these time limits. The Minister of ECCC may extend the time  limits by an additional three months, and the GIC may  further extend them.
Available performance information shows that federal partners are  meeting legislated time limits. All major resource  projects completing the EA process met legislated time limits between 2015-16  and 2017-18, and service standards and regulated time limits were likewise met (NRCan, 2016b, 2017b, 2018b). However, based on available studies, it is unclear if the total  time elapsed between the initial project application and the issuance of EA project  decisions – a performance measure that is potentially more meaningful from the  perspective of proponents – has declined over the  period covered by this evaluation, or more broadly, since the introduction of  legislated time limits under CEAA 2012. A relatively small number of studies  have examined this issue, and these have reached seemingly contradictory  conclusions:
An external study completed in  2018 concluded there is no evidence that overall time elapsed from initial  project application to issuance of a final EA decision has improved since CEAA  2012.
Footnote
7
This study included 14  major energy project reviews that were completed since January 1, 2010 or which  were substantially underway as of June 2016; as such, it likely included  projects initiated both pre- and post-CEAA 2012. The authors acknowledged that  the results were suggestive and illustrative, rather than definitive, due to  methodological issues such as the relatively small number of projects included  and the need to make judgement calls about what projects to include and how to  measure project start and end points  (Drance, Cameron, & Hutton,  2018).
An internal analysis completed  by the Office showed that transitional comprehensive studies (i.e., those  initiated prior to 2012) took longer than EAs completed by CEAA under CEAA 2012  when considering federal and proponent time together. The average total  calendar time for all transitional comprehensive studies (n=22) was 1,657 days  (minimum 616 days to maximum 2,934 days). This compares with an average of  1,135 days for EAs completed by CEAA under CEAA 2012 (n=17) (minimum 514 days,  maximum 1,969 days).
Footnote
8
A February 2019 study published  by the C.D. Howe Institute found that the average length of EA under CEAA 2012 has  been “highly variable”  (Bishop & Sprague, 2019, p.  25). Since 2015, durations for CEAA 2012 decisions  completed in a given year have averaged from 2.4 to 3.0 years (calendar time),  with wide variation across individual projects (p. 25). Most projects with a  value of over $500M were completed within three years (median 2.6 years), but  many larger projects had longer assessment times; for example, larger pipelines  such as TMX have been “highly contentious and faced protracted timelines” (pp.  24-25). The study also noted that the duration of EAs is often prolonged by  “clock stop” periods where the statutory timeline for completing the  assessments pauses until the proponent adequately responds to a request for  information.
Part of the explanation for these  divergent findings is likely methodological: the studies have generally used  small sample sizes and likely made different decisions about which projects  should be included and how timeliness should be measured. Further, some degree  of variability in timelines should be expected given differences in project  scope and complexity. Nevertheless, this information suggests that there is a  need for greater clarity about what timeliness and predictability mean in the  context of major resource project reviews, as well as a need for a sustained  effort, applying a consistent methodology, to collect relevant data pertaining to  these outcomes in the future, should they remain a priority.
Furthermore, it is important not to  overstate the MPMOI’s capacity to drive the timeliness (i.e., in terms of  overall time elapsed, rather than in terms of how the concept is defined in  legislation) and predictability of major resource project reviews, since these  are influenced by factors that may lie outside the Initiative’s control. For  instance, two recent studies – one conducted by the MPMO and the  other by an external expert (Orenstein, 2018) – have  concluded that stalled progress during reviews or voluntary termination by  proponents are likely attributable at least in part to such factors. These  include, for example, unfavourable market conditions; Canada’s attractiveness  to investors; evolution in the country’s regulatory landscape; proponent  changes to project design; and challenges experienced by proponents in satisfactorily  responding to requests for information.
Footnote
9
This is discussed in more detail in the section on Influencing Factors below.
Industry representatives who were  interviewed as part of this evaluation typically did not perceive timeliness  and predictability to have improved. In fact, some noted that changes  introduced under the Interim Strategy, such as additional consultation requirements  or the need to calculate upstream GHG emissions, have increased timelines and  detracted from predictability. MPMO representatives acknowledged that while the  need for additional consultation and GHG assessments increased timelines for  some major pipeline projects, time limit extensions were required for only a  minority of these projects and all extensions were consistent with the  legislation.
Quality
Few key informants commented  specifically on the issue of quality. Evidence relating to review quality  relates primarily to a series of performance measures used by the Initiative in  its performance reports to Parliament. These performance measures examine  whether federal experts were consistently involved in reviews and whether  environmental impacts were effectively mitigated. Available information  indicates that:
All federal departments with  specialist or expert information or knowledge relating to a designated project  contributed information and knowledge to EAs upon request, as required under  CEAA 2012 (NRCan, 2016b, 2017b, 2018b).
In 2016-17 and 2017-18, seven  of nine reports received by CEAA regarding projects subject to follow-up and  monitoring demonstrated that mitigation measures to address project-related  environmental impacts were effective (NRCan, 2017b, 2018b).
Proponent compliance with conditions  in a project’s EA decision statement was also identified by the Initiative as a  performance measure relevant to quality. This information could conceivably be  compiled on a project-by-project basis from publically available project-level  documentation, but aggregate or summary information (i.e., overall proponent  compliance rates across all projects) was not available, and it is unclear if  these rates are periodically or regularly calculated by the implicated partner  departments and agencies.
In the context of quality, it should  be noted that two of the interim principles directly addressed the quality of  regulatory reviews: 1) Decisions will be based on science, traditional  knowledge of Indigenous peoples, and other relevant evidence;
Footnote
10
and 2) Direct and upstream GHG emissions linked to the projects under review  will be assessed.
The available evidence indicates that  for projects under the Interim Strategy, the NEB and the GIC considered  scientific evidence in their deliberations, and this influenced the conditions  imposed by the NEB. For example:
In the case of the 2017 NOVA Gas Transmission  Limited (NGTL) System Expansion, ECCC and DFO  drew attention to the projects’ potential impacts on species at risk, migratory  birds and/or their habitats (Government of Canada, 2016c).
HC provided evidence concerning the possible  human health impacts of the projects under consideration, including acute and  chronic health risks related to exposure to noise associated with the project  (as in the NGTL 2017 System Expansion); on drinking/recreational water and  country food that Indigenous communities may rely on (TMX); and on  project-related impacts on air quality (both projects) (Government of Canada, 2016c,  2016a).
The NEB imposed a range of conditions to address the potential risks  the 2017 NGTL System Expansion posed to  the boreal caribou’s critical habitat, relating to habitat restoration, offset  measures, monitoring, reporting, and cumulative impacts, which are incremental  to the measures proposed by NGTL itself (Government of Canada, 2016a).
With regard to  assessment of upstream GHG emissions, publicly-available, standalone reports  prepared by ECCC during the evaluation period indicate that estimates of annual  upstream emissions were developed for several projects under the Interim  Strategy, including TMX, the Enbridge Line 3 Replacement, the 2017 NGTL System  Expansion, and the NGTL Towerbirch Expansion (ECCC, 2016a,  2016c, 2016b, 2017).
Interviewees  had mixed views regarding the extent to which the MPMOI had contributed to  increased consideration of scientific evidence in review decisions. Some argued  this outcome had been achieved (citing, for example, the consideration of  upstream GHG emissions or increased focus on caribou populations); others,  meanwhile, perceived no marked improvement, although this was often accompanied  by the caveat that scientific evidence was already being considered during  reviews prior to the evaluation period. In a few instances, however, scientific  information was described as being inappropriately scoped, validated, or  applied—primarily in relation to the calculation of GHG emissions. For instance,  some external respondents expressed concern about the  appropriateness of the methodology selected for calculating upstream GHG  emissions,
Footnote
11
or, with reference to the TMX review, argued that some activities were  arbitrarily excluded from the calculation of emissions or that the (November  2016) approval decision did not satisfactorily reference scientific evidence  and did not compellingly demonstrate how approval was consistent with Canada’s  climate change commitments.
Transparency and accountability
With respect to transparency and  accountability, a variety of internal and public-facing tools were used to  monitor, track and report on the performance of the MPMOI and the Interim  Strategy over the evaluation period. Furthermore, the MPMO acted on a  recommendation from the 2012 evaluation to enhance the MPMO Tracker to help  users determine if review timelines are being achieved and identify  responsibility for review tasks or milestones (NRCan, 2012a). Despite these changes, it remains challenging to use the Tracker  in a meaningful way. This issue, along with related performance measurement  issues pertinent to transparency, is discussed in more detail in the discussion  of Performance Measurement below.
Internal documents related to the  review of EA processes (dating to mid-2017) identified ongoing issues perceived  to contribute to continued public mistrust in the review system for major resource  projects, including: lack of ready access to information about EAs; lack of  clarity for the rationale behind review decisions; and lack of meaningful  consultation enabling the public to influence review outcomes. Review of  program documentation indicates many of these issues were explicitly considered  in the design of the Interim Strategy, and also conveys the federal  government’s view that more fundamental changes would be required to fully  address them (NRCan, 2016a). Correspondingly, these same issues figure prominently in the  design of the proposed new review system.
Overall, key informants offered  diverse perspectives on the extent to which this outcome has been achieved,  with internal key informants more likely overall than external key informants  to perceive progress over the evaluation period. Those who believe progress has  been made attributed it to what they perceived as improved coordination and  collaboration, including better tracking of project progress through the review  system and proactive identification and management of issues. Some key  informants specifically highlighted what they perceived as the Office’s  contribution in this regard, praising its work in convening key stakeholders to  discuss project-related issues, promoting accountability, acting as a single  window for industry, and otherwise helping to shepherd projects through the  federal review process.
Nearly all external key informants as  well as some internal key informants believe progress has been minimal and/or  that significant opportunities for improvement remain despite actions taken in  response to the 2012 evaluation. With regard to transparency in particular,  some key informants noted that it remains unclear precisely how the government  arrives at final review decisions.
More coordinated, consistent and  meaningful Indigenous and public consultations
Summary:
Although limited performance measurement information is available,       there is some evidence to indicate that progress has been made in       achieving more coordinated, consistent, and meaningful Indigenous, and for       some departments, public consultations. Key       informants interviewed as part of this evaluation were divided as to       whether this outcome had been achieved; the same observation applies to       Indigenous key informants, although most of the latter believe that at       least some elements of consultation processes are effective or have       improved. Those perceiving       progress attribute this to such factors as government policy direction,       resources available through the PFPs or the Interim Strategy, the MPMO’s       role as the Crown Consultation Coordinator for NEB projects, and/or the establishment of IAMCs.
Although two Federal Court of Appeal decisions during the period       covered by this evaluation overturned project approvals (for the Northern       Gateway and TMX projects) because (in part) the federal government failed       to fulfill the duty to consult, the Court observed significant       improvements in the TMX consultation compared to earlier project reviews.       In other instances, the Court has ruled in the Crown’s favour, concluding       the duty to consult had been discharged appropriately.
In summary, therefore, the evidence suggests further efforts are       required to build upon progress achieved to date. Areas for future       improvement include clarifying consultation roles, responsibilities, and       concepts; assisting proponents and Indigenous peoples to navigate       consultation processes; engaging Indigenous peoples in designing these       processes; and more clearly conveying how input has been considered in       review decisions.
Available evidence indicates that  activities were undertaken through the Initiative and the Interim Strategy to  improve the coordination, consistency and meaningfulness of Indigenous and  public consultations. There is evidence, for example, that the Initiative uses  various mechanisms to solicit the input of Indigenous peoples and the public.  MPMOI projects listed in the Canadian Environmental Assessment Registry  typically include a wide variety of materials that relate to public  participation opportunities, such as invitations to comment on summaries of  Project Descriptions, Environmental Impact Statements, and announcements  regarding the availability of PFP funding.
There is also evidence that Indigenous  communities and groups are participating in consultations related to major  resource projects. For example, publicly available Crown Consultation and  Accommodation Reports (CCARs), prepared for relevant projects, summarize how  the proponent, the NEB and the MPMO engaged Indigenous peoples at various  stages in the review process, and describe the key findings from the  consultations; similar information is provided in EA Reports prepared by the CEAA.  Similarly, data provided by the NEB and the Office for four projects under the  Interim Strategy indicate that Indigenous groups and communities participated  in consultations for these projects.
However, the proportion of potentially  affected Indigenous communities/groups that actually participated in consultations  (i.e., participation rate) during the period covered by this evaluation is not readily  available for consultations administered by the Crown.
Footnote
12
Analysing review  decisions for four projects subject to the Interim Strategy shows that evidence  from Indigenous consultations and public engagement was considered, and that  review decisions included some accommodation of concerns expressed by  Indigenous groups (Government of Canada, 2016c,  2016a, 2016b, 2016d, 2017a; MPMO, 2016a, 2016b, 2016c; MPMO & BC EAO, 2017).
Footnote
13
For example:
During the review of the 2017 NGTL System  Expansion Project, the NEB imposed several conditions to address Indigenous  peoples’ concerns that the proponent’s emergency response capability was  inadequate. These included  requiring NGTL to file a Project-Specific Emergency Response and Management  Plan and to maintain updated Emergency Procedures and Construction Safety  Manuals. The Crown and the GIC concluded that the NEB conditions should, in  combination with the proponent’s own emergency response measures, ensure  pipeline failures and accidents are addressed appropriately.
During the review of the Enbridge Line 3 Replacement Project,  the NEB imposed 23 conditions to address Indigenous peoples’ concerns about the  project’s impacts on their use of the land and on sites of cultural  significance. These included completing land use studies and ongoing  consultation with Indigenous groups. The Crown perceived the NEB conditions and  the proponent’s own commitments should minimize impacts on Indigenous peoples,  adding there is ongoing interest by Indigenous groups in formally monitoring these  impacts post-construction. This observation eventually culminated in the establishment  of an IAMC for the project, marking one  of the first times such an accommodation measure had been implemented. The GIC  concluded consultations undertaken as part of the review had been “consistent with the honour of the Crown and that the concerns and  interests [of Indigenous Peoples, as identified in the CCAR] have been  appropriately accommodated” (Government of Canada, 2016b), noting support  for the project among other members of the public.
Footnote
14
Similarly, analysis of review decisions for nine  projects in which CEAA was the Crown Consultation Coordinator indicates that  evidence from Indigenous and public consultations was considered, and that  decisions included accommodation of concerns expressed by Indigenous groups (CEAA, 2015b, 2015c, 2016b,  2017a, 2017b, 2018a, 2018b, 2018c, 2019).
Footnote
15
For example:
The Decision Statement for the Whabouchi Mine  Project imposed several conditions to mitigate adverse effects of the project,  including (but not limited to) a monitoring program for wildlife species of  interest to the Cree Nation of Nemaska, a program for the management of beaver  and black bear, and a program for the recuperation of harvested wood for the  use of the Cree Nation of Nemaska, as well as conditions for the preservation  of physical or cultural heritage (e.g., archeological artifacts).
The Decision Statement for the Murray River  Coal Project imposed numerous conditions to address concerns raised by  Indigenous communities with respect to use of lands and resources for  traditional purposes, including (among many others) conditions to preserve  access to sacred sites and camping sites and traditional and medicinal plants;  to mitigate the adverse environmental effects of the project on the critical  habitat for the Quintette herd of southern mountain caribou; and to preserve  physical and cultural heritage.
Despite these  examples of consultation and accommodation, information on the extent to which  Indigenous peoples considered the consultations to be meaningful and the review  decisions to adequately accommodate their concerns is not routinely collected.  As a result, relevant information was not available to directly assess whether  the outcome has been achieved. This is discussed in more detail in the section  on Performance Measurement.
Key informants interviewed as part of  this evaluation were divided about whether Indigenous and public consultations  have become more coordinated, consistent and meaningful over the period covered  by this evaluation. As with other outcomes, internal key informants were more  inclined than external key informants to believe improvements have occurred.  Key informants who perceive improvements noted that consultations have been  consistent, well-coordinated, and thorough; they attributed this to the policy  direction provided by the government, the resources provided through PFPs or  the Interim Strategy, or the Office’s role as Crown Consultation Coordinator  and its efforts to promote a whole-of-government approach to consultation.
Although Indigenous key informants had  mixed views, most believe that at least some elements of consultation processes  are effective or have improved. For example, some commented positively on the  implementation of the IAMCs in relation to the Enbridge Line 3 Replacement  Project and TMX, the availability of funding to support Indigenous communities’  own studies concerning projects under consideration (e.g., implementation of  traditional land use mapping research), and the ability to meet directly with  Crown representatives who were seen as independent and could validate the  consultations performed by the NEB (e.g., to ensure no Indigenous groups or  concerns were overlooked during the earlier round of consultations).
Many key  informants across all categories believe further improvements are needed.  Specific areas for improvement identified by key informants include:
earlier input by Indigenous peoples,  including greater ability to design the consultation process;
clear definitions of key terms (e.g., “free,  prior and informed consent”, “meaningful consultation”);
Footnote
16
assistance for proponents on carrying out  meaningful consultations (e.g., guidance on what standards proponents must meet  to ensure meaningful consultation or satisfactory accommodation of concerns);
protocols to mediate disputes when Indigenous  peoples do not agree; and
clearer demonstration of how input has been  considered in review decisions.
Consistent with  the findings from this evaluation, a report to the Minister of Indigenous and  Northern Affairs on
Building  Relationships and Advancing Reconciliation through Meaningful Consultation
(Gray, 2016) found that, despite improvement over past approaches, there is an  ongoing need to improve coordination across the federal government with regard  to Indigenous consultations.
Footnote
17
This report complimented the government’s efforts in  the context of major projects and specifically referenced the MPMO, but noted  that its capacity to enhance coordination is limited by its resources and a  lack of “teeth” (Gray, 2016, secs. I, VI). The report also identified an unmet need for oversight and  coordination of consultation activities in the project permitting phase.
Likewise, court  decisions during the period covered by this evaluation support the conclusion  that the federal government’s approach to Indigenous consultations has  improved, although further opportunities for improvements remain. The February 2019 report by the  C.D. Howe Institute noted that of 15 final decisions on judicial challenges  since 2012 concerning EAs initiated under CEAA 2012 or CEAA 1992, eight  concerned the duty to consult (Bishop & Sprague, 2019, p.  21). In three decisions – TMX (2018), Seismic testing in Baffin Bay and Davis Strait (2017),  and the Northern Gateway Pipeline project (2016) – the project approval was  quashed, and in each of these three cases, the decision concerned, at least in  part, the federal government’s failure to fulfill its duty to consult affected  Indigenous peoples.
Footnote
18
In
Gitxaala  Nation v. Canada
, the Federal Court of Appeal overturned the approval of  the Northern Gateway pipeline project on June 23, 2016, on the grounds that  Canada had not fulfilled its duty to consult with Indigenous peoples (Gitxaala Nation et al., 2016; McCarthy & Lewis, 2016; Proctor,  2016). The Court based its  decision on the judgement that while the Order in Council (OIC) was acceptable  and defensible, it should not have been issued without Canada first having  fulfilled the duty to consult with Indigenous peoples, an exercise that the  Court said was satisfactory in its design but lacking in its execution. More  specifically, the Court concluded that Canada offered “only a brief, hurried  and inadequate opportunity [during the Crown Consultation phase]—a critical  part of Canada’s consultation framework—to exchange and discuss information and  to dialogue” (Gitxaala Nation et al., 2016, p. 132), culminating in a process that failed to address many issues of  concern to Indigenous participants. The project application was ultimately  dismissed after the government concluded that the project was not in the  interest of Canadians (Prime Minister of Canada, 2016b).
Similarly, in
Tsleil-Waututh Nation v. Canada
, which overturned the approval of  the TMX project, the Federal Court of Appeal observed that Indigenous  consultations had been well-planned, but that there had been issues with their  implementation (Federal Court of Appeal, 2018). In particular, the Court noted that meaningful consultation  requires careful consideration of, and responsiveness to, concerns and issues  brought forward by Indigenous participants, and noted that the Crown had  regarded its role as limited to documenting and conveying those issues and  concerns to decision-makers (Tsleil-Waututh Nation et al., 2018). This observation is virtually identical to the one offered by the  Court in
Gitxaala Nation v. Canada
(Gitxaala Nation et al., 2016, p. 116). However, the Court acknowledged significant improvements in the  TMX consultation compared to earlier project reviews, such as the Crown’s  responsiveness to requests for information or time extensions and its  willingness to disclose its assessment of the strength of Indigenous parties’  claim to rights or title or of the projects’ impacts (Tsleil-Waututh Nation et al., 2018, pp. 187–188).
Footnote
19
In other instances, meanwhile, courts have ruled  that the Crown has engaged in reasonable efforts to discharge its duty to  consult
.
In
Bigstone Cree Nation v. Nova Gas Transmission Ltd.,
for instance, the Federal Court of Appeal concluded that both the NEB and the Crown had satisfactorily  consulted with Bigstone in relation to the approval of the 2017 NGTL System  Expansion Project (Bigstone Cree Nation, Nova Gas  Transmission Ltd., Attorney General of Canada, & NEB, 2018). Among other findings, they conclude that Bigstone’s assertion that  Phase IV consultations administered by the Crown were not meaningful is not  substantiated by the available evidence, noting, for example, that Canada “clearly  appears to have been open to suggestions of accommodation and mitigation  measures” (p. 30); that the MPMO gave Bigstone ample opportunity to verify that  its concerns had been properly documented and that the evidence it provided was  incorporated into decision-making processes (p. 31); and that the Crown  specifically endorsed Conditions proposed by the NEB to mitigate the project’s  impacts on Caribou and Caribou habitat, which was perceived to constitute  Bigstone’s most serious concern with the 2017 NGTL System Expansion Project  (pp. 27, 35-37).
To what  extent have internal and external factors influenced the ability of the MPMOI  to achieve its expected outcomes?
Summary:
The evaluation identified numerous internal and external factors that influence the ability of the MPMOI to achieve its expected outcomes. Factors that facilitate outcome achievement include the coordinating role of the MPMO; the availability of funding for scientific, technical and Indigenous consultation capacity; and the availability of PFP funding to support Indigenous participation in consultation. Factors that may hinder outcome achievement include the clarity of the MPMO’s mandate and increased public expectations in relation to project reviews, among others. Some factors – such as prevailing economic/market conditions and government priorities – may either facilitate or hinder the ability of the MPMOI to achieve its expected outcomes depending on the context. Recognizing that the MPMOI may have limited or no ability to mitigate some external factors (such as unfavourable market conditions), these factors should be understood and mitigated, where possible, to optimize the ability of the Initiative to achieve its expected outcomes.
Multiple factors, both internal and  external to the Initiative, influence the ability of the Initiative to achieve  its expected outcomes. Recognizing that the Initiative may have limited or no  ability to mitigate the influence of some external factors, these factors should  be understood and mitigated, where possible, to optimize the ability of the  Initiative to achieve its expected outcomes. Factors that may have influenced  the Initiative’s ability to achieve its expected outcomes include the following:
Role of the MPMO
. Some key informants believe the coordination and facilitation roles  of the MPMO as well as its support for the EA and regulatory review have facilitated  the achievement of expected outcomes. A few suggested the MPMO’s ability to  facilitate the achievement of expected outcomes would be enhanced by clearly  articulating its roles and responsibilities relative to other MPMOI partners, thereby  limiting potential for overlap and duplication.
Capacity and resources.
Key informants generally agree that the availability of funding for  departments and agencies to provide scientific, technical and Indigenous consultation  capacity, as well as the availability of funding, through PFPs, to support Indigenous  consultation capacity, has facilitated the achievement of expected outcomes  (although some noted that PFP funding to support Indigenous consultations is  insufficient relative to the need). However, some key informants identified  capacity issues that in their view have hindered the achievement of outcomes.  Internal to the Initiative, these include turnover and perceived lack of  sufficient knowledge, expertise and experience among MPMO staff. External to  the Initiative, it was observed that varying levels of capacity among  proponents to respond to information requests during EAs can affect the overall  timeliness and predictability of major resource project reviews.
Public expectations.
Key informants observed that evolving public awareness and  understanding of Indigenous and public consultations (including involvement by  Indigenous communities in informing both project development and the  consultation process), has increased expectations with regard to the  consultation process and outcomes, and made it more challenging for the federal  government to meet these expectations. Key informants pointed out that these  challenges exist, at least in part, because key concepts and terms relevant to  Indigenous consultations (e.g., “free, prior and informed consent”; “meaningful  consultation”) have not been clearly defined. As another example, key  informants noted that review decisions do not always clearly articulate how or  if Indigenous concerns have been accommodated.
Economic/market conditions
. Economic factors can affect achievement of outcomes by affecting  the financial viability of current or proposed projects. For instance,  fluctuations in the prices of a particular commodity (e.g., natural gas or a  rare earth element) or in the cost of a key input (e.g., labour or capital) can  influence willingness to invest in a major resource project. For instance,  analysis of data from the Major Projects Inventory and other indicators  suggests that lower commodity prices in 2016 contributed to reduced capital  investment and project delays and cancellations among energy and mining firms,  whereas a subsequent upswing in prices produced the opposite result (NRCan, 2017a, p. 5).
Government priorities
. Program documentation suggests the Interim Strategy measures and  the ongoing review of EA and regulatory processes (up to and including the  changes proposed in Bill C-69), reflect a change in federal priorities that  emphasize the importance of objectives such as reconciliation with Indigenous peoples  and mitigation of/adaptation to climate change. This significantly impacted how  federal reviews were undertaken over the evaluation period—as exemplified by  the provision of funding for expanded public and Indigenous consultations and  the preparation of upstream GHG emission assessments for certain projects.  Given the complex regulatory environment for major resource projects,  priorities at the provincial/territorial level can also potentially affect the  Initiative in significant ways.
The influence  of external factors was highlighted in two recent studies – one  conducted by the MPMO and the other by an external expert  (Orenstein, 2018)  – that  examined trends over time in the number of projects in various phases of the  regulatory review process within the MPMOI portfolio. Both studies found that a  sizable number of major resource projects have stalled at some point in the  review process or have been voluntarily terminated by proponents, and concluded  that this trend could be driven by a range of external factors, such as  unfavourable market conditions, Canada’s overall attractiveness to investors, evolution  in the country’s regulatory landscape, and challenges experienced by proponents  during the review process (such as the need to respond to frequent requests for  information), among others.
It is also  worth noting that an earlier study completed in 2014 noted that the MPMOI’s  capacity to promote the timeliness of federal review processes for major  resource projects may be inherently limited as a consequence of factors that  are partly or wholly unrelated to coordination and largely outside the  program’s control (PRA Inc., 2014).
Have there been any unintended outcomes (positive  or negative) as a result of the Initiative?
Summary:
The evaluation      identified both positive and negative unintended outcomes resulting from      the MPMOI and the Interim Strategy. The positive outcome relates to      increased public awareness, understanding, and appreciation of the      regulatory review process for major resource projects. The negative      unintended outcome relates to challenges for the federal government in      satisfying increased expectations for EA and regulatory review processes      for major resource projects.
Both positive and negative unintended  outcomes may be attributable to the MPMOI and the Interim Strategy, although  some are likely driven, at least in part, by factors beyond the program’s  control. The main positive unintended outcome identified by key informants is  increased public awareness, understanding, and appreciation of the regulatory  review process for major resource projects.
One unintended outcome identified  through the document review and key informant interviews is that the Interim  Strategy and the federal review of EA and regulatory processes may have  increased public and stakeholder expectations—particularly with respect to public  and Indigenous consultations—which the government may find challenging to  satisfy.
In addition, Eyford (2013) has  argued that an integrated whole-of-government approach may formalize consultation  processes in ways that negatively impact dialogue between Indigenous peoples and  the Crown.
Footnote
20
For example, it can make participation more costly for Indigenous peoples, and  result in proceedings that are overly technical and potentially adversarial.
The introduction of legislated time  limits may further exacerbate capacity constraints experienced by Indigenous  peoples while also limiting the scope of issues that consultations can address.  In
Gitxaala Nation v. Canada
, for  example, the Federal Court of Appeal noted Indigenous peoples perceived  timelines set aside for the Northern Gateway pipeline project consultations as  too short to promote meaningful outcomes, adding that the legislation-driven  nature of the timelines meant requests for extension relied upon Ministerial  approval that was not always granted (Gitxaala  Nation et al., 2016, pp. 103–104). Similarly, in
Tsleil-Waututh  Nation v. Canada
, the Court observed that Indigenous communities involved  in the TMX review cited the extremely restrictive nature of the NEB’s  legislated time limits as an impediment to meaningful consultation, noting that  these did not afford sufficient time for communities to develop a comprehensive  understanding of the project under consideration or participate in the review  process (Tsleil-Waututh Nation et al.,  2018, p. 205).
Performance – Efficiency
Is the design of the MPMOI appropriate for achieving its expected  outcomes?
Summary:
To the      extent that it provided support to federal departments and agencies to      fulfill their statutory obligations in relation to major resource project      reviews, the design of the MPMOI was appropriate for the period covered by      this evaluation.
While there      is clearly evidence of improvement in some areas, the study could not      conclusively determine if the Initiative has been successful in achieving      all expected outcomes; this, however, may be attributable largely to the      limited performance measurement information available to support this      evaluation. Moreover, while opportunities to improve the Initiative’s      design may exist, given the wide range of factors that likely influence      outcome achievement, it is not clear that any alternative model would have      been more effective.
Moving      forward, there is a need to determine whether the Office or a similar      entity is an appropriate or necessary element of the future design of the      Initiative, and if so, what its specific roles and responsibilities should      be.
Broadly  speaking, to the extent that activities funded and delivered under the  Initiative are required by federal legislation, the design of the MPMOI was largely  appropriate for the period covered by this evaluation.
Resources  for scientific and technical capacity position federal authorities to provide  expertise, knowledge and information during EAs, as required under CEAA 2012,  while funding for Indigenous consultation capacity assists federal departments  and agencies in fulfilling their duty to consult with Indigenous peoples during  project reviews, pursuant to section 35(1) of the
Constitution Act, 1982
. Moreover, internal and external key  informants agree that funding for scientific, technical and Indigenous  consultation capacity is essential to the ability of Initiative partners to  carry out their legislated roles and responsibilities.
Although  the office and its roles/responsibilities are established through a Cabinet  Directive rather than in legislation, it is intended to help the federal  government meet its statutory obligations. From this broad perspective, these  roles and responsibilities can be considered as appropriate elements of the  overall Initiative design for the period covered by this evaluation. As was  discussed in detail in the section on Continued Need, although most key  informants agreed there is an ongoing need for the roles and responsibilities  performed by the Office, they disagreed on where these roles and responsibilities  should be housed in the future and whether there is still a need for the Office  as a distinct entity – particularly since some of its roles and  responsibilities, at the time, were likely to be transferred to IAAC if the  changes proposed in Bill C-69 became law. Moreover, various concerns were  raised about the Office, including lack of clarity with regard to its roles and  responsibilities relative to other partner departments and agencies, as well as  lack of authority to hold federal partners accountable for the achievement of  expected outcomes. Given these considerations, there is a need to determine  whether the Office or a similar entity is an appropriate or necessary element  of the future design of the Initiative, and if so, what its specific roles and  responsibilities should be.
Overall,  therefore, the design of the Initiative was appropriate for the period covered  by this evaluation, to the extent that it provided support to federal  departments and agencies to fulfill their statutory obligations in relation to  major resource project reviews. However, as discussed in the Effectiveness  section of this report, the evaluation could not conclusively determine if the  Initiative was successful in achieving all expected outcomes, although there is  clearly evidence of improvement in some areas. While this could suggest  opportunities to further enhance the design of the Initiative, it is at least  as likely to speak to the limited performance information available to support  this evaluation (see p. 41 below).  Furthermore, while opportunities to further enhance the Initiative’s design may  exist, considering the wide range of factors that likely influence outcome  achievement, it is not clear that any alternative model (such as those outlined  in the next section) would have been more effective.
A certain degree of  tension is inherent in the design of the Initiative, arising from its efforts  to achieve two distinct objectives in response to statutory obligations as well  as current federal policy direction. A key challenge for the Initiative is  balancing the MPMOI goals of enhancing the timeliness and predictability of  major resource project reviews, and achieving a more thorough review process in  which stakeholders and partners are meaningfully consulted and all relevant  evidence is considered in review decisions. This challenge arises because  activities like generation, collection and analysis of scientific evidence,  administration of public and Indigenous consultations, and analysis of evidence  from consultations require considerable time to complete and may be subject to interruptions  and delays that cannot necessarily be foreseen. Although it may not be possible  to resolve this tension through changes to Initiative design alone, it may be  possible to mitigate it by clarifying and improving understanding of, key  aspects and requirements of the review process.
Is the  program operating efficiently? Are there alternative approaches or models that  would be more efficient or effective at achieving the expected outcomes?
Summary:
The evaluation is       unable to assess whether the Initiative and the Interim Strategy are       operating efficiently due to limited objective information on resource       use, outputs, and expected outcomes. Although key informants gave a wide       range of suggestions for improving effectiveness and efficiency, there is no evidence these would be more efficient or       effective at achieving expected outcomes.
Resource use
Due to limited  financial and human resource information, the evaluation can infer very little  about resource use and efficiency in relation to the Initiative and the Interim  Strategy. For new funding allocated to the Initiative (i.e., excluding the  Interim Strategy), actual spending was close to, but consistently less than, planned  spending over the period covered by the evaluation, as shown in Table 6.
Table 6: Planned versus actual MPMOI  Expenditures ($ millions), new funding, 2015–16 to 2017–18
Federal Organization
2015-16
2016-17
2017-18
Total
Planned
Actual
Planned
Actual
Planned
Actual
Planned
Actual
CEA Agency
$8.00
$8.00
$8.00
$7.82
$8.20
$8.00
$24.20
$23.82
DFO
$7.00
$6.87
$7.00
$6.79
$7.01
$6.91
$21.01
$20.58
ECCC
$2.50
$2.53
$2.50
$2.34
$2.50
$2.26
$7.50
$7.13
INAC
$1.80
$1.73
$1.80
$1.75
$1.80
$1.73
$5.40
$5.20
NRCan
$4.20
$4.39
$4.20
$3.65
$4.00
$3.90
$12.40
$11.94
TC
$3.50
$3.26
$3.50
$3.15
$3.50
$3.18
$10.50
$9.59
Total
$27.00
$26.77
$27.00
$25.49
$27.01
$25.99
$81.01
$78.26
Sources:
Internal program documentation; NRCan  (2016c, 2017c, 2018b)
These figures do not include $164.9M in  existing funding allocated to the review of major resource projects over the  same period, for which actual spending data was not available, and therefore do  not reflect the full cost of major resource project reviews. Furthermore, a  detailed breakdown based on the MPMOI’s five main funded activities (see Table 2 in  the Program Profile) is not available. NRCan funding represents the funding  provided for the Office.
Information on planned and actual spending  for the Interim Strategy is presented in Table 7 .  Overall, actual expenditures were lower than planned for all three funded  departments and agencies, presumably due primarily to the timing and cancellation  of the Energy East Pipeline (EEP) project by the proponent.
Table 7 : Planned versus actual Interim Strategy expenditures ($  millions), 2016–17 to 2017–18
Federal organization
2016-17
2017-18
Total
Planned
Actual
Planned
Actual
Planned
Actual
NEB
a
$0.92
$0.43
$4.74
$2.36
$5.65
$2.79
NRCan
b
$2.85
$1.92
b
$2.61
$1.54
b
$5.47
$3.45
TC
$0.18
$0.18
$0.43
$0.00
$0.61
$0.18
Total
$3.95
$2.53
$7.78
$3.90
$11.73
$6.43
Notes:
a – The NEB did not access $1M in funding allocated in the TB Submission for the Interim Strategy
b – These figures differ from
Table 10
because NRCan transferred resources to CEAA to support the administration of the PFP program.
Source:
Internal program documentation
These figures do not include $15.3M in  existing funding allocated to the review of major resource projects subject to  the Interim Strategy over the same period; as above, therefore, they do not  reflect the full cost of administering reviews of these projects.
The total number of actual full-time equivalents (FTEs) allocated to the MPMOI and the Interim  Strategy for each year, by department/agency, is shown in Table 8. On  average, approximately 191 FTEs per year were allocated to the Initiative and  the Interim Strategy.
Table 8 : Actual FTEs by department/agency, MPMOI and Interim  Strategy, 2015–16 to 2017–18
Federal Organization
2015-16
2016-17
2017-18
CEA Agency
61.0
62.0
60.0
CIRNAC-ISC
12.0
12.0
12.0
DFO
a
42.0
42.0
42.0
ECCC
16.2
16.2
16.2
NEB
b
-
6.4
8.2
NRCan – MPMO
28.1
35.0
27.2
TC
25.6
26.2
22.3
Total
185.0
199.8
187.8
Notes:
a – DFO figures exclude A-base FTEs    used to support the review of major resource projects.
b – FTE figures are not    available prior to 2016-17, as NEB was only funded through the Interim    Strategy.
Source:
Internal program    documentation
Although there is  some information on how financial and human resources were allocated and used  to support Initiative and Interim Strategy activities (as reported above), the  level of detail is insufficient to support conclusions about efficiency. Based  on the available data, for example, it is not possible to estimate a cost per  unit of output or level of outcome achieved; more detailed resource utilization  data would be necessary to support estimates of the cost of an “average”  review, or elements of it. Furthermore, there is no straightforward way to  quantify coordination or meaningful consultation, and no obvious baselines  against which efficiency could be compared. Overall, therefore, data  limitations preclude quantitative assessment of efficiency.
Some key informants  raised concerns about efficiency, relating specifically to the MPMO. In  particular, concerns were raised about significant turnover and perceived lack of  knowledge, expertise and experience among MPMO staff, especially in relation to  specific resource extraction sectors and Indigenous consultations. With regard  to Indigenous consultations, it was noted that MPMO does not necessarily have  the knowledge and experience to consult Indigenous peoples without support from  other federal departments and agencies.
Footnote
21
As a result, the latter are often required to represent themselves  during consultations. However, the hiring of Consultation Coordinators located  in the regions where consultation was being undertaken was viewed as a positive  step.
Alternative designs or approaches
When  asked to identify potential alternatives to the Initiative that would be more  effective or efficient at achieving the expected outcomes, key informants gave  a wide range of responses.
Many  key informants (both internal and external) focused their suggestions on the  Office. One view was that some or all of the Office’s roles and  responsibilities could or should be assumed by other departments or agencies. Others (largely but not  exclusively internal) argued the current  approach should be preserved, at least in the short run (e.g., to support the  transition to the new review system under Bill C-69). However, a subset of  these individuals suggested efficiency and effectiveness could potentially be improved  through enhancements to the Office, in particular by providing it with a more robust mandate that is sufficiently well-articulated to mitigate the  risk of overlap and duplication with other federal departments and agencies and  that provides the Office with the authority needed to facilitate achievement of  the Initiative’s outcomes without interfering with the  legislative roles and responsibilities of partner departments and agencies. A specific example of the latter might include requiring federal departments  and agencies to collaborate, coordinate, and participate in an MPMO-administered  issues resolution mechanism.
Other miscellaneous  suggestions to improve efficiency and effectiveness, which did not directly  relate to the Office, included enhancing coordination with provincial regulators  (e.g., continuing to work towards coordinated or harmonized reviews); engaging  Indigenous peoples as early as possible during the review process (possibly up  to and including extending greater autonomy to design and administer  consultations); ensuring consultation participants have sufficient capacity to  support the process, maintain a shared understanding of their respective roles  and responsibilities, and can ultimately see their input reflected in review decisions  (which could entail simply justifying why this did not occur); streamlining the  regulatory/permitting phase of the review process; and restoring the practice  of developing Project Agreements and/or reviewing Agreements on an annual basis. However, these suggestions were diverse in nature and  there were no general themes. In addition to this, the proposed changes in  Bill C-69 present an alternative to some elements of the Initiative that was  referred to by numerous internal and external key informants.
Overall, there was little consensus among  interviewees regarding the appropriateness or desirability of alternative  designs and approaches to the MPMOI, and no compelling  evidence these would be more efficient or effective at achieving expected  outcomes.
Is performance information being collected,  monitored and used to support decision-making?
Summary:
Although some performance information is collected, monitored, and used internally to support decision-making, it is not always appropriate or sufficient to demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of the Initiative and the Interim Strategy. There are opportunities to enhance the      collection of financial and human resource information, the relevance of      performance data to the expected outcomes (i.e., validity of performance      measures), and the functionality of public-facing project monitoring      systems.
Overall, the financial, human resource, and outcome information currently being collected and monitored is not  sufficient to demonstrate the effectiveness or efficiency of the MPMOI.
Nevertheless, Performance  Measurement and Risk Strategies exists for both the MPMOI and the Interim  Strategy. Furthermore, some performance information is being collected,  monitored, and used in the preparation of a range of internal knowledge  products, such as Major Project Look Ahead documents distributed to  participants in the governance of the Initiative. Similarly, publicly available  resources reference data collected by Initiative partners, including annual  Departmental Results Reports (DRR), the Horizontal Initiatives Database, and  the MPMO Tracker.
In addition, some  internal key informants reported that performance information is being, or has  been, used to support Initiative decision-making, at least at the  project-level. For example, they noted that project-level tracking  tools are used to inform discussions about projects where issues have been  encountered or where there are significant upcoming milestones; or, that data  regarding the timeliness of the review process helped inform the proposed  timelines incorporated into Bill C-69. However, a small number reported that  emphasis on performance measurement and tracking has declined over time, and  they attributed this to both a reduction in the number of major projects under  consideration, an increased focus on policy development and changes in  legislation requiring departments to do more performance measurement themselves.
Consistent  with the findings from the previous evaluation, and as is evident throughout  this report, the evaluation identified several gaps and opportunities for  improvement with regard to performance measurement and reporting:
Availability of basic  program information.
It was very challenging for the evaluation to obtain  accurate information relating to activities and outputs of the Initiative and  the Interim Strategy for the period covered by this evaluation. Furthermore,  although there is a Performance Measurement and Risk Strategy for the  Initiative and the Interim Strategy and performance measures have been  identified, it appears some indicators mentioned therein are not being  routinely compiled (e.g., those related to the preparation and publication of  Project Agreements). As noted above, some key informants reported that for  various reasons performance measurement and tracking diminished over time.
Limited financial and human  resource information.
Existing spending for the Initiative is not fully tracked.  In addition, the allocation of financial or human resources to specific funded activities  (i.e., those listed in Table 2 above) does not appear to be regularly tracked.  These shortcomings make it difficult to know the actual cost of delivering the  Initiative and the Interim Strategy, and to assess efficiency.
Appropriateness of  performance measures.
As noted above, performance measures have been  identified for the Initiative and the Interim Strategy. However, these are not  always appropriate or sufficient for demonstrating progress towards outcomes,  nor are they necessarily meaningful to external stakeholders. Specific examples  include the following:
Timeliness  and predictability of the review process is currently measured with reference  to legislated time limits and service standards, rather than the total time  required to complete the EA and regulatory review process. The latter is more  meaningful to proponents and members of the public and might offer additional  insight into the program’s success in promoting the timeliness and  predictability of project reviews, but runs the risk that (for example) long  review times resulting from factors outside the government’s control may be  misattributed to the MPMOI. It may be advisable either to present both of these  pieces of information together, or to design a more sophisticated indicator  that attempts to balance these considerations.
Footnote
22
Performance  measures related to Indigenous consultation are essentially process indicators  (e.g., the percentage of major resource project reviews that have an Aboriginal  consultation work plan, or the number of Indigenous communities that receive  PFP funding), which do not demonstrate progress towards outcomes. An alternative approach might be to replace or supplement these with metrics that directly  reference Indigenous stakeholders’ perspectives of the process.
Weaknesses of the MPMO  Tracker.
The MPMO Tracker is an interactive  online tool enabling users to obtain detailed information on projects in the  MPMOI portfolio. While useful for obtaining project-specific  information, it has limited functionality when it comes to providing aggregate data  about projects undergoing review. It is not possible for an industry  stakeholder or member of the public to access this database and easily  determine, for example, whether major resource projects in the federal review  process are on track to meet legislated time limits or what proportion of  project proponents are compliant with conditions, or obtain a high-level  overview of the functioning of the review process or the status of all projects  at a given point in time. Furthermore, the Tracker does not appear to be  updated on a regular basis, which further limits its usefulness.
Other partners in the  Initiative (the NEB and CEAA) have their own public-facing tools for reporting  information about the performance of the review system for major projects.  However, the MPMO Tracker has some unique features  (previously discussed in the section on Continued Need) and integrates, to a  limited extent, with these other tools. It is unclear whether the Canadian Impact Assessment Registry (CIAR)  proposed in Bill C-69 would replace the MPMO Tracker, or whether some form of  integration between the two tools is being envisioned. It is also uncertain to  what extent the CIAR would, or could, address the types of issues outlined  above now that Bill C-69 has come into force.
Is the governance structure clear and are its members  actively engaged? Does it support effective decision-making and achievement of  intended outcomes?
Summary:
Internal      key informants believe that the governance structure is clear, that its      members are actively engaged, and that the structure supports effective      decision-making and achievement of outcomes. The DM and ADM committees,      which make up the key elements of the governance structure, are seen as a      main strength of the MPMOI. Nevertheless, there may be opportunities to      clarify the roles and responsibilities of the senior manager committees,      particularly with respect to focus (i.e., horizontal policy issues versus project-level      issues), committee involvement in issues resolution, and the nature of      NRCan participation.
NRCan as lead department
NRCan executes  its role as the lead department for the Initiative through the role of its DM  as the Chair of the DM MPMO and through the MPMO. Most key informants did not  raise any concerns about the appropriateness of NRCan as the lead department.  However, a few internal and external key informants suggested that because the  MPMO is situated within NRCan, it may be (or may be perceived as) biased in  favour of proponents. These key informants suggested that the Office’s location  within NRCan, which has an economic development mandate, results in a tendency  to promote or prioritize project approvals as opposed to environmental  protection or other goals of the regulatory review process. On the other hand,  it was also observed that NRCan’s relatively limited regulatory role reduces  the potential for conflict of interest. In addition, some internal key  informants noted that the participation of other federal departments and  agencies with different mandates in MPMOI governance committees provides  necessary balance.
Governance committees
Governance of  the MPMOI is the responsibility of the DM MPMO, chaired by the DM of NRCan as  the lead department, with a parallel committee operating at the ADM level.  Program documentation, including Terms of Reference, describes the structure,  composition, and mandate of the DM MPMO, as well as the roles and  responsibilities of its members and the Committee’s procedures and decision-making  processes (Government of Canada, 2007; MPMO, 2008). The MPMO provides secretariat support to both the ADM and DM MPMO  committees. Terms of Reference do not exist for the ADM committee.
Internal key  informants generally believe the governance structure is clear; that  participants meet with appropriate frequency and are adequately engaged; and  that the governance structure supports effective decision-making and  achievement of expected outcomes. Some specifically pointed out that the  existing governance bodies are excellent venues for information-sharing, policy  discussion, and collaborative management of issues. Department  and agency Deputy Heads surveyed by the program in 2016-17 believe governance  bodies maintain an essential oversight role during the federal regulatory  review of major natural resource projects, and that the committee structure  effectively manages the flow of information to senior management and the  advancement of horizontal advice. That said, internal key informants raised a  number of issues and concerns relating to governance:
Role and focus of governance committees.
One  concern was the degree to which meetings of the governance bodies should focus  on horizontal policy issues relative to project-level issues. Although senior  managers have expressed a preference for greater emphasis on horizontal policy  discussions, they seem to recognize that project-level discussions constitute  an essential element of the committees’ work. However, substantial  resources are required to sustain interdepartmental coordination and apprise  senior executives of major resource projects navigating the federal review  process, which may divert their time to considering issues that could have been  addressed at lower levels. While this could be addressed by focusing the  mandate of senior-level committees, some internal key informants believe it can  be sometimes constructive to allow issues to escalate to higher levels. In  addition, senior managers from MPMOI-funded partner departments, regulatory  agencies and aligned departments who were interviewed alluded to a lack of  clarity regarding the DM MPMO committee’s role as a decision-making body.
Performance of secretariat  function.
Some internal interviewees described instances in  which the late provision of meeting materials had proven problematic (e.g., by  giving meeting participants insufficient time to absorb their contents),  suggesting a need to distribute these materials in a timelier fashion. However,  MPMO representatives indicated that the ability to do so is contingent on  timely submission to the Office of the documents requiring dissemination.
Engagement of partners.
Some internal key informants suggested that  participants in program governance bodies may not always be adequately or  consistently engaged. For  example, some department/agency Deputy Heads noted CIRNAC-ISC and the Canadian Northern Economic Development Agency had  limited opportunity during meetings to integrate lessons learned from northern  major resource projects into ADM and DG committee level discussions.
Role of the  Interdepartmental Task Team.
Finally, the  formation of the Interdepartmental Task Team and  working groups to support the passage of Bill C-69 appears to have disrupted  the existing governance bodies and created confusion about the ongoing function  of both the Task Team and the MPMOI governance structure. This finding may be  the result of the timing of the key informant interviews, which were conducted soon  after the establishment of these teams.
Conclusions and recommendations
This section  summarizes the evaluation’s key findings and recommendations. These findings  and recommendations apply even with changes to the EA and regulatory review  process that are now law under Bill C-69. As the changes associated with Bill  C-69 are enacted, the recommendations should be considered by the  organization(s) responsible for horizontal governance under the new process for  environmental/impact assessments and regulatory reviews.
Relevance
The evaluation  confirmed that the MPMOI and the Interim Strategy align with federal  priorities, including environmental protection, action on climate change, and reconciliation  with Indigenous peoples, as well as the priorities of participating departments  and agencies.
There is a clear need and role for  departments and agencies to support major resource project reviews. In  particular, there is a continued need for departments and agencies to provide scientific,  technical and Indigenous consultation capacity to support these reviews and to  meet statutory/ legislated and regulatory responsibilities associated with EAs  and regulatory reviews. In keeping with resources provided in Budget 2018 and  the passing of Bill C-69, partner departments, should continue to collaborate  on and maintain scientific, technical and Indigenous consultation capacity  supporting major project reviews.
The evaluation also found widespread agreement  on the continued need for the roles and responsibilities currently performed by  the MPMO. However, there was not consensus on whether these roles and  responsibilities should continue to be performed by the Office. Based on a  preliminary analysis of the Office’s current functions, it is clear that with Bill  C-69, some of the roles and responsibilities of the Office will become the responsibility  of IAAC. Responsibilities that are not specifically  assigned to the new Agency, and that will likely need to be performed by some  entity in the future, include:
Providing secretariat support to the  horizontal governance structure.
Functions associated with the post-IA  decision phase, including providing support to proponents, monitoring and tracking the progress of major projects, coordinating  engagement of Indigenous peoples, and possibly,  providing horizontal leadership to advance policy improvements  applicable to this phase.
In addition, there are 89 projects that  entered the system under CEAA 2012 that have not yet completed the review  process and that may continue to move through the federal system under existing  assessment processes. There may therefore be a need for the Office to continue  performing its existing roles and responsibilities in relation to these active  projects, now that Bill C-69 is law.
An upcoming internal review of horizontal  governance could serve as a venue for initiating discussions regarding the  Office’s mandate, roles and responsibilities relative to other partner  departments and agencies and external partners and stakeholders, going forward.  Depending on the outcome of these discussions, the review may also provide an  opportunity to explore whether there exists a need to modify MPMO’s mandate so  as to support achievement of the Initiative’s expected outcomes.
Recommendation 1.
NRCan  should work with participating departments and agencies to ensure continuation  of relevant activities currently performed by the MPMO. This process should be  informed by a comprehensive review of the Office’s mandate, roles and  responsibilities relative to the roles of other participating departments and  agencies and/or external stakeholders, and should include the following tasks:
Determine what entity or  entities (including the MPMO itself) should carry out roles and  responsibilities currently performed by MPMO going forward, with explicit  reference to any pertinent legislative (i.e., Bill C-69) or other developments  occurring or anticipated to occur at the time the determination is made, and  update the mandate as required.
Performance – Effectiveness
The expected outcomes of the MPMOI,  including the Interim Strategy, assessed as part of this evaluation include:
Improved coordination of the regulatory  review process;
Improved timeliness,  predictability, quality, transparency and accountability of regulatory reviews;  and
More coordinated, consistent  and meaningful Indigenous and public consultation.
For all three outcomes, baseline measures are  lacking, performance measurement data for the period are limited, and key  informants offered diverse perspectives on the extent to which progress has  occurred, with internal key informants more likely to perceive improvements  than external key informants. As a result, it is challenging to draw firm  conclusions about the extent to which these outcomes were achieved for the  period from 2015-16 to 2017-18, although there is evidence of progress in some  areas. Key findings related to the achievement of outcomes are presented below:
Coordination of the  regulatory review process.
There is clear  evidence that the MPMO and other Initiative partners engaged in a range of  activities to coordinate the regulatory review process. At the project level,  Initiative partners worked with provincial regulators and proponents to  coordinate activities during the review process and resolve issues. At the  horizontal level, the Office contributed to improved coordination through its  support for the Initiative governance structure, through its role in the  development of Bill C-69, and through the provision of policy advice. Some key  informants suggested that the major gains in coordination had been made prior  to the evaluation period, and were primarily due to the implementation of CEAA  2012, rather than the MPMOI.
Timeliness, predictability,  quality, transparency and accountability of regulatory reviews.
Due to data limitations and divergent key informant perspectives,  the evaluation could not conclusively determine if timeliness, predictability,  quality, transparency and accountability of regulatory reviews has improved. With  regard to timeliness and predictability, although federal partners are meeting  legislated time limits, projects timelines are highly variable and it is not  clear whether the total time elapsed between the initial project application  and project authorization has declined since the last evaluation. Similarly,  with regard to quality, Initiative partners are providing the specialized or  expert information or knowledge required to inform EAs, scientific evidence is  considered in review decisions and affects conditions imposed, and estimates of  GHG emissions have been developed for projects under the Interim Strategy; however,  the evaluation also found little consensus among key informants regarding the extent to which  consideration of scientific evidence improved over the evaluation period, with  a few describing opportunities to further enhance how scientific information is  scoped, validated, or applied during major resource project reviews. Finally, with regards to transparency and accountability, there is  evidence of various internal and public-facing tools to monitor, track, and  report on performance; it is also  evident that the desire to increase Canadians’ trust in  the review system for major resource projects was a motivating factor underpinning many aspects of the design of the Interim  Strategy and Bill C-69.
Coordinated, consistent and  meaningful Indigenous and public consultation.
Despite  limited performance measurement information, there is some evidence to indicate  that progress has been made in this area. Key informants interviewed as part  of this evaluation were divided as to whether this outcome had been achieved;  the same observation applies to Indigenous key informants, although most of the  latter believe that at least some elements of consultation processes are effective  or have improved. Those perceiving  progress attribute this to such factors as government policy direction,  resources available through the PFPs or the Interim Strategy, the MPMO’s role  as the Crown Consultation Coordinator for NEB projects, and/or the establishment of IAMCs. Although two Federal Court of Appeal decisions  during the period covered by this evaluation overturned project approvals (for  the Northern Gateway and TMX projects) on the grounds, at least in part, that  the federal government failed to fulfill the duty to consult, the Court was of  the opinion that significant improvements had been made in the TMX consultation  compared to earlier project reviews. In other instances, meanwhile, the Court has ruled in the Crown’s  favour, concluding that the duty to consult had been discharged appropriately. Although there has been recent progress, it is also clear that  further efforts are required. Areas for future improvement include clarifying  consultation roles, responsibilities, and concepts; assisting proponents and  Indigenous peoples to navigate consultation processes; engaging Indigenous  peoples in designing these processes; and more clearly conveying how input has  been considered in review decisions.
The evaluation identified numerous internal  and external factors that influence the ability of the Initiative to achieve  its expected outcomes. Factors that facilitate outcome achievement include the  coordinating role of the Office; the availability of funding for scientific, technical  and Indigenous consultation capacity; and the availability of PFP funding to  support Indigenous participation in consultations. Factors that may hinder  outcome achievement include the limitations  inherent in the mandate of the Office and increased  public expectations in relation to project reviews, among others. Some factors  – such as prevailing economic/market conditions and government priorities – may  be either facilitators or barriers, depending on the context. Recognizing that  the Initiative may have limited or no ability to mitigate some external factors  (such as unfavourable market conditions), it is important that these factors  are understood and mitigated, where possible, to optimize the ability of the  Initiative to achieve its expected outcomes.
Recommendation.
There are no recommendations  associated with this section.
Performance – Efficiency
With regard to governance, the evaluation  found that the DM and ADM committees, which are the key elements of the MPMOI  governance structure, are a main strength of the Initiative. In addition, the  governance structure is clear and its members are actively engaged. Nevertheless,  there may be opportunities to clarify the roles and responsibilities of the  senior manager committees, particularly with respect to focus (i.e., horizontal  policy issues or project-level issues), committee involvement in issues resolution,  and nature of NRCan participation.
Due to limited information on resource use,  outputs, and expected outcomes, the evaluation cannot definitively conclude on  whether the MPMOI and the Interim Strategy are operating efficiently. Notwithstanding  numerous (and often contradictory) suggestions from key informants for  improving effectiveness and efficiency there is no evidence that any of these  would be more effective or efficient at achieving expected outcomes.
Consistent with  the findings from the previous evaluation, a significant barrier to the  analysis of effectiveness and efficiency was the limited performance  measurement and resource information available for the evaluation. Although  some performance information is collected, monitored and used internally to  support decision-making, the available information is not always appropriate or  sufficient to demonstrate effectiveness and efficiency. Key weaknesses include:
Limited financial and human resource information,  including limited linkage of this information to Initiative/Strategy activities;
Inappropriate or insufficient performance  measures for demonstrating progress towards outcomes, or performance measures  that are not meaningful to external partners/stakeholders (e.g., emphasis on  meeting legislated time limits rather than overall time elapsed; or emphasis on  process indicators relating to Indigenous consultation, rather than metrics  that reference Indigenous peoples’ perspectives of the process); and
Limited functionality of the MPMO Tracker  with regard to providing aggregate information about projects undergoing  review.
There are  opportunities to improve the collection of performance measurement and financial  and human resource information, ensure that performance indicators are relevant  and valid for measuring expected outcomes, and improve the functionality of  public-facing project monitoring systems.
Recommendation 2.
NRCan should  collaborate with participating departments and agencies to improve performance  measurement for the MPMOI. To ensure responsible departments and agencies can  demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of the MPMOI and IARP, the  following steps should be taken (at a minimum):
Revise the logic model for the Initiative
to ensure that it clearly articulates activities, outputs and  expected outcomes (immediate, intermediate, and long-term). This may include  revising, removing, or adding activities, outputs and expected outcomes to  ensure clarity and avoid repetition.
Develop and implement a set of performance measures
corresponding to the outcomes  identified in the revised logic model.
The performance measures should enable  monitoring of progress towards outcome achievement; process indicators should  not be relied upon as evidence of outcome achievement, and indicators should be  meaningful and relevant to Initiative stakeholders and partners.
Strengthen monitoring and reporting tools or practices
, to facilitate consistent collection of performance information  across departments and agencies, and enable a clear understanding of progress  towards outcomes or enable course correction if the desired change is not seen.  This should include establishing baselines or benchmarks for expected outcomes,  and identifying clear targets and dates to achieve these targets.
Improve tracking of financial and human resource information
. This should include:
Actual resource use from new  and existing department and agency budgets for major resource project reviews  (including trends over time); and
Allocation of financial and  human resources to various activities, corresponding to the activities  identified in the revised logic model.
Improve public-facing project monitoring systems
to ensure that stakeholders and interested members of the public  can obtain and understand information about major resource projects under  federal review. This should include providing easier access to information  about project assessments (including the rationale behind review decisions), as  well as improving the functionality and timeliness of public-facing monitoring  systems to ensure accessibility of project-level and aggregated information  about major resource projects progressing through the federal review system.
With the passing of Bill C-69 and the  implementation of the IARP, the IAAC should also consider these improvements to  performance measurement and collaborate with participating departments and  agencies to ensure they are addressed for this new horizontal initiative.
Evaluation Team
Christian Asselin, Chief Audit and Evaluation Executive (CAEE)
David Ash, Senior Advisor to the CAEE
Mary Kay Lamarche, Senior Evaluation Manager
Martine Perrault, Senior Evaluation Manager
PRA Inc.
The evaluation was  also supported by a Horizontal Evaluation Advisory Committee with  representatives from the evaluation functions at: the Fisheries and Oceans  Canada; Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada-Indigenous  Services Canada; the Canadian Environmental Assessment Agency; Environment and  Climate Change Canada; Transport Canada; and the National Energy Board.
Appendix 1 Logic model for the MPMO Initiative
Text version - Appendix 1 Logic model for the MPMO initiative
The logic model is comprised of seven sections: Influences/External  Factors; Resources; Programs/Activities; Outputs; Immediate Outcomes;  Intermediate Outcomes; and Long-term Outcomes. There is a continuous feedback  loop between the Initiative’s resources and outputs.
Relevant influences and external factors include: Changes in  economic context and markets, Regional trends and technology; A complex federal  regulatory environment and system; Multiple stakeholders and federal and provincial  jurisdictions; Changes in federal and provincial government priorities; Impact  of legislative changes and court decisions on EA and AC; Federal regulatory and  aboriginal consultation capacity needs; and changes in stakeholder and public awareness  and expectations for EA, AC, and Transparency.
Resources include: Operating funds from MPMO; Capacity funding  for the regulatory process from five departments/agencies; Capacity funding for  Aboriginal consultations from five departments/agencies; In-kind contributions,  both MPMOI Funded and from unfunded departments, agencies, and stakeholders;  FTEs and infrastructure from MPMO; Scientific and technical expertise and transactional  support through FTEs of five departments/agencies; and In-kind scientific and technical  expertise and transactional support through FTEs.
Programs and Activities include: Provide a single point of entry  into the federal regulatory process for proponents; Implement a consistent, coordinated  approach to EA and regulatory reviews; Integrate Aboriginal consultation responsibilities  into the overall regulatory process; Monitor, track, and report on performance based  on project agreements and service standards; Establish and support senior governance  and oversight mechanisms; and Policy and research such as identifying, evaluating  and implementing process improvements. Activities associated with the regulatory  review process for major resource projects include: Pre-submission processing; Environmental  assessments; Aboriginal consultations; Regulatory review and decision making; and  follow-up and monitoring.
Relevant outputs include: Service standards such as reduced  timelines; Project agreements; Aboriginal consultation plans, crown records,  and other documents; Progress reports, progress meetings and a MPMO tracker; DM  committee meetings and interdepartmental and agency collaboration; and research  and analysis, studies, reports, guidance, materials, and training sessions.
Immediate outcomes include: A consistent, whole-of-government approach to  Aboriginal consultations; Integrated and well-coordinated EAs and regulatory reviews;  Increased transparency and accountability of the federal regulatory process; and  an improved federal regulatory review process.
Intermediate outcomes include: Aboriginal consultation responsibilities  are fulfilled in a consistent, adequate, and meaningful manner; and high quality,  predictable, and timely EAs and regulatory reviews.
The long-term outcome is to improve the performance of the  federal review process for major resource projects to support responsible  resource development in Canada.
Appendix 2 Logic Model for the  Interim Strategy for Pipelines and Other NEB Reviews
ULTIMATE OUTCOME
Decision-making processes for federally regulated pipeline projects are inclusive and demonstrate effective use of evidence from Indigenous consultations and public engagement
arrow pointing up
INTERMEDIATE OUTCOMES
Improved understanding of concerns being brought forward by the public and Indigenous groups
Indigenous concerns are accommodated as appropriate
arrow pointing up
IMMEDIATE OUTCOMES
Implementation of the interim measures (e.g., deeper consultations with Indigenous groups; expansion of the NEB and NRCan PFPs; and appointment of temporary Board members)
arrow pointing up
OUTPUTS
Robust Crown consultation records
Contribution agreements for participant funding
NEB recommendation reports (including assessments of direct greenhouse gas emissions)
Ministerial Panel’s report on engagement with the public and affected communities along the TMX route
Assessments of upstream greenhouse gas emissions
Timely Government decisions on major pipeline projects during the Interim Strategy period
arrow pointing up
ACTIVITIES
Providing participant funding to facilitate the participation of the public & Indigenous groups in the NEB review process and Crown consultations (NEB and MPMO)
Conducting Crown consultations (MPMO, relying on NEB process to the extent possible, with TC)
Engaging the public and affected communities (NEB and MPMO); and appointing a credible Ministerial Panel for the TMX project with a clear mandate and in a timely manner (MPMO)
Assessing upstream (ECCC) and direct (NEB) greenhouse gas emissions associated with projects
Analyzing  and responding to concerns raised by Indigenous groups and the public (NEB,  MPMO and TC); Identifying options to avoid, mitigate, or accommodate  outstanding concerns (NEB and MPMO)
Appointment of temporary Board members (MPMO)
arrow pointing up
INPUTS
Operating Funds
Contribution Funds
Personnel(Crown Consultation Coordinators, PFP Manager, MPMO project management, coordination, and oversight)
Technical expertise & transactional support
Text version - Appendix 2 Logic Model for the  Interim Strategy for Pipelines and Other NEB Reviews
The logic model is organized into six categories: Inputs, Activities, Outputs, Immediate Outcomes, Intermediate Outcomes, and the Ultimate Outcome. Inputs lead to activities which then produce outputs. The outputs result in immediate outcomes, which then lead to the intermediate outcomes, and finally the ultimate outcome of the Initiative.
The inputs are: Operating funds; Contribution funds; Personnel including Crown consultation coordinators, PFP manager, MPMO project management, coordination, and oversight; and Technical expertise and transactional support.
The activities are: Providing participant funding to facilitate the participation of the public & Indigenous groups in the NEB review process and Crown consultations (NEB and MPMO); Conducting Crown consultations (MPMO, relying on NEB process to the extent possible, with TC); Engaging the public and affected communities (NEB and MPMO) and appointing a credible Ministerial Panel for the TMX project with a clear mandate and in a timely manner (MPMO); Assessing upstream (ECCC) and direct (NEB) greenhouse gas emissions associated with projects; Analyzing and responding to concerns raised by Indigenous groups and the public (NEB, MPMO and TC); Identifying options to avoid, mitigate, or accommodate outstanding concerns (NEB and MPMO); and Appointment of temporary Board members (MPMO).
The outputs are: Robust Crown consultation records; Contribution agreements for participant funding; NEB recommendation reports including assessments of direct greenhouse gas emissions; Ministerial Panel’s report on engagement with the public and affected communities along the TMX route; Assessments of upstream greenhouse gas emissions; and Timely Government decisions on major pipeline projects during the Interim Strategy period.
The immediate outcome is the implementation of the interim measures, which are deeper consultations with Indigenous groups, expansion of the NEB and NRCan PFPs, and the appointment of temporary Board members.
The intermediate outcomes are: Improved understanding of concerns being brought forward by the public and Indigenous groups; and Indigenous concerns are accommodated as appropriate.
The ultimate outcome: Decision-making processes for federally regulated pipeline projects are inclusive and demonstrate effective use of evidence from Indigenous consultations and public engagement.
Appendix 3 Program Resources
For the period covered by this evaluation (2015-16 to 2017-18),  approximately $81.0M was allocated to the MPMOI; Table 9 provides a  breakdown of planned MPMOI expenditures by fiscal year and department/agency.  These figures do not include $164.9M in existing funding  allocated to the review of major resource projects over the same period.
Table 9: MPMOI resources ($ dollar), 2015–16 to 2017–18
Federal organization
2015-16
2016-17
2017-18
Total
CEA Agency
$8,000,000
$8,000,000
$8,000,000
$24,000,000
DFO
$7,000,000
$7,000,000
$7,000,000
$21,000,000
ECCC
$2,500,000
$2,500,000
$2,500,000
$7,500,000
INAC
$1,800,000
$1,800,000
$1,800,000
$5,400,000
NRCan
$4,200,000
$4,200,000
$4,200,000
$12,600,000
TC
$3,500,000
$3,500,000
$3,500,000
$10,500,000
Total
$27,000,000
$27,000,000
$27,000,000
$81,000,000
Source:
Internal program documentation
For the two years within the scope of this evaluation (2016-17 to  2017-18), a total of $13.0M was allocated to the Interim Strategy; Table 10 provides a  breakdown of planned Interim Strategy expenditures by fiscal year and  department/agency. These figures do not include $15.7M  in existing funding allocated to the review of major resource projects subject  to the Interim Strategy over the same period.
Table 10 : Interim Strategy resources ($ dollar), 2016–17 to  2017–18
Federal organization
2016-17
2017-18
Total
NEB
1,915,877
4,737,972
6,653,849
NRCan
3,003,066
2,777,679
5,780,745
TC
181,907
425,801
607,708
Total
5,100,850
7,941,452
13,042,302
Source:
Internal program documentation
Appendix 4 Detailed Evaluation Methodology
Evaluation Issues and Questions
Evaluation questions were  identified in accordance with the Treasury Board
Policy on Results
(2016) and issues of interest to senior  management, namely Indigenous consultations as well as the overall design of  the MPMOI, particularly the ongoing and future need for  a horizontal coordination function (i.e., the future role of the MPMO).
The following questions related to the relevance and performance of the  MPMOI were examined in the evaluation:
Relevance
Continued  need for the program.
Is there a continued need  for the MPMOI and its main components?
Alignment  with government priorities.
Is  the MPMOI aligned with current federal government priorities?
Alignment  with federal roles and responsibilities.
Is the MPMOI consistent with existing and proposed federal roles and  responsibilities?
Value-Added.
Does the MPMO bring  value-added to the regulatory review process for major resource projects?
Performance
Effectiveness  (achievement of expected results).
To what  extent has the MPMOI, including the Interim Strategy,  achieved its expected outcomes?
To what extent have internal  and external factors influenced the ability of the MPMOI to achieve its  expected outcomes?
Have there been any unintended outcomes (positive or negative) as a result of  the Initiative?
Efficiency
Is the design of the MPMOI  appropriate for achieving its expected outcomes? To what degree does the MPMO  contribute to achieving the expected outcomes?
Is the program operating  efficiently? Are there alternative approaches or models that would be more  efficient or effective at achieving the expected outcomes?
Is the governance structure  clear and are its members actively engaged? Does it support effective  decision-making and achievement of intended outcomes?
Is performance information being collected, monitored and  used to support decision-making?
Evaluation Approach and Methodology
Two data collection methodologies were used to address the evaluation  issues and questions. Evidence drawn from these methods informed the findings  and conclusions.
Review of documents and  administrative data
The document review served to develop a thorough understanding of the MPMOI  and Interim Strategy and to contribute as a line of evidence to address all  evaluation questions. Examples of the types of documents reviewed included:
The prior  evaluation of the MPMOI (2012), and subsequent Renewal Review (2014).
Treasury  Board submissions, Performance Measurement and Risk Strategies and other  planning documents.
Departmental  Performance Reports (DPRs)/Departmental Results Reports (DRRs) and Departmental  Reports on Plans and Priorities (RPPs)/Departmental Plans.
Speeches  from the Throne, Mandate Letters, and annual Budget Plans.
Materials  relating to Bill C-69, including the text of the proposed Act, and a review of  stakeholder feedback submitted in response to requests for public comment  regarding the Act and the Discussion Paper that preceded it.
Financial  information (collected primarily from DRRs and Departmental Plans), and  materials associated with the DM MPMO (e.g., Terms of Reference, agendas,  Records of Decision, presentation slide decks, etc.).
Materials  associated with specific projects in the MPMOI portfolio, such as CCARs,  Reviews of Related Upstream GHG Estimates, and OICs.
Internal  communications and other materials.
Relatively little administrative data was available to support the  evaluation. Financial data was obtained primarily from annual DPRs/DRRs, while  information regarding Indigenous participation in consultations associated with  Interim Strategy projects was obtained from CCARs or furnished by the NEB or  MPMO.
Key informant interviews
Key informant  interviews were used to solicit informed opinions and observations on the  evaluation questions from various stakeholders involved in or familiar with the  MPMOI and Interim Strategy.
A total of 52  interviews were conducted with 68 key informants. Both individual and group  interviews were conducted. Interviews were conducted between July and October  2018.
Table 11 : Distribution of interviews by key informant category
Key Informant Category
Key Informant Sub-Category
# of completed interviews
# of key informants
Internal
DMs and other senior government officials
10
11
Internal
Participating departments and agencies (those    funded and those not receiving funding for MPMOI)
16
27
Total internal
26
38
External
MPMOI proponents (industry)
10
11
External
Industry associations
2
2
External
Indigenous communities and organizations
7
9
External
Non-governmental    organizations
3
3
External
Provincial/territorial representatives and    representatives of provincially-based federal agencies (i.e., offshore    petroleum boards)
4
5
Total external
26
30
Overall total
52
68
Footnotes
Footnote 1
The NEB and CEAA also deliver PFPs, but these are outside the scope of this evaluation.
Return to footnote
1
referrer
Footnote 2
Of  note is that ECCC did not receive funding to prepare estimates of upstream GHG emissions under the Interim Strategy. The Interim Strategy is described later  in this report.
Return to footnote
2
referrer
Footnote 3
According  to the IAA, a designated project means “one or more physical activities that (a) are carried out in Canada or on federal lands; and (b) are designated by  regulations made under paragraph 109(b) or designated in an order made by the  Minister under subsection 9(1). It includes any physical activity that is incidental  to those physical activities, but it does not include a physical activity  designated by regulations made under paragraph 112 (1) (a.2).
Return to footnote
3
referrer
Footnote 4
GBA+ is an analytical tool intended  to assist decision-makers in evaluating  how policies, programs and initiatives affect diverse groups of women, men and  gender-diverse people (where the “plus” reflects acknowledgement that GBA transcends  biological and socio-cultural differences) (Government  of Canada, 2018c, p. 4)
Return to footnote
4
referrer
Footnote 5
On  October 5, 2017, TransCanada Corporation announced that “after careful review  of changed circumstances”, it would be terminating its Energy East Pipeline and Eastern Mainline project applications (TransCanada  Corporation, 2017).
Return to footnote
5
referrer
Footnote 6
A detailed analysis was beyond the scope of this evaluation.
Return to footnote
6
referrer
Footnote 7
Nearly all of the projects  included in the study subsequently received federal approval, excepting the  Energy East Pipeline, which was later withdrawn by the proponent—although it  should be recognized that Northern Gateway’s approval was later overturned. In  both cases, the calculations presented in the study had been undertaken before  these events took place. In addition, Drance et al. (2018) estimated timelines for three projects for which final  decisions had not yet been issued when they conducted their analysis, including  TMX, the Energy East Pipeline and the Pacific Northwest Liquefied Natural Gas  project (p. 24).
Return to footnote
7
referrer
Footnote 8
Program  representatives noted this is likely attributable at least in part to the  imposition of legislated timelines under CEAA 2012, as well as to the  additional steps associated with RA-led comprehensive studies.
Return to footnote
8
referrer
Footnote 9
This may be either an internal or external factor (or both), depending on context. It is an internal factor in the sense that partners in the MPMOI are responsible for generating the requests, but an external factor in that proponents may not provide enough information or information of sufficient quality to support the review.
Return to footnote
9
referrer
Footnote 10
The evaluation did not examine, as an aspect of quality, the extent to which Indigenous traditional knowledge has been incorporated into review decisions. However, the evaluation did examine the extent to which concerns raised by Indigenous peoples were accommodated in review decisions. This is discussed under “More consistent, coordinated and meaningful Indigenous and public consultations”, below.
Return to footnote
10
referrer
Footnote 11
ECCC representatives  indicated the government is currently working to revise the methodology  (including how the methodology will be applied in the context of strategic  assessments of climate change during project impact assessments) to address  concerns raised by industry.
Return to footnote
11
referrer
Footnote 12
Program representatives noted that participation rates do not necessarily indicate the adequacy of Indigenous consultation processes. It is unclear what proportion would constitute an appropriate benchmark against which to assess progress.
Return to footnote
12
referrer
Footnote 13
These  four projects were: TMX, 2017 NGTL System Expansion, Enbridge Line 3  Replacement, and NGTL Towerbirch Expansion.
Return to footnote
13
referrer
Footnote 14
In the explanatory note accompanying the OIC,  the GIC mentions that landowner groups support the project, as did online  questionnaire respondents (n = 1,911), who highlighted the replacement  pipeline’s potential to improve safety and generate economic benefits,  including employment.
Return to footnote
14
referrer
Footnote 15
The  evaluation identified nine projects in the MPMOI portfolio for which EA  Decision Statements were released or revised over the evaluation period, and  which contained sufficient detail to determine what was done to accommodate  Indigenous concerns.
Return to footnote
15
referrer
Footnote 16
It is important to  recognize that these are currently whole-of-government issues that extend well  beyond the MPMOI (Justice  Canada, 2018).
Return to footnote
16
referrer
Footnote 17
Bryn Gray is a legal  expert in the area of Aboriginal law who previously served as a policy and  legal advisor to the Minister of Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development  Canada (now Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada/Indigenous  Services Canada) (McCarthy Tétrault LLP,  2019). In May 2015, the Minister requested that Mr. Gray identify avenues to  improve Canada’s approach to discharging its duty to consult; in completing the  study, Mr. Gray met with or received submissions from representatives of 70  Indigenous groups/organizations, 19 resource development companies and industry  associations, and 15 federal and provincial departments/agencies (Gray, 2016).
Return to footnote
17
referrer
Footnote 18
In  the case of TMX, the court also found that the NEB decision to exclude the  effects of marine shipping from the scope of the review was flawed.
Return to footnote
18
referrer
Footnote 19
Assessment of the  strength of an Indigenous community’s claim and of the severity of the  potential adverse impacts of an activity on their rights is important because  it determines the magnitude of the Crown’s duty to consult with and accommodate  that community; in particular, the duty to consult with and/or accommodate an  Indigenous community increases proportionally with their strength of claim and  the expected magnitude of the impact (Aboriginal Affairs and  Northern Development Canada, 2012, pp. 39–44). In
Gitxaala  Nation v. Canada
, the Court argued that given its importance in  establishing the nature and content of the duty to consult, Canada should have  disclosed information about its assessment of affected Indigenous peoples’  strength of claim to rights and title and the Project’s impacts on them, but  did not do so (Gitxaala Nation et al.,  2016, p. 95). By contrast, in
Tsleil-Waututh  Nation v. Canada
the Court observed Canada did share this information,  pointing to this as evidence of the government’s efforts to learn from and  remedy past mistakes (Tsleil-Waututh Nation et  al., 2018, pp. 186–187).
Return to footnote
19
referrer
Footnote 20
Douglas R. Eyford is an expert in the area of legal issues pertaining to transportation infrastructure and resource development projects (Eyford Macaulay Shaw & Padmanabhan LLP, 2019). In March 2013, Eyford was appointed as Canada’s special federal representative charged with engaging Indigenous and other stakeholders: to enhance understanding of issues and opportunities relating to development of west coast energy infrastructure (including factors affecting Indigenous interests); to share information with Indigenous communities about federal pipeline and marine safety initiatives; and, to identify factors affecting, and opportunities to expand Indigenous participation in west coast energy development. The recommendations outlined in Eyford’s report draw from consultations with over 80 representatives of Indigenous communities and organizations, industry, and provincial and local governments in British Columbia and Alberta (Eyford, 2013, pp. 6, 46).
Return to footnote
20
referrer
Footnote 21
MPMO  representatives, however, noted that other  federal departments may be required to support consultation when Indigenous  groups are interested in areas that pertain to their respective mandates.
Return to footnote
21
referrer
Footnote 22
Further to this point, it is worth noting that the NRCan Performance Information  Profile for the MPMOI includes an indicator that tracks the number of “clock  stop” periods where the statutory timeline for completing the assessments  pauses until the proponent adequately responds to a request for information.  Additional data regarding these “clock stop” periods may provide valuable  insight into the reasons for, and implications of delays linked to issuance of  requests for information during project reviews.
Return to footnote
22
referrer
Appendix 5 Reference List
Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada. (2012). Aboriginal  consultation and accommodation: Updated guidelines for federal officials to  fulfill the duty to consult. Ottawa: Minister of Department of Aboriginal  Affairs and Northern Development Canada.
Ariss,  R., Fraser, C. M., & Somani, D. N. (2017). Crown  Policies on the Duty to Consult and Accommodate: Towards Reconciliation? McGill  Journal of Sustainable Development Law, 13(1), 55.
Bigstone Cree Nation, Nova Gas  Transmission Ltd., Attorney General of Canada, & NEB. Bigstone Cree Nation  v. Nova Gas Transmission Ltd. , 2018 FCA 89 (Federal Court of Appeal May 8,  2018).
Bishop, G., & Sprague, G.  (2019). A Crisis of Our Own Making: Prospects for Major Natural Resource  Projects in Canada (Commentary No. 534).
C. D. Howe Institute website
(PDF, 2.17 MB).
CEAA. (2015a, March 31). Designating  a Project under the
Canadian  Environmental Assessment Act, 2012
[Guidance - legislative], January 3,  2019,
Canadian  Environmental Assessment Agency website
.
CEAA. (2015b, June 17).
Decision  Statement Issued Under Section 54 of the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act,  2012
(
LNG Canada Export Terminal Project
).
CEAA. (2015c, July 29).
Decision  Statement Issued Under Section 54 of the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act,  2012
(
Whabouchi Mining Project
).
CEAA. (2016a).
Murray  River Coal Project environmental assessment report
(PDF, 2.80 MB).
CEAA. (2016b, April 26).
Decision  Statement Issued Under Section 54 of the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act,  2012
(
Black Point Quarry Project
).
CEAA. (2017a, June 23).
Environmental Assessment Decision Statement  Sisson Project (Tungsten and Molydbenum Mine),
New Brunswick.
CEAA. (2017b, December 13).
Decision  Statement Issued Under Section 54 of the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act,  2012
(Murray River Coal Project)
.
CEAA. (2018a, January 31).
Decision  Statement Issued Under Section 54 of the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act,  2012
(
Scotian Basin Exploration Drilling Project
).
CEAA. (2018b, March 7).
Decision  Statement Issued Under Section 54 of the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act,  2012
(
Woodfibre LNG Project
).
CEAA. (2018c, April 18).
Decision  Statement Issued Under Section 54 of the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act,  2012
(
Jackpine Mine Expansion Project
).
CEAA. (2018d, July 18). Basics  of Environmental Assessment [Frequently asked questions], July 18, 2018,
Canadian  Environmental Assessment Agency website
.
CEAA. (2018e, July 30).  Infographic: Key amendments to Bill C-69 for companies, July 4, 2019,
Canadian  Environmental Assessment Agency website
.
CEAA. (2019, February 25).
Decision  Statement Issued Under Section 54 of the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act,  2012
(
Côté  Gold Mine Project
) (PDF 786 KB).
Drance, J., Cameron, G., &  Hutton, R. (2018). Federal Energy Project Reviews: Timelines in Practice. Energy  Regulation Quarterly,
6
(3), 23.
ECCC. (2016a, September).
NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd. –  2017 NGTL System Expansion Project: Review of Related Upstream Greenhouse Gas  Emissions Estimates
. (PDF 1  MB)
ECCC. (2016b, November).
Enbridge Pipelines Inc. – Line 3  Oil Pipeline Replacement Program: Review of Related Upstream Greenhouse Gas  Emissions Estimates
(PDF 1.2 MB).
ECCC. (2016c, November).
Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC
− Trans Mountain Expansion  Project: Review of Related Upstream Greenhouse Gas Emissions Estimates
(PDF 1 MB).
ECCC. (2017, March).
NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd. –  Towerbirch Expansion Project: Review of Related Upstream Greenhouse Gas  Emissions Estimates
(PDF 785  KB).
Eyford, D. R. (2013).
Forging  partnerships, building relationships: Aboriginal Canadians and energy  development - Report to the Prime Minister
.
Eyford Macaulay Shaw &  Padmanabhan LLP. (2019, March 11). EM Lawyers – Douglas R. Eyford, Q.C., March  11, 2019,
Eyford  Macaulay Shaw & Padmanabhan website
.
Federal Court of Appeal. (2018,  August 30).
Trans Mountain Decision  (Executive Summary)
(PDF 280  KB).
Gitxaala Nation, Gitga’at First  Nation, Haisla Nation, THE COUNCIL OF THE HAIDA NATION, PETER LANTIN, KITASOO  XAI’XAIS BAND COUNCIL, … CANADIAN ASSOCIATION OF PETROLEUM PRODUCERS.
Gitxaala  Nation v. Canada (Federal Court of Appeal)
. , 4 FCR 418, 2016 FCA 187  (Federal Court of Appeal June 23, 2016).
Government of Canada. (2007).
Cabinet Directive on Improving  the Performance of the Regulatory System for Major Resource Projects
(PDF 117 KB).
Government of Canada. (2012).
Canadian Environmental  Assessment Act, 2012 (S.C. 2012, c. 19, s. 52) (CONSOLIDATION)
(PDF 63.6 KB).
Government of Canada. (2015,  December 4).
Speech from the Throne to Open the First Session Forty Second Parliament of  Canada
.
Government of Canada. (2016a).
Order  — Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity GC-126
to NOVA Gas  Transmission Ltd. In respect of the construction and operation of the 2017 NGTL  System Expansion Project (P.C. 2016-962 October 28, 2016).
Canada Gazette,  Part I
,
150
(50).
Government of Canada. (2016b).
Order  — Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity OC-63
to Enbridge  Pipelines Inc. In respect of the proposed construction and operation of the  Line 3 Replacement Project (P.C. 2016-1048 November 25, 2016).
Canada  Gazette, Part I
,
150
(50).
Government of Canada. (2016c).  To Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC for the Trans Mountain Expansion Project: (I)
Order —  Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity OC-001-064
; (ii) Amending  Order in Council AO-002-OC-49; and (iii) Amending Order in Council AO-003-OC-2  (P.C. 2016-1069 November 29, 2016).
Canada Gazette, Part I
,
150
(50).
Government of Canada. (2016d,  October 28), July 18, 2018,
Orders  in Council Online Database website
.
Government of Canada. (2017a).
Order  — Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity GC-127
to NOVA Gas  Transmission Ltd. In respect of the construction and operation of the NGTL  Towerbirch Expansion Project (P.C. 2017-231 March 10, 2017).
Canada Gazette,  Part I
,
151
(11).
Government of Canada. (2017b,  June).
Environmental and Regulatory  Reviews: Discussion Paper
(PDF 970 KB).
Government of Canada. (2018a,  June 20).
Bill C-69: An Act to enact the  Impact Assessment Act and the Canadian Energy Regulator Act
(PDF 3.37 MB), to amend the Navigation Protection Act and to make consequential amendments to other  Acts (As Passed by the House of Commons - June 20, 2018).
Government of Canada. (2018b,  August 14).
The Proposed Impact Assessment  System: A Technical Guide
(PDF 121 KB).
Government of Canada. (2018c,  September 5).
Better rules for major project reviews  to protect Canada’s environment and grow the economy: A handbook
(PDF 147 KB).
Gray, B. (2016).
Building  Relationships and Advancing Reconciliation through Meaningful Consultation
[Report to the Minister of Indigenous and Northern Affairs].
Justice Canada. (2018).
Principles Respecting the  Government of Canada’s Relationship with Indigenous Peoples
. (PDF 14.3 MB)
McCarthy, S., & Lewis, J.  (2016, June 30).
Court  overturns Ottawa’s approval of Northern Gateway pipeline.
The Globe and Mail
.
McCarthy Tétrault LLP. (2019,  March 11), Bryn Gray. March 11 2019,
McCarthy Tétrault Website  website
.
MPMO. (2008, May 8).
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING For  the Cabinet Directive on Improving the Performance of the Regulatory System for  Major Resource Projects
(PDF 165 KB).
MPMO. (2014, February 12).
The Federal Review Process for  Major Projects: Project Agreement Companion Document
(PDF 158 KB).
MPMO. (2016a, October 14).
NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd. –  2017 NGTL System Expansion Project: Crown Consultation and Accommodation Report
(PDF 1.37 MB).
MPMO. (2016b, October 31).
Enbridge Pipelines Inc. – Line 3  Oil Pipeline Replacement Program: Crown Consultation and Accommodation Report
(PDF 1 MB).
MPMO. (2016c, November).
Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC –  Trans Mountain Expansion Project: Joint Federal/Provincial Consultation and  Accommodation Report
(PDF 1.5 MB).
MPMO. (2017, May 25). Project  Agreements. June 19, 2018,
Major  Projects Management Office website
.
MPMO, & BC EAO. (2017,  February 9).
NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd. –  Towerbirch Expansion Project: Federal/Provincial Consultation and Accommodation  Report
(PDF  1.63 MB).
NRCan. (2012a).
Evaluation of the  Major Projects Management Office Initiative (MPMOI)
.
NRCan. (2012b, June 29).  Responsible Resource Development. July 2, 2019,
Natural  Resources Canada website
.
NRCan. (2016a, January 27).  Government of Canada Moves to Restore Trust in Environmental Assessment  [Statements]. July 3, 2018,
Government  of Canada website
.
NRCan. (2016b, October 12).
Natural Resources Canada:  2015–16 Departmental Performance Report
(PDF 2.35 MB).
NRCan. (2016c, November 21).  Major Projects Management Office Initiative: FY 2015-16. January 8, 2019,
Natural  Resources Canada website
.
NRCan. (2016d, November 29).  Government of Canada announces pipeline plan that will protect the environment  and grow the economy [News releases]. January 16, 2019,
Government  of Canada website
.
NRCan. (2017a, August).
Natural resources: Major  Projects Planned and Under Construction — 2017 to 2027
(PDF 2.8 MB). Presented at the Energy  and Mines Ministers’ Conference, St. Andrews by-the-Sea, New Brunswick.
NRCan. (2017b, October 25).
Natural Resources Canada:  2016-17 Departmental Results Report
(PDF 1.36 MB).
NRCan. (2017c, November 9).  Major Projects Management Office Initiative: FY 2016-17. January 8, 2019,
Natural  Resources Canada website
.
NRCan. (2018a, August).
Natural Resources: Major  Projects Planned or Under Construction — 2018 to 2028
(PDF 2.9 MB). Presented at the Energy  and Mines Ministers’ Conference, Iqaluit, Nunavut.
NRCan. (2018b, October 12).  Major Projects Management Office Initiative: FY 2017-18. January 8, 2019,
Natural  Resources Canada website
.
NRCan. (2018c, November 20).
Departmental Results Reports - 2017
–18
(PDF 2 MB).
Orenstein, M. (2018).
What  now? The fate of projects: A review of outcomes from the federal EA approvals  process
(p. 4) [Policy Brief].
Canada  West Foundation website
.
PRA Inc. (2014).
Renewal  Review of the Major Projects Management Office Initiative (MPMOI): Analysis of  Economy, Efficiency and  Performance
[Final Report].
Prime Minister of Canada.  (2015a, November 12).
Minister  of Environment and Climate Change Mandate Letter
.
Prime Minister of Canada.  (2015b, November 12).
Minister  of Fisheries, Oceans and the Canadian Coast Guard Mandate Letter
.
Prime Minister of Canada.  (2015c, November 12).
Minister  of Indigenous and Northern Affairs Mandate Letter
.
Prime Minister of Canada.  (2015d, November 12).
Minister  of Natural Resources Mandate Letter
.
Prime Minister of Canada.  (2015e, November 12).
Minister  of Transport Mandate Letter
.
Prime Minister of Canada.  (2016a, August 19).
Minister  of Fisheries, Oceans and the Canadian Coast Guard Mandate Letter
.
Prime Minister of Canada.  (2016b, November 30). Prime Minister Justin Trudeau’s Pipeline Announcement.  October 1, 2018,
Prime  Minister of Canada website
.
Prime Minister of Canada.  (2017, October 4).
Minister  of Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Mandate Letter
.
Prime Minister of Canada.  (2018a, August 27).
Minister  of Fisheries, Oceans and the Canadian Coast Guard Mandate Letter
.
Prime Minister of Canada.  (2018b, August 27).
Minister  of Natural Resources Mandate Letter
.
Proctor, J. (2016, June 30).  Northern Gateway pipeline approval overturned. October 1, 2018,
CBC  News website
.
TransCanada Corporation. (2017,  October 5). March 8, 2019,
TransCanada  Announces Termination of Energy East Pipeline and Eastern Mainline Projects
.
Tsleil-Waututh Nation, CITY OF  VANCOUVER, CITY OF BURNABY, THE SQUAMISH NATION, XÀLEK/SEKYÚ SIÝAM, CHIEF IAN  CAMPBELL, … Attorney General of British Columbia.
Tsleil-Waututh Nation v.  Canada (Attorney General)
. , 2018 FCA 153 (Federal Court of Appeal August  30, 2018).
Report a problem on this page
Please select all that apply:
A link, button or video is not working
It has a spelling mistake
Information is missing
Information is outdated or wrong
I can't find what I'm looking for
Other issue not in this list
Submit
Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries,
contact us
.
Date modified:
2021-03-03