Evaluation of the Geoscience to Keep Canada Safe Program
Audit and Evaluation Branch
Natural Resources Canada
Presented to the Performance Measurement, Evaluation and Experimentation Committee (PMEEC),
June 3, 2022
Table of Contents
List of Acronyms
Executive Summary
About the Evaluation
Evaluation Findings
Recommendations and Management Response
Introduction
Program Profile
Evaluation
What We Found
Relevance
Question 1: Is the program role appropriate and necessary within the context of changes in the program operating environment?
Effectiveness – Progress on outcomes
Question 2: To what extent has the program contributed to achieving intended outcomes?
Immediate Outcomes
Intermediate Outcomes
Long-term / Ultimate Outcomes
Program Design and Delivery
Question 3: Does the program model support the achievement of program objectives?
Equity, Diversity and Inclusion (EDI)
Question 4: To what extent does the Program consider EDI factors?
Best Practices and Lessons Learned
Question 5: Are there any best practices and lessons learned related to the design and delivery of the program?
Conclusions
Appendix A: Evaluation Matrix
Appendix B: Description of Sendai Priorities
List of Acronyms
ADM, LMS
Assistant    Deputy Minister, Lands and Minerals Sector
AEB
Audit    and Evaluation Branch
BC
British    Columbia
CCGP
Climate Change Geoscience Program
CHIS
Canadian    Hazards Information Service
CSSP
Canadian Safety and Security Program
DRR
Disaster    Risk Reduction
EDI
Equity,    Diversity and Inclusion
EEW
Earthquake Early Warning System
EM
Emergency    Management
EMA
Emergency    Management Act 2007
EMS
Emergency    Management Strategy for Canada
FTE
Full-Time Equivalent
GBA+
Gender-based Analysis Plus
GC
Government    of Canada
GEMF
Global Earthquake Model Foundation
GKCS
Geoscience    to Keep Canada Safe
GSC
Geological    Survey of Canada
HAOB
Hazards    and Operations Branch (of LMS)
ICAO
International Civil Aviation Organization
IOC
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission
LMS
Lands    and Minerals Sector
NBCC
National    Building Code of Canada
NRCan
Natural    Resources Canada
PS
Public Safety    Canada
PSG
Public    Safety Geoscience
SF
Sendai    Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
USGS
United States Geological Survey
Executive Summary
About the Evaluation
This  report presents the findings, conclusions, and recommendations of an evaluation  of the Geoscience to Keep Canada Safe Program (GKCS) at Natural Resources  Canada, which includes Lands and Minerals Sector (LMS) activities related to  geo-hazards delivered by the Geological Survey of Canada (GSC) and the Hazards,  Adaptation and Operations Branch (HAOB). The immediate goal of the Program is  to increase available scientific knowledge and provide alerts on geo-hazards  and space weather. Decision-makers in governments and  critical infrastructure then use this information to inform decisions related  to public safety and emergency management so that Canada is resilient to  disasters in the long-term.
The  evaluation covered the six-year period from 2014-15 to 2019-20 and actual expenditures  of approximately $93 million. The evaluation scope included science, research, and  monitoring activities carried out by the GSC’s Public Safety Geoscience Program  (PSG) and HAOB’s Canadian Hazards Information Service (CHIS) in relation to  geo-hazards, specifically those that are abrupt, yet infrequent incidents such  as earthquakes, volcanoes, landslides, tsunamis, and geomagnetic storms. To  meet a specific Treasury Board commitment, the evaluation scope also included  CHIS’ National Earthquake Monitoring Initiative (NEMI) funded between 2014-15  and 2018-19. Data was collected through review of literature and program  documents; interviews with 22 internal and external stakeholders, including  four external experts; an online survey of stakeholders as targeted by the  Program; and three case studies, 1) space weather, 2) Thompson Valley Landslide  and 3) NEMI.
The  evaluation examined long-standing activities that were evaluated in 2010 and 2014,  and for which there was ample evidence of consistent progress on immediate outcomes  over time. The 2014 evaluation was unable to make conclusive findings on  intermediate outcomes. Since there was no indication that the Program’s ability  to achieve progress on immediate outcomes had changed, this evaluation focused on  identifying more conclusive findings regarding intermediate and long-term outcomes.
The  Program operating context changed significantly since the 2014 evaluation.  Canada signed the Sendai Framework for  Disaster Risk Reduction (SF) in 2015, and then developed the Emergency Management Strategy for Canada (EMS)  in 2017. These instruments re-focused efforts in disaster risk reduction and  emergency management towards risk assessment and disaster prevention instead of  loss reduction. In doing so, they introduced a whole of society approach
1
to  disaster prevention and risk assessment. The evaluation assessed the extent to  which the Program role, as government’s subject matter expert for geo-hazards,  remained relevant in this new operating context.
Evaluation Findings
Relevance in a changing  operating environment
The  Program remained highly relevant to government objectives around public safety  and emergency management. All sources agreed that the subject matter expertise  found within the Program was a valuable asset for Canada in disaster risk  reduction and emergency management. However, the evaluation identified a need  for knowledge translation and dissemination of science information to an  expanded group of stakeholders and users. Meeting this need is important to the  whole of society approach to disaster risk reduction adopted in the SF and EMS.
While  all sources indicated that the Program had a critical role in accommodating  this need by virtue of the expertise it housed, evidence was mixed as to the  precise nature of the role the Program should play. This contributed to  confusion among external stakeholders over the role of the Program in relation  to federal involvement as led by Public Safety Canada. Some interviewees envisioned  an increased public facing role in engagement and collaboration with  non-technical users. Others saw NRCan as having an expanded leadership role and  viewed NRCan as well-positioned to accommodate the role given its successful  collaborations with external stakeholders to date. However, these  perspectives interpreted the Program role in a way that that goes beyond what  the Program was designed to support. In this light, NRCan acts as subject  matter expert supplying information to government partners who are then  responsible for the diffusion of understanding. In addition, it raised the challenge of  capacity within the Program to meet an increased demand for its expertise yet  maintain its unique role in research to understand geo-hazards. The evidence  suggests that there is a need  to review the Program  role  and  contribution to the enabling  environment for knowledge translation for disaster risk reduction and public  safety in light of the changing expectations generated by the EMS and SF.
Progress on Outcomes
Similar to the findings from the 2014 evaluation, the evaluation  found that the Program again made significant progress on immediate outcomes.  An increased body of authoritative scientific knowledge and information was  directly attributable to the Program. Models and tools to assess risk were  available, but were considered somewhat inaccessible to a layperson user.  Alerts and notifications consistently met standards for timeliness.
Progress was also evident at the intermediate level of outcomes.  Nine in 10 survey respondents agreed that decisions about disaster risk  reduction and emergency planning were made using scientific evidence and knowledge.  Survey respondents also held the view that NRCan information played a  significant role in their own increased understanding of geo-hazards, as well  as that of those responsible for taking decisions. Furthermore, many  stakeholders and partners said there would be an impact on their organization  if NRCan geo-hazards information was unavailable or not produced.
Success was closely connected to collaborative relationships  and capacity. Where these existed, uptake of information and use of tools and  models in risk assessment was clearly evident. For example, CHIS worked with  the Nuclear Waste Management Organization (NWMO) to evaluate potential sites  for a deep geological repository under a long-standing agreement. The PSG  participated in a strong collaboration funded by the Canadian Safety and  Security Program (CSSP) to develop a rapid risk assessment for seismic hazard  that induced local plans for mitigation. Through interviews and the survey,  stakeholders reported that they felt better equipped to respond to hazard  events.
The evaluation also found evidence that moderate progress  was being made on the longer-term and ultimate level outcomes. Survey findings  showed that respondents expressed a growing level of confidence that they were  better prepared for hazard events, and attributed their confidence to NRCan. While  there was significant collaboration and the Program benefited from joint  efforts in identifying information and filling information gaps, plans to  reduce gaps often lacked further development and resources to be implemented.  While some of this activity fell outside of the direct mandate of NRCan,  stakeholders expressed the view that NRCan (and the Program) was implicated due  to the need for multidisciplinary tables to deal with the gaps in knowledge  transfer and the critical fact that expertise in Canada largely resided within  NRCan. On the whole, interviewees and survey respondents expressed cautious  optimism that Canada was more resilient. However, experts and some other  interviewees noted that measuring resilience was challenging. They noted that while  Canada has experienced disasters, the country had yet to be tested by a catastrophic  incident with the extensive damage to critical systems and trauma a catastrophe  entails.
2
Design and Delivery
The  Program was well-designed to support outcomes related to research and  monitoring at the immediate outcomes level. Evidence from all sources clearly demonstrated  that projects were delivered on time and on budget, and that activities  reflected stakeholder needs. However, the Program was less well-designed to  support the whole of society approach to disaster risk reduction.
NRCan  lacked the mechanisms to collaborate across hazards internally. Both internal  and external interviewees noted that information was not easily shared among  other NRCan programming with similar goals in public safety and resilience.  Several Program personnel provided examples of this, including no uptake on  suggestions to co-locate equipment and an unclear process to access data and imagery  held in other sectors. Others noted that NRCan groups came together effectively  to coordinate NRCan’s involvement in the action plan to implement the federal  role in the EMS and suggested that a more permanent table for sharing  information in disaster risk reduction and emergency management be established  within NRCan.
External  stakeholders were confused by the hazard-specific groups originating within  NRCan. From their perspective, these groups drew on their limited capacity to  conduct risk assessments and expressed concern that multiple engagements would  exceed their ability to participate. Government partners in disaster risk  reduction and emergency management noted the risk of having hazard-specific  approaches to risk assessment that conflicted with the multi-hazard approach  adopted. They suggested that NRCan needed a coordinated approach to avoid  confusion and ensure common approaches to reduce burden at the local level  where little capacity to conduct hazard identification already existed.
Equity, Diversity and Inclusion  (EDI)
The  Program made strides in integrating EDI considerations into its activities. The  evaluation found several examples of the Program’s accommodation of related  factors, including: integrating Indigenous knowledge to accurately date  historic tsunami events; engaging Inuit translators for community presentations;  and participation in Science Day in Tuktoyuktuk. However all sources recognized  that more needed to be done to ensure that people with diverse socio-demographic  characteristics such as race, gender, cultural identity, location or ethnicity,  did not experience negative consequences or barriers due to Program activities.  Suggestions were mostly related to consideration of Indigenous populations,  including engaging with communities to share research findings and knowledge  affecting local communities, and enhancing opportunities for employment in  geo-hazards research among Indigenous people.
Best Practices and Lessons  Learned
The  evaluation identified several practices within the Program that facilitated  effective operations. For example, PSG’s mid-year and year-end reports for  research projects assisted in tracking project performance and identifying  challenges in time for effective mitigation. CHIS adopted a practice of  dashboard reporting within the NEMI that contained pertinent information on  progress in a readily accessible format. Canada’s membership in the Global  Earthquake Model Foundation involved multiple partners. This approach to  membership stretched the resources of multiple stakeholders and established  grounds for closer collaboration within the country.
The  evaluation identified several lessons learned. Firstly, collaboration and  relationship-building take time and requires dedicated capacity. Taking this  into account during the planning phase of activities improved uptake of  information. Additionally, poorly defined roles in overlapping areas of NRCan  limits intra-departmental interaction and creates confusion among stakeholders.  This reduces opportunities for collaboration, creates confusion regarding  reporting responsibilities where objectives overlap, and can lead to an  inefficient allocation of NRCan resources.
Recommendations and Management Response
The  evaluation found that the GKCS program was well managed and achieved its  immediate outcomes, and was able to fulfill very well its primary role as the  supplier of scientific and technical information on geohazards to the  Government of Canada. However, the implementation of the Sendai Framework and  the Emergency Management Strategy for Canada has impacted the context of the  program and has implications for achieving its intermediate outcomes. The  following recommendations thus reflect the evaluation’s conclusion that the  Program should examine its role in view of the changes in the operating  environment.
Recommendations
Management Response
1. Recognizing that Public Safety Canada leads the    whole-of-society approach for emergency management and disaster risk    reduction, the ADM, LMS should continue to work with federal partners to    clarify the roles and responsibilities of the GKCS Program in relation to    federal involvement in disaster risk reduction, particularly in respect of    knowledge translation in a whole of society approach to DRR and EM. The goal    would be to clarify roles and expectations in relation to DRR so that the    Program can align capacity and manage demands for the DRR expertise housed    within the Program.
Management
agrees
.
ADM-LMS commits, via DG-HAOB and DG-GSC, to raise    the issue of LMS’s role and expectations in relation to disaster risk    reduction with PS.
The GKCS Program will continue to deliver    scientific, operational and policy advice to PS through ongoing bi-lateral DG    (LMS and PS) discussions. Further, LMS commits to participating in a number    of interdepartmental DG tables to assist PS to advance whole-of-government    disaster risk reduction where there is overlap with LMS’ mandate.
This includes the participation of the DG    LMS/HAOB at the DG Emergency Management Committee, the DG National Risk    Profile Committee, the DG Interdepartmental Table on Earthquake Risk, and, as    required, through direct participation in the federal/provincial Senior    Officials Responsible for Emergency Management (SOREM) table. DG HAOB will    meet regularly with DG GSC and together will ensure that their accountable    directors (GSC/Pacific and HAOB/CHIS) raise relevant components of the GKCS    Program at these tables.
In particular, LMS’ will ensure its science and    policy advice is included in a) the biennial Cabinet Report and b) the    biennial Public Report on the National Risk Profile.
LMS will continue to support PS and the    newly-created Minister of Emergency Preparedness at the Privy Council’s    Office as they develop priorities.
Position responsible
:  DG, HAOB and DG, GSC
Timing
:  Public Report on NRP, March 31, 2023; Cabinet Report, June 2021 (complete).   Additional updates and briefings through PS-led DG level committees.
2. The ADM, LMS should initiate a forward-looking    discussion on disaster risk reduction and risk assessment activities across    NRCan sectors in order to improve internal coordination of overlapping    activities. At minimum, the ADM-LMS should support the GKCS Program to    explore the linkages between climate change and hazards research in an effort    to a) review LMS’s efforts in knowledge translation to decision-makers under    the Emergency Management Strategy funding (Budget 2019) and b) for GSC’s    Public Safety Geoscience program, in particular, to advance research linkages    between climate change and hazards research for hazards expected to be    altered by a changing climate.
Management
agrees.
ADM-LMS will continue to assess potential for    future work within LMS between disaster risk reduction and climate change    adaptation, particularly in light of the National Adaptation Strategy in    expected in late 2022.
a) To clarify LMS approaches in knowledge    translation, ADM-LMS will bring LMS’s work on disaster risk reduction, hazard    and risk assessment activities to the ADM Policy Committee. This will include    presentation of LMS’ efforts to design results for practitioners, which makes    the program’s knowledge and science advice on disaster risk reduction    accessible to decision-makers.
b) LMS does not have the lead role in NRCan for    disaster risk reduction. However, within GKCS, in particular the GSC’s Public    Safety Geoscience Program, further research work centred on the potential for    a changed climate to accelerate geohazard events such as landslides    (including those that contribute to flooding), slope stability (marine and    terrestrial) and coastal hazards will be examined and inform program delivery    further the program’s intermediate outcomes.
Position responsible
:  a) DG HAOB and DG GSC; b)    Director GSC Pacific
Timing
:  a) Presentation on LMS disaster risk    reduction to ADM Policy Committee by January 31, 2023.  b) PSG mid-cycle program adjustments by May    1, 2023.
Introduction
This  report presents the findings, conclusions, and recommendations from the  evaluation of the Geoscience to Keep Canada Safe Program (GKCS). The Audit and  Evaluation Branch (AEB) of Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) conducted the  evaluation between August 2020 and June 2021 in accordance with the Treasury  Board Policy on Results (2016). The evaluation examined activities of the program  between 2014-15 and 2019-20. These activities were last evaluated in 2014-15
3
.
Program Profile
Program Description
Geo-hazards  research and monitoring are long-standing activities of NRCan and carried out  to support public safety and security. Through GKCS, monitoring, research and  planning related to natural geo-hazards (earthquakes, landslides, tsunamis,  volcanoes, and space weather) and human-induced hazards (i.e., radiological and  nuclear incidents) are carried out. By providing information to assist  decision-makers to better understand and act on hazard risks, the Program helps  federal and other levels of government (including international governmental  organizations), the private sector, and professional organizations to prevent,  mitigate, prepare for, respond to and recover from natural disasters (see  figure 1).
Figure  1 : Program Theory Geoscience to Keep Canada  Safe (GKCS)
Text Version
Infographic showing the  program theory of Geoscience to Keep Canada Safe (GKCS), consisting of three  boxes and two arrows.
The first box explains  that “through the GKCS, NRCan’s Land and Minerals Sector carries out  monitoring, research, and planning related to hazards.” An arrow from the first  box points towards the second box.
The second box explains  that “PSG and CHIS establish a strong knowledge base, and develop tools to  support decision-making and the development of mitigation strategies and action  plans.” An arrow from the second box points towards the third box.
The third box explains  “this helps governments, the private sector, and professional organizations to  prevent, mitigate, prepare for, respond to, and recover from natural disasters.”
The GKCS program activities are delivered by the Hazards and Operations Branch (HAOB) and the Geological Survey of Canada (GSC) of the Lands and Minerals Sector (LMS) at NRCan. Under the HAOB, the Canadian Hazards Information Service (CHIS) is responsible for the monitoring and alerting systems related to seismicity and space weather. The Public Safety Geoscience Program (PSG) of the GSC carries out the research and fundamental science into geo-hazards as well as risk assessment. These two groups provide information about hazards so that Canadians have information to enhance safety in the event of a natural disaster, model the impacts of hazards, and develop tools to support decision-making and the development of mitigation strategies and action plans. Within the Program, PSG and CHIS have separate functions.
The  PSG is primarily a research component, examining geo-hazards and their impacts  and conducting risk assessments. The PSG adds to the knowledge base needed  about geo-hazards to support evidence-based decision-making, and targets  critical gaps in understanding geo-hazard occurrences and their impacts. The  PSG program develops tools intended to support emergency management,  development, planning, and regulatory decisions to help increase resilience and  decrease risk to keep Canadians safe from earthquakes, terrestrial and  submarine landslides, volcanoes, tsunamis, and space weather.
The  CHIS is primarily an operational entity providing alerts and notifications in  order to provide advance warning of hazard occurrences and supporting  stakeholder actions for preparedness and response. It also maintains the  observational and monitoring equipment and systems that supply data, and  conducts research activities in support of operational enhancement. CHIS  operations with respect to space weather and seismicity fall within the scope  of the evaluation.
Program Operating Context
While GKCS Program activities themselves have remained  largely unchanged over time, the scope and priorities have shifted in line with  changing approaches to emergency planning and disaster risk reduction. The GKCS  Program operates within the larger context of emergency management (EM) and  disaster risk reduction (DRR). Approaches in this field have evolved rapidly  since 2005, primarily driven by increased frequency and losses from hazard  events. Even though floods and wildfires are more frequent and account for most  of the losses, sustained public attention on hazards has impacted the level of  urgency in preparing for all hazards, including those that are less frequent,  but carry a greater possibility of high losses. For example, estimated losses  from a potential earthquake in Vancouver rose from $12 billion in 1995 to almost  $75 billion in 2013.
4
In a 2016 report, the Conference Board of  Canada estimated losses of $127.5 billion resulting from a catastrophic  earthquake on Canada’s west coast with economic impact cascading throughout the  country and across industries over a three-year period.
5
As  a result of the sustained attention on emergency management and disaster risk  reduction, public policy and programming is rapidly evolving. Internationally,  the United Nations Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction (SF) was signed  in 2015. The SF introduced the whole of society approach to disaster risk  reduction with a focus on preventing disaster. In signing SF, Canada agreed to  implement the Sendai guidance. Moreover, Canada has worked to align its own  emergency management and disaster risk reduction strategies to the priorities  identified in the SF. The four SF priorities are described further in
Appendix B
.
In  Canada, the field of emergency management and disaster risk reduction is  complex. Responsibilities are shared among many  stakeholders, with immediate response primarily being a responsibility of local  jurisdictions. In addition, Canada’s geography is vast. Risk levels vary across  the country by region and type of hazard. Capacity also differs among the  provincial, territorial, and municipal jurisdictions. As a result, a “one size  fits all” approach is ineffective for the Government of Canada (GC) in carrying  out its role. Partnership  is therefore a key principle underlying the federal-provincial-territorial  agreement Emergency Management Framework  for Canada (2017) which established the principles for  federal-provincial-territorial cooperation.
The  Federal efforts in these areas are led by Public Safety and Emergency Canada  (PS) as per the Emergency Management Act  2007 (EMA). The EMA defines the role of the GC and names specific  responsibilities for government departments. Under the EMA, as the lead federal  ministry, PS led a series of consultations and engagements in 2017 that  culminated in an Emergency Management  Strategy for Canada: Toward a Resilient 2030 (EMS). In the EMS, Canada articulated  a whole of society, all-hazards disaster risk reduction approach for Canada  through five priority activities that reflect the SF. In Budget 2019, Canada  announced resources to implement the federal portion of the EMS. The GKCS  Program received funding to implement an early warning system (within CHIS) and  carry out work to contribute to the National Geo-hazards Risk Assessment  Profile (within PSG).
Program Resources
Actual  expenditures over the 6-year evaluation period were estimated at $93 million as  shown in Table 1. The main source of funding was on-going (A-base) and provided  through the Main Estimates. Spending fluctuated during the evaluation period  due to activities supported through temporary project-based funding. These  resources were provided by other government departments and non-GC partners, or  through temporary funds (C-based) provided through Treasury Board.
Table 1: Program  expenditures by component during evaluation period (2014 to 2020)
Component
2014-15 ($)
2015-16 ($)
2016-17 ($)
2017-18 ($)
2018-19 ($)
2019-20 ($)
Total ($)
PSG
7,221,451
8,058,940
7,709,163
8,137,554
8,389,363
8,420,000
47,936,471
CHIS
4,850,516
5,785,781
13,605,131
7,161,531
7,025,222
7,115,369
45,543,550
Total
12,071,967
13,844,721
21,314,294
15,299,085
15,414,585
15,535,369
93,480,021
Approximately 118 Full-Time Equivalents  (FTEs) supported the Program. PSG activities were carried out by  approximately 58 FTEs based in GSC facilities across the country (Dartmouth,  Quebec City, Calgary, Sidney, and Vancouver). CHIS activities were carried out  by approximately 60 FTEs based in Ottawa, Yellowknife, and Sidney, British Columbia  (BC).
Evaluation
Objectives and Methods
Based  on the considerations used to plan the Evaluation of GKCS, the following four  evaluation objectives were identified:
Assess  program contribution to i) achieving intermediate and longer-term outcomes and  ii) meeting stakeholder needs;
Assist  the Program with establishing its baseline performance data to enable future  performance measurement;
Identify  and document best practices and lessons learned to inform implementation of the  2019-24 Program activities; and
Identify  potential Equity, Diversity and Inclusion (EDI) considerations and impacts  using Gender-Based Analysis Plus (GBA+).
To  meet these objectives, the evaluation examined issues of relevance,  performance, EDI, and best practices and lessons learned according to the  following five questions. The evaluation matrix in
Appendix A
presents the questions and their  related indicators.
Is the  program role appropriate and necessary within the context of changes in the  program operating environment? (Relevance)
To  what extent has the program progressed on achieving its intended outcomes?  (Performance)
Does  the program model support the achievement of program objectives? (Performance)
To what  extent does the program consider factors around EDI factors? (GBA+ analysis)
Are  there any best practices and lessons learned related to the design and delivery  of the program? (Best practices and lessons learned)
Data  was collected according to five lines of evidence as shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Five Lines of Evidence
Text Version
Infographic showing the  five lines of evidence, consisting of five columns.
The first column  describes the document review – approximately 100 documents related to program  operations and activities from program files, as provided by the Program.
The second column  describes the literature review – approximately 50 documents including academic  journals and industry sources.
The third column  describes the survey of stakeholders – survey sent to 200 program stakeholders  (39 % response rate).
The fourth column  describes the key informant interviews – 22 interviews, including 4 interviews  with experts selected for their level of experience and overarching view of EM  and DRR on consultation with the Program.
The fifth column  describes the 3 case studies – 1) Ripley Landslides activity, 2) Space Weather,  and 3) National Earth Monitoring Initiative.
The  evaluation focused on the activities of geo-hazards research and monitoring of abrupt  but infrequent natural hazards such as earthquakes, tsunamis, landslides,  volcanoes and geomagnetic storms (space weather). Hazards resulting from  climate change, wildfires and floods, or nuclear incidents are outside the  focus of the evaluation. The GKCS Program Logic Model in Figure 3 reflects the  activities and expected results that fall within the scope of this evaluation.
Figure 3: GKCS Logic Model  (based on evaluation scope)
Text Version
Infographic showing the  GKCS Logic Model based on evaluation scope, consisting of activities, outputs  and outcomes.
For activities, PSG activities  include: Risk Assessment Case Studies; Tools Development; and Research  (Earthquakes, Space Weather, Terrestrial & Marine Landslides). CHIS  activities include: 24/7 monitoring and alerting for natural hazard in Canada;  and providing near-real-time information products to support emergency  management decision making. Arrows from “activities” point to “outputs”,  indicating that activities lead to outputs.
For outputs, PSG outputs  include: Data and datasets; Tools, Maps; and Scientific reports and  publications. CHIS outputs include: Real-time 24/7 natural hazard monitoring  and alerts; and Information products to support EM decision making. Arrows from  “outputs” point to “outcomes”, indicating that outputs lead to outcomes.
For outcomes, PSG and  CHIS outputs contribute to three immediate outcomes:
2.1: Authoritative geoscience foundation for  geohazards and related risk assessments is available to stakeholders in  emergency management and disaster risk reduction planning (PSG primarily).
2.2: Decision-making support tools, models, and  approaches are available to stakeholders in emergency planning and disaster  risk reduction (CHIS and PSG).
2.3: Information to support decision-making  during a hazard event is provided to Canadians and other stakeholders in  real-time (CHIS primarily).
An arrow from “immediate  outcomes” points to “intermediate outcomes”, indicating that the immediate  outcomes lead to two intermediate outcomes:
2.4: Responses and mitigation strategies to  hazard events integrate scientific knowledge and alert information.
2.5: Emergency and disaster management  stakeholders are equipped to plan for, and respond to, hazard events.
An arrow from  “intermediate outcomes” points to “long-term or ultimate outcomes”, indicating  that the intermediate outcomes lead to two long-term or ultimate outcomes:
2.6: Canada’s preparedness, response, and  recovery from natural disasters is enhanced (long-term).
2.7: Canada is more resilient to natural hazards  (ultimate).
Immediate  outcomes are largely within the control of the Program. Through the activities  carried out by the PSG and CHIS, the outputs produced directly support the  achievement of the immediate results. This relationship has been  well-established in previous evaluations. The program  performed well on achieving its immediate outcomes in previous evaluations, and  other departmental reporting indicated that condition remains the same. Since  this evaluation found similar results based on evidence that is well-documented  elsewhere, the report presents a condensed version of evidence supporting the  findings on immediate outcomes.
Intermediate  outcomes fall somewhat outside the Program’s direct control, but within its  sphere of influence, most obviously through direct involvement with  stakeholders. In the case of GKCS, the intermediate outcomes reflect the level  of uptake and use of GKCS information and alerts. The first intermediate  outcome is that responses and mitigation strategies will be based on the  scientific evidence. This will be assessed through evidence of examples where  decisions were made based on the science, trends in stakeholder views regarding  their understanding of hazards and their impacts (increasing / improving over  time) and stakeholder views and documented evidence that stakeholders rely on  CHIS alerts and notifications in their decision-making. A second intermediate  outcome expects that emergency and disaster management stakeholders are  equipped to plan for and respond to hazard events. Essentially, this means that  the tools and information produced by the program to support decision-making  meet stakeholders’ needs, enable effective decision-making, are adaptable to  local conditions, and that mechanisms to share information and collaborate are  effective and were assessed according to those criteria.
Long-term  outcomes fall further along the Program’s sphere of influence, and are achieved  through the intersection of a wide variety of factors. In the case of GKCS, the  long-term outcome considered was the extent to which Canada’s preparedness,  response and recovery from natural resources is enhanced. This reflects the  work undertaken at various jurisdictions in disaster risk reduction, and  measures the Program’s contribution to progress. The ultimate outcome is that Canada  is resilient to natural hazards. Again, the Program was assessed based on  identifiable progress where the Program reasonably contributed. For both of  these impact levels, the Program’s contribution was hard to precisely define,  and was gleaned from stakeholder views for the most part.
A note on terminology
The  logic model outcomes reflect the terminology used in the fields of disaster  risk reduction and emergency management. For the purpose of clarity, Table 2  provides definitions for the technical terms used in this report.
Table 2: Definitions used in this document
Terms
Definitions
All-hazard / Multi-Hazards Risk Approach
An approach that recognizes that the actions required to mitigate    the effects of emergencies are essentially the same, irrespective of the    nature of the event, thereby permitting an optimization of scarce planning,    response and support resources. The intention of all-hazards generic    emergency planning is to employ generic methodologies, modified as necessary    by particular circumstances. All-hazards incorporates natural and man-made    hazards threats including traditional emergency management events such as    flooding and industrial accidents; as well as national security events such    as acts of terrorism; and cyber events.
Catastrophe
A catastrophic incident is one of such extreme and remarkable    severity or magnitude that a nation’s collective capability to manage all    response requirements would be overwhelmed, thereby posing potential threats    to national security, national economic security, and/or the public health    and safety of the Nation. (
Source
: Federal Emergency Management    Agency)
Critical infrastructure
Refers to processes, systems, facilities, technologies,    networks, assets and services essential to the health, safety, security or    economic well-being of Canadians and the effective functioning of government.    Critical infrastructure can be stand-alone or interconnected and    interdependent within and across provinces, territories and national borders.
Disaster
A serious disruption of the functioning of a community or a society    causing widespread human, material, economic or environmental losses which exceed    the ability of the affected community or society to cope using its own    resources. A disaster is a function of the risk process. It results from the    combination of hazards, conditions of vulnerability and insufficient capacity    or measures to reduce the potential negative consequences of risk.
Disaster Risk Reduction
Systematic efforts to analyze and reduce the causal factors of    disasters. Reducing exposure to hazards, lessening vulnerability of people    and property, wise management of land and the environment, and improving    preparedness and early warning for adverse events are examples of DRR.
Emergency management
The prevention and mitigation of, preparedness for, response to    and recovery from emergencies.
Hazard
A potentially damaging physical event, phenomenon or human    activity that may cause the loss of life or injury, property damage, social    and economic disruption or environmental degradation.
Mitigation
Sustained actions taken to eliminate or reduce risks and impacts    posed by hazards well before an emergency or disaster occurs; mitigation    activities may be included as part of prevention. Measures may be structural    (e.g. flood dikes) or non-structural (e.g. land use zoning and building    codes).
Prevention
Actions taken to avoid the occurrence of negative consequences    associated with a given threat; prevention activities may be included as part    of mitigation.
Preparedness
A phase of emergency management consisting in making decisions    and taking measures before an emergency, in order to be ready to effectively    respond and recover.
Response
A phase of emergency management implemented immediately before,    during or after an emergency, and consisting in activities aimed at limiting    or preventing damage to life, property or the environment.
Resilience
The capacity of a system, community or society potentially    exposed to hazards to adapt, by resisting or changing in order to reach and    maintain an acceptable level of functioning and structure.
Vulnerability
The conditions determined by physical, social, economic and    environmental factors or processes, which increase the susceptibility of a    community to the impact of hazards. It is a measure of how well prepared and    equipped a community is to minimize the impact of or cope with hazards.
Whole of Society approach
The whole of society approach is one that seeks to leverage the    existing knowledge, experience and capabilities within emergency management    partners in order to strengthen the resilience of all.
Source
: Compiled from the Federal Policy on    Emergency Management and the UNESDOC Glossary of Basic Terminology on    Disaster Risk Reduction, except as otherwise noted.
Evaluation limitations
The  evaluation team acknowledged the unique circumstances caused by the COVID-19  pandemic. While outside the immediate scope of the evaluation, the team  documented instances of Program adaptation to COVID-19 to support NRCan efforts  to learn from its experience operating during a pandemic.
The  evaluation used a mixed-methods approach to mitigate limitations associated  with individual methods. The triangulation of evidence across multiple methods  of data collection is an evaluation technique that helps to reduce the impact  of (unconscious) bias in order to identify reliable findings and draw valid  conclusions. However, the following limitations should be considered when  reviewing the evaluation findings.
This evaluation was conducted completely during  a time of active public emergency protocols due to the COVID-19 pandemic. As  such, public safety was at an unusually high level of visibility. It is  possible that the high level of alert impacted the perspective of key  informants and survey respondents. To mitigate, the evaluation team triangulated  interview and survey evidence with sources documenting stakeholder discussions  around the topic of DRR and EM (e.g. conference proceedings, witnesses to House  of Commons Standing Committees) prior to the emergency protocols being  emplaced.
Floods and wildfires fall outside the scope of  GKCS program activities. As such, the evaluation findings are not intended to  cover those types of hazards. However, the evaluation team recognized that  floods and wildfires are prominent natural hazards and come first to mind for  many people, including stakeholders in the Program. There was a risk that  survey respondents and interviewees would provide information more pertinent to  floods and wildfires than the hazards within scope. To mitigate that risk,  informants were reminded specifically to exclude consideration of floods and  wildfires in forming their comments in order to remain within the scope of the  evaluation during interviews. The survey questions were also worded to remind  respondents of the scope.
The online survey was emailed to approximately  200 program staff and stakeholders identified through the Program contact  lists, with a response rate of 39%, split approximately evenly between Federal  Government (36%), Academics (37%), and Other external groups (22%, included  industry and provincial, territorial and municipal governments). While the  response rate was high for an online survey, the results reflect only the  perspective of those who have had direct interaction with the Program and  should not be construed to reflect the Canadian population at large. Moreover,  the small numbers of responses to some of the questions did not allow for  meaningful comparison across groups.
What We Found
Relevance
Question 1: Is the program role appropriate and necessary  within the context of changes in the program operating environment?
Indicators:
Extent to which the activities of the Program  align and respond to i) the needs of the intended beneficiaries and  stakeholders; and ii) the guidance provided in the Sendai Framework and  Canada’s EM Strategy.
Extent to which the role played by NRCan is  complementary to other federal organizations and viewed as appropriate by  stakeholders.
Evidence that the role of NRCan is clear and  well understood within NRCan, and among external stakeholders.
Summary  of key findings
: The Program  role continued to be necessary, and all stakeholders  considered the Program’s scientific expertise a valuable asset for Canada.  Stakeholders’ existing needs were largely met, and the Program activities aligned to  guidance found in the SF and EMS. The  whole-of-society approach to disaster risk reduction and hazard risk assessment  adopted through the SF and EMS generated new needs for information. The new  approach increased demand for expertise at points further along on the science  value chain than targeted by the Program. In response to these changes, the Program  role in knowledge translation was evolving. While all sources viewed the  Program role in accommodating the changes as highly important by virtue of the  unique body of expertise housed within the Program, evidence was mixed as to  exactly what that role should be.
Recommendation 1:
Recognizing  that Public Safety Canada leads the whole-of-society approach for emergency  management and disaster risk reduction, the ADM, LMS should continue to work  with federal partners to clarify the roles and responsibilities of the GKCS  Program in relation to federal involvement in disaster risk reduction,  particularly in respect of knowledge translation in a whole of society approach  to DRR and EM. The goal would be to clarify roles and expectations in relation  to DRR so that the Program can align capacity and manage demands for the DRR  expertise housed within the Program.
Program role is necessary and consistent with the Emergency Management Act (EMA)
"Certain NRCan products are strictly      essential: seismic information, space weather – geomagnetic storms, we      cannot do without these data."
-      External Interviewee
All lines of evidence pointed to the continued need for GKCS  programming. The document review and the interviews showed that the Program served  as the subject matter expert on earthquakes, volcanoes, landslides, tsunamis,  and space weather, and had a unique role in monitoring and providing alerts and  data on seismicity and space weather consistent with the EMA. Interviewees consistently acknowledged that without the GKCS  role in conducting research and providing information, there would be a  piecemeal approach to emergency management and disaster risk reduction across  the country. The impact would be reduced opportunities for standardization and  consistency in approaches that facilitated the sharing and application of  knowledge. In addition, NRCan provided a larger-scale context, particularly  across jurisdictional boundaries necessary to fully understand local  geo-hazards and assess related risks. Survey respondents largely indicated that  if NRCan stopped producing geo-hazard information products, their organizations  would be significantly impacted. Notably, 63% of respondents indicated that  their ability to assess risk would be impacted “to a great extent” if the NRCan  information on geohazards was unavailable.
NRCan  plays a support role as the subject matter expert to government on geohazards,  and fulfills specific commitments under the EMA and other international agreements. Under the EMA, PS is the lead federal department with respect to emergency  management and disaster risk reduction, and responsible for coordinating policy  response and communications with respect to hazards. Additionally, the Strategic  Emergency Management Plan outlines specific responsibilities for NRCan, namely  the provision of scientific, technical, and/or policy leadership for geological  hazards, space weather, and seismic alerts. In practice, stakeholders such as  PS and provincial governments turned to NRCan as the subject matter expert for  geo-hazards, and NRCan supported these stakeholders by providing the requisite  scientific information and alerts to ensure that they were adequately informed  about hazards and hazard risk.
The  Program’s monitoring capacity enabled Canada to meet international commitments.  For example, as outlined on CHIS’ official website, “CHIS discharges NRCan  responsibilities for ongoing monitoring under the Comprehensive Nuclear Test  Ban Treaty (CTBT).” The 13 stations that Canada shared with the International  Monitoring System of the CTBT were included in the 2014-19 NEMI upgrade  project. Canada also contributed CHIS seismic data to the National Tsunami Warning  Centre in Alaska as a member of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission  of UNESCO. Space weather information provided by Canada through GKCS contributed  to the International Aviation’s Organization (IAO) ability to act on its  protocols.
The Program activities aligned with the guidance provided in the Sendai  Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction and Canada’s Emergency Management  Strategy
During  the evaluation period, the external Program operating environment changed with  the signing of the SF in 2015. This  document focused on the importance of reducing the impact of disasters through  the proactive mitigation and prevention of disasters themselves, as opposed to  simply responding post-event. There were four priorities under the SF:
Understanding disaster risk;
Strengthening disaster risk governance;
Investing in disaster risk reduction for  resilience; and
Enhancing disaster preparedness for effective  response and to “Build Back Better” in recovery, rehabilitation, and  reconstruction.
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction (SF) 2015-2030
"The United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction    (UNISDR) coordinates international efforts in disaster risk reduction, and    guides, monitors and reports on the progress of the implementation of the    Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR).
Canada is a signatory to the global framework, which Public Safety    Canada is leading as federal department responsible for the domestic    implementation of the Sendai Framework."
Emergency Management Strategy for Canada (EM)
"The EM Strategy helps fulfill the Government of Canada’s commitment    under the Sendai Framework for a pan-Canadian DRR Strategy and aligns with    the Sendai Framework’s 2030 timeline."
Source:
Emergency Management Strategy    for Canada
In  2017, the Government of Canada, provinces and territories adopted the EMS. The EMS identified five priority  areas of activity, and which was based on the four priorities of the SF. It outlined Canada’s  whole-of-society approach to disaster risk reduction and emergency management.  Document review and interview evidence revealed that the Program’s activities  supported the priorities of the SF and EMS. The Program helped stakeholders  understand disaster risk by providing scientific information and alerts through  PSG and CHIS. The Program has invested resources in disaster risk reduction for  resilience by contributing to the development of the National Building Code of  Canada (NBCC) and investing in an early earthquake warning system. The Program contributed  to disaster preparedness for effective response and to “Build Back Better” in  recovery, rehabilitation, and reconstruction by considering GBA+ factors in the  vulnerability datasets and models it produces. Table 3 provides examples of  Program alignment to the Sendai Priorities and corresponding EMS priority areas.
Table 3: Program Activities  align to Sendai Priorities and Corresponding EMS Priority Areas
Sendai Priorities
Corresponding EMS Priority Areas
Program Activities
Understanding    disaster risk
Improve    understanding of disaster risk in all areas of society
All projects of the Public Safety Geoscience    Program and Canadian Hazards Information Service
Strengthening    disaster risk governance
Enhance    whole-of-society collaboration and governance to strengthen resilience
PSG negotiated Canada’s Global Earthquake Model    Foundation (GEMF) membership with partners. A steering committee was struck,    and workshops on GEMF’s OpenQuake software were conducted.
Risk Project staff contributed to organizing a key    panel discussion at Fifth Regional Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction in    the Americas in Montréal.
Program was reporting performance information    reflecting the Sendai Priorities, and was involved in the development of    appropriate indicators for Canada’s reporting.
Investing in    disaster risk reduction for resilience
Enhance    disaster response capacity and coordination and foster the development of new    capabilities.
Contributions to the National Building Code of    Canada.
Investment in early earthquake warning system.
Enhancing    disaster preparedness for effective response and to “Build Back Better” in    recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction
Increase    focus on whole-of-society disaster prevention and mitigation activities.
Strengthen    recovery efforts by building back better to minimize the impacts of future    disasters.
Investment in early earthquake warning system.
Consideration in GBA+ factors of vulnerability.
The Program largely met stakeholders’ needs, but new needs are emerging  that impact Program role
Overall,  stakeholders perceived the GKCS Program as largely meeting their needs. All  lines of evidence indicated that research and information products aligned to  topics relevant to stakeholders in emergency management and disaster risk  reduction. Needs perceived to be unmet were more likely to relate to perceived  deficiencies in information and existing products. Addressing many of the unmet  needs such as availability of local level geo-hazard data however, were outside  the sole responsibility of the Program, and would require coordination and  collaboration among various jurisdictional entities to address. In interviews  and the survey, stakeholders suggested that removing silos across hazards would  help to resolve these challenges.
The  EMS, which outlined Canada’s approach to disaster risk reduction and emergency  management, expressed the shift in the Sendai Framework as follows:
Traditionally, EM has been primarily concerned with preparedness and  response activities, but the current risk environment requires a shift in focus  toward proactive prevention/mitigation efforts and forward-looking recovery  measures. Greater investment in mitigation can help prevent disasters or  significantly reduce the social, economic, cultural heritage and environmental  costs when events do occur. Forward looking recovery measures allow communities  not only to recover from disasters, but also to build back better in order to  reduce vulnerability to eventual hazards.
This evolution in EM is consistent with the international concept of  Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR), which is defined by the United Nations (UN) as “systematic  efforts to analyze and reduce the causal factors of disasters. Reducing  exposure to hazards, lessening vulnerability of people and property, wise  management of land and the environment, and improving preparedness and early  warning for adverse events are examples of DRR”. It is important to consider that the impacts of disasters are not  uniform across society, and that different variables can intersect and contribute  to the level of risk facing vulnerable populations (e.g., gender, age,  disability, socioeconomic conditions).
6
“[M]ore      accurate and timely information will be required to support and inform      disaster risk reduction and emergency preparedness in alignment with the      Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction. This will likely require the      development of new and enhancing existing information to support      decision-making. “
-      Survey respondent familiar with Sendai Framework
The SF focuses on reducing the impact of disasters through mitigation  / prevention of the disaster itself instead of loss reduction from an event.  The manner of implementation is through sophisticated risk assessments, whole-of-society  involvement, and a multi-hazard approach
7
. Among the  survey respondents who said they were familiar with the Sendai Framework for  Disaster Risk Reduction (n=20), five said they foresaw their needs for  geohazards information changing over the next 10 years as a direct result  of the SF. When asked to describe the changes they foresaw, these respondents  mentioned the following: geohazards information that was accessible to  non-experts; more multi-hazard datasets; and new informational products or  enhanced existing products to support decision-making in reducing risk.
According  to the document and literature review, the approach to disaster risk reduction  found in the SF fully acknowledged  that disasters were a product, not only of the hazard event itself, but also  the manner in which the natural environment intersected with the social,  cultural and political environment. This risk-based approach involved a high  level of multidisciplinary and multi-jurisdictional collaboration in order to  be successful
8
. Due to the change in approach, there was an expectation that disaster risk  management systems would rely on science more heavily.
9
Gap in knowledge transfer identified
As  noted earlier, the EMS signalled a  significant shift in focus towards geo-hazards risk assessment and  whole-of-society exercise. Inherent in the approach was a need for information  more readily consumed by a lay user. Thus, the pool of relevant stakeholders  had increased beyond the scientific and technical users targeted by the  Program. Most of those interviewed identified a gap in between the  accessibility of the available information to support understanding by  non-technical users who integrated the scientific information for effective  mitigation and response planning. Meeting those needs created new demands for  subject matter expertise in knowledge translation. This raises implications for  the Program as the primary subject matter expert for geo-hazards within the  Government of Canada. However, evidence was mixed as to what role the Program  should play in meeting the new demand.
All  of the interviewees valued the expertise provided through the Program, and 86%  of survey respondents cited expert knowledge as a key source of their  information on geo-hazards. Experts particularly saw the expertise as a  significant asset for Canada. However, concerns were raised about the capacity  of the Program to meet the increased need.
Whole-of-society approach to disaster risk reduction and emergency  management drives expanded role for Program on the science value chain and  unmet needs in knowledge translation
NRCan  scientists were often called on to provide guidance to local stakeholders on an  ad-hoc basis to support the uptake and use of the Program’s scientific  information products and tools. This strained the capacity of the Program. On  the one hand, the engagement was necessary in a whole-of-society approach. On  the other, the Program’s ad-hoc engagement activities had the potential to  detract from NRCan scientists’ capacity to conduct fundamental research and  scientific activities on geohazards, which no other group was doing. External  interviewees indicated that they understood the capacity issues affecting the  Program, but that the Program nevertheless should play a larger role in  bridging the information gap between NRCan and local communities, and with  non-technical users. Internal interviewees noted that the Program lacked the  capacity to undertake the long-term relationship building required for  consistent engagement at the local level where adverse events largely occurred.  While engagement activities were underway within specific projects, they were  supported by resources from other established programs.
Interviews  revealed that experts as a group identified the importance of expanding the  Program’s role as an integral part of the natural hazards science value chain.  They expressed that in addition to its current work in assessing hazard  (identify, understand, assess, and exposure), the Program could also increase  its efforts in contributing to vulnerability and risk assessments.
Climate change has implications for the geohazards risk assessments and  needs integration to support a strong science foundation
All  lines of evidence pointed to the need to integrate climate change information  when identifying hazards and assessing risk levels. Melting permafrost, coastal  erosion, and precipitation had potential impact on hazard locations,  particularly in relation to landslides and tsunamis. In addition, static risk  assessments might not have accounted for changes in the natural environment.  For the Program, this meant that identifying potential hazard locations and  assessing risk should be an ongoing exercise to provide a solid science  foundation to support public safety and resilience.
The  need for better integration between disaster risk reduction and climate change  research was discussed at the Disaster Risk Reduction Roundtable
10
in 2017. During its strategic review exercise, PSG identified closer synergies  with the Climate Change Geoscience program (CCGP) as an opportunity, given  their shared mandate under the shared goal of ‘Keeping Canada Safe’. In  planning the 2019-24 cycle, PSG added a review of changing climate conditions  on landslides as a key science question to address in the next iteration of  their Landslides and Marine Geo-hazards project. Interviewees and survey  respondents also noted that climate change impacts required better integration  into the science foundation for geo-hazard identification and risk assessment.
Effectiveness – Progress on outcomes
Question 2: To what extent has the program  contributed to achieving intended outcomes?
Indicators:
Evidence that outputs are produced and  disseminated as planned
Evidence of Program contribution to achieving  intended outcomes
Program outputs were produced as planned
Over  the course of the evaluation period, research conducted through the GKCS  Program added to the scientific knowledge available to stakeholders. To support  the achievement of results, the program produced a wide variety of outputs that  were tracked by project and documented for reporting purposes. These knowledge  products were readily available through the scientific literature in peer-reviewed  journals, or on open source electronic spaces like GEOSCAN. A review of the  program documents shows that outputs were generally delivered as planned. Figure  4 presents a conservative estimate of the number of program information outputs  produced between 2014 and 2020. The evaluation also sought information on how  stakeholders used and became aware of the program outputs through a survey of  stakeholders.
Figure 4: GKCS Program Outputs
Text Version
Infographic illustrating  GKCS program outputs, consisting of science products, dissemination, and engagement  activities.
Science products include  250+ peer-reviewed articles, 40+ open files, and 11+ maps.
Dissemination includes  140+ presentations and 600+ media interviews/articles.
Engagement activities  include 11+ engagement activities.
Stakeholder use and awareness of outputs
Through  the survey, respondents were asked to select the type(s) of information they  used from a list of categories. The types of information most used by  respondents were scientific geohazards information (67%), decision-making support  tools and product (39%), space weather forecasts (29%), and Seismic alerts  (27%).
The  evaluation was also interested in how stakeholders became aware of the outputs  used. Based on the survey conducted, among the stakeholders who used NRCan’s  information products (n=65), most (85%) became aware of these products via professional  contacts. Other main sources of awareness were the NRCan website (52%),  published academic and technical journals (52%), and academic conference or  symposium (48%).
Immediate Outcomes
Summary  of key findings
: Overall,  all sources of evidence confirmed that significant progress was made on  immediate outcomes. NRCan science was considered authoritative and provided a  good foundation for understanding geo-hazards and developing risk assessments.  There was progress in the availability of decision-making support tools, models  and approaches, which was particularly evident in areas where there had been  long-standing collaboration and where there had been an influx of external  resources. NRCan was providing alerts within prescribed time parameters, and  survey respondents overwhelmingly considered seismic alerts and space weather  forecasts to be “timely to very timely.”
Immediate Outcome: Authoritative science foundation on geo-hazards is  available to a large extent
Producing  an authoritative body of scientific knowledge is an immediate first step in  achieving subsequent outcomes of the Program. The scientific research program  of GKCS was designed to fill gaps in understanding earthquakes, landslides and  marine geo-hazards, volcanoes, tsunamis, and space weather. The goal was to  identify and characterize geo-hazards and related risks to provide a sound  basis for risk assessment and decision-making to support uptake of the  information in later stage outcomes. Products included a variety of maps that identify  geo-hazards, like the Canada’s first volcanic ash map published in 2015 (Figure  5).
Figure 5: Volcanic Ash Map
Source: Geological Survey of Canada,
A preliminary  volcanic ash fall susceptibility map of Canada
,
Geoscan, Open File 7679, 2015
.
Text Version
Diagram illustrating a preliminary volcanic ash fall susceptibility map of Canada. The map shows that annual probability of volcanic ash fall of 1 in 5000 or more tends to occur in the west coast of Canada.
Among  those who reported using scientific geo-hazards information in the survey  (67%), the most used sources of Program geoscience information were expert  knowledge (86%), followed by scientific reports open files (78%), research  datasets (76%), maps (74%) and journal articles (66%). Stakeholder feedback on  Program information was generally positive. Survey results showed that overall,  97% of respondent who used NRCan information products said they were satisfied  with the information, including 72% who said they were "very satisfied".
When  survey respondents were asked how information provided by NRCan could be  improved, 40% pointed to improving information sharing and access (i.e.,  sharing data in a timely manner or making data available for analysis or use),  34% suggested expanding or improving the information products offered, and 26%  mentioned improving the website/interface. Notably, 14% of respondents simply  stated they were satisfied with the information provided through NRCan and/or  that NRCan does a good job in providing information. Interviewees made similar  suggestions. Some interviewees pointed out that gaps remained in understanding  geo-hazards in Canada (e.g., northern Canada, volcanoes), it was relatively  early in the risk assessment work, and there was a need for improved access to  updated data and online datasets. In addition, they noted that the need for  more scalable data so that they could better assess geo-hazards at the local  level.
All lines of evidence indicated that stakeholders considered Program information authoritative. Two-thirds of survey respondents indicated that information products were “authoritative” or “very authoritative.” Respondents particularly noted the authoritativeness of the expert knowledge and the scientific journal articles published with GKCS research findings. Interview findings were similar. Some external stakeholders noted during interviews that part of the value of collaborating with NRCan was direct access to the expertise of the scientists. Most of the external interviewees, including all of the experts, mentioned that the expertise housed under the Program was a vital asset for Canada in emergency management and disaster risk reduction.
Documentary  and interview evidence indicated that external stakeholders sought out GKCS  Program scientists for help in developing and/or validating their own  approaches to disaster risk reduction. For example, a member of the Risk  Assessment project team was asked to review the new social vulnerability  component of the Global Earthquake Model. Space weather scientists from the  Program were involved in developing a manual to guide implementation of new  protocols for the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). Manitoba  Hydro and CHIS are involved in long-standing collaboration with respect to  impacts of geomagnetic storms on hydro transmission lines.
In  northern Canada, there is lack of geoscience data in general, and Indigenous  and Northern Affairs Canada (INAC) provided funding to help increase available  data and understanding of marine geohazards. Interview and documentary evidence  suggested that a low density of seismic monitoring stations in northern Canada  limited available data about seismic activity for that region. Moreover,  melting permafrost and coastal erosion were giving rise to concerns about  landslides and tsunamis, where previously the risk was considered much lower.  Some interviewees pointed out that understanding of marine geo-hazards and  volcanoes was low, although project work for the 2019-24 iteration of the PSG  was specifically designed to address some of those areas. For example, the work  plan would focus on identifying volcano hazards in southwest BC as a precursor  to a risk assessment of population and infrastructure.
In  its planning, the Program also acknowledged the need to address climate change  implications on risk, and made plans to research the interactions between  climate change and geo-hazard risk. The Program planned on reviewing the  impacts of changing climate conditions such as heavy precipitation and drought  on landslides, and conducting research to develop guidelines on factors that  increase susceptibility to landslides.
Immediate Outcome: Decision-making support tools, models, and approaches  are available to stakeholders in emergency management and disaster risk  reduction to a large extent
"Monitoring unstable slopes is a cost-effective hazard management      practice to ensure resilient transportation infrastructure, for example,      the national railway network. By monitoring seasonal variations in ground      resistivity (to electrical currents), we define moisture paths and develop      thresholds for the prediction of slope failure in the Thompson River      transportation corridor."
Source: [PSG Landslides project report]
Building on work from the previous iteration of the Program  (2009-2014), a variety of decision-making support tools, models, and approaches  became available to stakeholders in emergency management and disaster risk  reduction over the period evaluated (2014-2020). Examples included the  following:
A building-level assessment of earthquake risk  and risk reduction potential completed by the Program for the City of Vancouver  supported initial stages of a seismic retrofit program. BC planned to use outputs  of this work to inform provincial seismic retrofit policy.
In 2016-17, the activity Prompt Evaluation of  Seismic Risk (ER2 tool) was completed as part of the Earthquakes project.  It was funded by the Canadian Safety and Security Program (CSSP). Rapid Risk  Evaluator (ER2) is a web-based application that puts risk assessment tools  directly in the hands of non-technical end users.
A Risk-based Land-use Guide was published by the  Program. Public Safety Canada requested that the Program adapt it for use in  all of Canada.
A Total Electron Count (TEC) map service was  launched in 2016-17. TEC maps help users to correct for Global Positioning System position error due  to electromagnetism. NRCan produces maps containing near real-time information  at 15 minute intervals and daily maps at 2 hour intervals.
Consistent  with the Program plan, tools, models and approaches were disseminated to  targeted stakeholders. While the dissemination effectively reached targeted  stakeholders, expert opinion from the interviews coalesced around the need to  expand targeted stakeholder groups in order to advance the uptake of the  available decision-making support information and adopt a whole of society  approach.
The  Program had started to integrate the whole of society approach to its  dissemination activities as suggested by the SF. Through collaborative networks  in British Columbia, project scientists engaged with local jurisdictions (e.g.,  Understanding Risk British Columbia). In the landslides and marine geohazards  project work, the Program engaged west coast Indigenous communities in relation  to tsunamis. Presentations were made in Tuktoyaktuk and local communities on  Baffin Island as part of the same project. Through the risk assessment project,  the Program was heavily involved in organizing an online forum through  Understanding Risk British Columbia in 2020.
The  Program has also adopted other practices that aligned to the SF and whole of  society approach to disaster risk reduction in developing its risk reduction  tools and models to support decision-making.
In 2015, the GSC commissioned a review of risk  assessment tools being supported by NRCan to assess their ability to provide  quantitative risk assessment information. The assessment was a first step in  ensuring alignment with the SF and the National-Scale Geo-hazard Risk project.  One of the key criteria in assessing the tools for risk assessment was the  ability to integrate a wide range of data to identify vulnerabilities.
In 2017, Canada became a member of the Global  Earthquake Model Foundation (GEMF). Involvement in GEMF enabled the expertise  of Canada to be shared with the world. Through GEMF, Canada gained direct  access to the information produced from around the world as earthquakes happen.  This enabled Canada to integrate information on best practices in earthquake  risk assessment and disaster risk reduction and emergency management as they  became available.
In  each case identified, the dissemination was supported by collaboration, and  often included resources from other sources. When active dissemination occurred  beyond the traditional scientific and technical fields where existing  relationships and connections are strong, plans for such activity was built  into the agreement with the project funder. For example, CSSP program funds  allocated resources for sharing the results of the marine geo-hazards research.
Interview  evidence suggested that dissemination of the tools and other decision-making  support information was hampered by a lack of planning around dissemination. A  few interviewees connected to the landslides project noted that they  participated in the development of guidelines for landslides. However, the  guidelines “went nowhere” due to an insufficiency of funds to prepare the  documents for publication. Some internal and a couple of external interviewees  identified missed opportunities for dissemination of information and tools by  being unaware of other NRCan-sponsored research and engagement activities in  related fields.
Immediate Outcome: Alerts and notifications are available in real-time to a  large extent
Timeliness  of information was a critical feature of alerts, forecasts, and notifications.  All lines of evidence corroborated the view that seismic alerts and space  weather forecasts were received in a timely manner. Under the Departmental  Results Framework, a key indicator for NRCan was the percentage of times that  notification of seismic activity was made within prescribed time parameters.  Annual reports published to the NRCan website indicated that prescribed targets  were met for each year. As planned, updates performed to the monitoring  equipment resulted in fewer latent delays due to equipment lags in transmission  times in the NEMI project that received funding for equipment upgrades. Of  those who reported using seismic alerts and space weather forecasts in the  survey, all (100%) of them rated timeliness of these products as at least  “somewhat timely”.
Alert  and notification systems were highly coordinated among those who provided alerts  and notifications within Canada and with international partners, as revealed in  the following examples:
Canada’s membership in the Intergovernmental  Oceanographic Commission (IOC) of UNESCO enabled its tsunami warning capability.  Through agreement under the IOC, data collected by CHIS was transmitted to the  National Tsunami Warning Centre operated by the United States which then issued  tsunami warnings for Canadian waters.
A high level of cooperation between the United  States Geological Survey (USGS) and the Program enabled cross-border earthquake  response activities and data sharing.
Intermediate Outcomes
Summary  of key findings
: Intermediate  outcomes were progressing more moderately. The stakeholders’ responses and  mitigation strategies to hazard events, where they existed, integrated the  Program’s scientific knowledge and alert information. Stakeholders viewed GKCS  program activities as having a significant impact on their own understanding of  geo-hazards, as well as on decision-makers at strategic levels. However, the  evaluation found that there were limits to the uptake of this information by a  wider group of relevant stakeholders and in engaging local communities.
Indications that emergency and disaster management  stakeholders are equipped to plan for and respond to hazard events showed  moderate progress. Decision-making support tools, methods and approaches were  being adapted to regional and local needs as communities’ awareness of risk  mitigation grew. The SF and EMS provided good overall guidance to structuring  Program efforts to advance this outcome. Further, the lack of good data refined  to a useable local scale impeded the ability of local emergency management and  planning professionals to plan for and respond to hazard events. All sources  indicated that NRCan information had helped stakeholders increase their  understanding of geo-hazards and risk, underlying the value of the information  that GKCS produces.
Intermediate Outcome: 2.4. Responses and mitigation strategies to hazard  events integrate scientific knowledge and alert information to a moderate extent
Generally,  the evidence demonstrated that science and alert information produced by the  Program was integrated into geo-hazard response and mitigation strategies as  the result of direct collaboration. Uptake and application of the scientific  knowledge and alert information was limited to larger municipalities,  infrastructure installations, and provincial and government agencies. It is  worth noting that all of them had a high level of interaction with the Program.  The interaction was either through whole of government approaches such as the  review of critical infrastructure in the event of an emergency, or through  research collaborations established through academia or funded through external  grants.
Evidence from the survey and interviews indicated that the information supported effective decision-making to a lesser extent. A slight majority (56%) reported that the information supported effective decision-making to a “moderate” or “great extent.” On the other hand, almost half reported that NRCan information contributed to effective decision-making to a “small extent” (25%) or “not at all” (19%). Likewise, interview evidence was mixed. Stakeholders who had direct collaborative engagement with the Program rated it highly based on their experience. However, others noted that impact on decision-making was limited. While overall they rated the available tools positively, they were more likely to rate support for effective decision-making as moderate during the interviews.
The  document review and interviews recorded numerous instances where decisions were  made, action taken, and policies and regulations developed based on information  provided by the Program. Among them were the following:
Building Code of Canada: CHIS produced the  seismic model, and PSG conducted research on seismic impacts. This information  was built into the National Building Code of Canada (NBCC). This work had been  ongoing since 1953 and every five years the Building Code of Canada integrated  new scientific understanding on seismic risk. For example, the 2015 NBCC  incorporated the national seismic risk model  and provided information for further updating in 2020.
The Program’s space weather scientists  contributed to a manual for implementing new protocols established by the  International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). Canada was also a part of the  collaborative engaged by the ICAO to provide space weather data. As noted by  one survey respondent: “Technical  leadership on providing practical real-time information for the power grid has  been foundational for much of the support that we can provide today. We also  applaud the recently upgraded data services from the magnetometer network which  provides some of the most timely space weather information in the world and  which we use to support our space weather mission in the U.S.”
Space weather scientists collaborated with  Public Safety and other government departments to assess space weather risk on  critical infrastructure. The work resulted in “A Guideline for Enhancing  Canada’s Critical Infrastructure Resilience to a Catastrophic Space Weather  Event.”
Collaborative work with the District of North  Vancouver resulted in a risk-based land use planning and earthquake emergency  preparedness action plan.
A Risk Map Atlas was produced that provided  outputs of the pilot study to understand earthquake risk and loss reduction in  a mid-sized Canadian urban community.
The study used the modelling software Hazus-MH  Canada to estimate the damages caused by earthquakes to buildings, roads,  pipelines, and people.
The initial analysis was then repeated to show  the potential changes in outcome if buildings in the community were retrofitted  to modern building codes.
This comparison analysis helped to motivate the  community to develop an earthquake ready action plan, and could be applied to  other stakeholders and locations.
11
Guidelines and protocols for landslide  monitoring methods were developed in the Thompson River Valley research  activity that was a collaborative effort on the part of the Program, academia,  the railways, and Transport Canada. On completion, the recommendations were  integrated into railway operations. Also, NRCan scientists were applying the methodology  developed to determine landslide risk levels in other locations such as the Assiniboine  and Qu’Appelle River valleys.
Nine  in 10 survey respondents agreed that decisions about disaster risk reduction  and emergency planning were made using scientific evidence and knowledge,  including 52% who strongly agreed. Survey respondents also held the view that  NRCan information played a significant role in their own increased  understanding of geo-hazards, as well as that of those responsible for taking  decisions. Many stakeholders and partners, moreover, said there would be an  impact on their organization if NRCan geo-hazards information was unavailable  or not produced.
As  shown in Figure 6, survey respondents overwhelmingly acknowledged the  contribution of NRCan information to their improved understanding of  geo-hazards over the course of their careers
12
. When asked the extent to which NRCan  information contributed to their improved understanding, 98% indicated that  it played at least some part, with 86% saying to a great (61%) or moderate  (25%) extent, regardless of the length of their career.
Figure 6: Extent to which NRCan  information contributed to respondents’ understanding of geo-hazards
Source: GKCS Evaluation Survey.
*1
Text Version
Infographic showing the  extent to which NRCan information contributed to survey respondent’s  understanding of geo-hazards, consisting of a bar chart.
Percent of survey respondents by NRCan information contributed to understanding
NRCan information    contributed to understanding
Percent of    survey respondents
To a great extent
61 %
To a moderate extent
25 %
To a small extent
12 %
Not at all
2 %
In  addition, survey respondents identified a variety of types of decision-makers,  including (in order of frequency), operations staff (those with technical  knowledge), emergency planners, responders and crisis centres, all levels of  government, senior government officials, those in the private sector, and  politicians as being responsible for emergency management and disaster risk  reduction. Seventy-seven percent (77%) of survey respondents believed that,  from their perspective, these decision-makers also gained an increased  understanding of geo-hazards (Figure 7). The vast majority of those (83%) said  that the information provided by NRCan contributed to this increased  understanding at least “to a moderate extent”, including 45% who said “to a  great extent”.
Figure 7: Contribution of NRCan  information to increased understanding among decision-makers
Source: GKCS Evaluation Survey.
*2
Text Version
Infographic showing the  contribution of NRCan information to increased understanding among  decision-makers as perceived by survey respondents, consisting of a donut chart  on the left and a bar chart on the right.
The donut chart shows the  percentage of survey respondents who said their overall level of understanding  of natural hazards increased over the course of their career.
Percent of survey respondents by NRCan information contributed to  increased understanding among decision-makers
NRCan    information contributed to increased understanding among decision-makers
Percent of    survey respondents
Yes
77 %
No
4 %
Don’t know
19 %
The bar chart shows the extent to which NRCan  information has contributed to the general understanding among those  responsible.
Percent of  survey respondents by extent of NRCan information contributed to increased  understanding
Extent of    NRCan information contributed to increased understanding
Percent of    survey respondents
To a great extent
45 %
To a moderate extent
38 %
To a small extent
12 %
Not at all
5 %
Stakeholders relied on the alerts and notifications provided through the Program. All lines of evidence presented well-documented examples that CHIS seismic monitoring data and alerts, as well as the associated analysis, that were integrated into the plans of infrastructure operators, building and construction operations. Examples included the following:
"Certain NRCan products are strictly      essential: seismic information, space weather (geomagnetic storms), we      cannot do without these data."
- External      Interviewee
The ministère des Transports du Québec used seismic alerts provided  through CHIS data to launch inspections of its roadworks and infrastructure.  Relevant interview information confirmed that over a specified threshold, the  seismic level reported triggered automatic inspections of the infrastructure  and roads within its jurisdiction.
In assessing potential sites for a deep  geological storage facility, the Nuclear Waster Management Organization (NWMO)  had an ongoing collaboration with CHIS. Through this work, specific sites were  tested for seismicity to identify their suitability. Interview evidence  indicated that the organization relied heavily on the collaborative work  arrangement in assessing various sites.
On request, CHIS conducted seismic assessments  of various sites for external stakeholders. Program documents contained  numerous site assessments, mostly for use in the building industry.
Stakeholders  also included other sources of alerts and notifications in their planning. In  relation to seismic alerts, some stakeholders with responsibility for immediate  response to hazards indicated that they referred to information from the United  States Geological Survey (USGS) for primary alert because it was provided  faster. The more detailed information received from NRCan sources was used to  “ground truth” the information to determine the most appropriate response at  the local level. However, inconsistencies in risk levels as assessed by  separate agencies led to planners adopting the lower risk levels.
Intermediate Outcome: 2.5. Emergency and disaster management stakeholders  are equipped to plan for and respond to hazard events to a moderate extent
The  extent to which emergency and disaster management stakeholders were equipped to  plan for, and respond to, hazard events was closely associated with location  and hazard type, as well as involvement in collaborative networks focused on  geo-hazards and disaster risk reduction. In Canada, responsibility for disaster  events and emergency management lays primarily at the local level. For  stakeholders to be equipped to plan for, and respond to hazard events, they  need information to identify local risk levels and options to mitigate that  risk before an event, as well as  information for situational awareness during a hazard event. The Program provided key information to support such activity.
There  was some indication that decision-making tools developed by the Program were  being adapted to regional and local needs. In Tuktoyaktuk, a tool used to  assess earthquake risk was being adapted to assess landslide risk. Methods and  information developed through the Thompson River Valley landslide research  activity were being applied to other locations in the Assiniboine and  Qu’Appelle River valleys. The ER2 assessment tool was being adapted for local  use across the country. During interviews however, stakeholders consistently  pointed out that that decision-making support tools were at various stages of  development depending on hazard type, and planning was uneven across the  country. For example, a relatively large number of tools was available for  earthquake risk assessment but far fewer for tsunami risk. Planning and  response measures were more advanced in British Columbia where the provincial  government was highly engaged in supporting geo-hazards emergency planning and  disaster mitigation efforts.
As reported through the interviews and survey, stakeholders held the view that the information and tools provided through the Program largely met their needs. According to the survey data (see Figure 8), the majority of respondents (77%) said that their needs were “mostly” or “entirely” met. Survey respondents particularly identified that the Hazard maps, space weather forecasts, and earthquake catalogues as key tools.
Figure 8: Extent to which geo-hazards  information provided through NRCan met needs
Source: GKCS Evaluation Survey.
*3
Text Version
Infographic showing the extent to which  geo-hazards information provided through NRCan met the needs of survey  respondents, consisting of a bar chart.
Percent of survey respondents by NRCan information met needs
NRCan    information met needs
Percent of    survey respondents
Entirely
29 %
In part
48 %
Mostly
20 %
Not at all
3 %
Interviewees  for the most part distinguished between response and planning for geo-hazard  events. Among them, almost half noted that emergency management response was  more advanced than prevention and risk reduction planning. Some of those  suggested that professional cultures played a role. They noted that emergency  management was a more established field that focused on operational response  and need for real-time information during an event. Disaster risk reduction on  the other hand, was a relatively new area of expertise and was focused on  planning for possible events. As a  result, it was generally challenging to motivate efforts and investment to  reduce risk and expand existing relationships. In their view, it would take  time for disaster risk reduction to become a predominant thought process in the  emergency management field. Others noted that disaster risk reduction went  beyond emergency management response. Local approaches therefore needed to  better integrate planners and local and regional municipality managers in  preparing for disasters by improving land use and zoning in hazard-prone areas.
Central  to the whole of society approach underlying the Sendai Framework was a high  level of information sharing and collaboration. Evidence was weak however that existing  mechanisms to share information and collaborate such as Canada’s Disaster Risk  Reduction Platform were sufficiently effective in supporting stakeholders to be  adequately equipped to plan for, and respond to hazard events.
Survey  evidence in open text questioning showed that among the unmet needs identified  was a need for greater collaboration and cooperation across fields of  expertise, and information such as guidelines to support integration of  geoscience data into usable risk assessments. One respondent stated the need as  a “bridge between experts at NRCan and  users of information to understand how data is used and the downstream impact  to help in decisions around balancing of risk with cost.”
In  the interviews, most stakeholders pointed to collaboration with the Program as  a key component in being equipped to plan for and respond to hazards. However,  they also noted that there were few opportunities outside of the  well-established scientific and technical fora in geo-hazards and emergency  management for non-expert learning and networking – particularly for those new  to the field of emergency management and disaster risk reduction. In addition,  a couple of external stakeholders noted that Canada still largely operated in  silos of expertise when it came to geo-hazards and disaster risk reduction and  was less advanced in national collaboration relative to other countries they  had worked in.
Overall,  very few interviewees were familiar with the SF and the EMS. However,  interviewees familiar with the SF and the EMS reported that the Program was  applying the guidance of the SF, and that guidance from the SF and EMS helped  them to focus their priorities and activities. Documented examples noted  earlier suggested that in spite of challenges in capacity, the Program was  implementing the whole of society approach in its activities. The Program was  also working to improve its warning capacity. For example, upgrades to the  seismic monitoring system between 2014 and 2019 reduced latent delays in alert  notifications, and the 2019 federal budget provided funding for CHIS to  implement an earthquake early warning (EEW) system.
Long-term / Ultimate Outcomes
Summary  of key findings
: At  the longer-term level, Canada’s preparedness, response and recovery from  natural disasters was enhanced moderately. Stakeholders expressed a growing  level of confidence that they were better prepared for hazard events, and  attributed NRCan for their confidence in both the survey and through  interviews. While some of this activity fell outside the direct mandate of  NRCan, stakeholders expressed the view that NRCan (and the Program) was  implicated due to the need for multidisciplinary tables to deal with the gaps,  and the critical fact that critical subject matter expertise in Canada largely  resided within NRCan.
With respect to resilience, stakeholders saw  increasing evidence that resilience in Canada was increasing. However, all  experts interviewed pointed out that Canada’s resilience had yet to be tested to  the level of a catastrophe.
Long-term Outcome: Canada’s preparedness, response and recovery from  natural disasters is enhanced to a moderate extent
Stakeholders  expressed a moderate level of confidence that they were better prepared to act  during hazard events. The survey results in Figure 9 show that 81% of  stakeholders were at least moderately confident that they (their organizations)  were better prepared to act during hazard events than at the beginning of their  career, and 71% attributed their confidence level to NRCan to a moderate or  great extent. Interview evidence found a similar level of confidence, but also  noted that there was room for further improvement. They cited the need for  better integration and support for sharing information and lessons learned in  order to be fully prepared; resources to support a collaborative risk reduction  model overall; and implicated NRCan in addressing these issues because of its  expertise. Experts interviewed largely shared this view, and believed that the  Program was doing what needed to be done.
Figure 9:  Confidence in preparedness to act with attribution to NRCan information
Source: GKCS Evaluation Survey.
*4
Text Version
Infographic showing confidence in preparedness to act with attribution  to NRCan information, consisting of two bar charts.
The first bar chart on the left shows the percentage  of survey respondents who responded to “thinking back over your career, how  confident are you that you/your organization is better prepared to act during  hazards events now?”:
Percent of survey respondents by confidence in preparedness
Confidence    in preparedness
Percent of    survey respondents
Not at all confident
3 %
A little confident
16 %
Moderately confident
61 %
Very confident
20 %
The second bar chart on the right shows the percentage  of survey respondents who responded to “the information from NRCan has  contributed to my confidence about acting during a hazard event”:
Percent of survey respondents by NRCan information contributed to  confidence
NRCan    information contributed to confidence
Percent of    survey respondents
To a great extent
28 %
To a moderate extent
43 %
To a small extent
18 %
Not at all
12 %
Evidence  of planning at the strategic level to reduce gaps and resource them overall was  limited. The Disaster Risk Reduction Roundtable was positioned as a key venue  for identifying information gaps at the strategic level. For example, through  this venue, discussion at the 2017 DRR Roundtable on integration of climate  change helped to articulate the overlap between disaster risk reduction and  climate change adaptation and mitigation. However, there was little evidence  that the Roundtable served to develop work plans for resourcing or acting on  the identified gaps. Interviewees suggested that the challenge of multiple  priorities reduced its effectiveness in developing action plans and identifying  synergies among stakeholders focused on geo-hazards. External interviewees also  noted that the existing platforms to exchange information and develop action  plans for disaster risk reduction were inadequate. They suggested that NRCan  was well equipped to fill the gap due to its subject matter expertise, and its experience  with the Canada’s Climate Change Adaptation Platform.
Stakeholders believe that the GKCS Program contributed to Canada’s increased  resilience to geo-hazards
Among  stakeholders, there was a general belief that Canada was progressively more  resilient to natural hazards, particularly over the last decade. As shown in Figure  10, survey respondents considered NRCan information and knowledge as a factor  impacting their assessment of Canada’s resilience. Most of the survey  respondents (71%) believed that Canada was more resilient to natural hazards  than it was at the start of their career. Of those, 29% saw NRCan information  and knowledge as a factor in their assessment to a great extent, while 55% saw  it as a factor to a moderate extent.
Figure 10: Assessment of  resilience and attribution to NRCan information and knowledge
Source: GKCS Evaluation Survey.
*5
Text Version
Infographic showing the assessment of resilience and attribution to  NRCan information and knowledge, consisting of two bar charts.
The first bar chart on the left shows the  percentage of survey respondents who believed Canada became more resilient over  the course of their career:
Percent of survey respondents by Canada’s resilience
Canada’s    resilience
Percent of    survey respondents
Less resilient
6 %
About the same
22 %
More resilient
71 %
The second bar chart on the right shows the  percentage of survey respondents who believed Canada became more resilient who acknowledged  that the information and knowledge provided through NRCan contributed to their  assessment:
Percent of survey respondents by NRCan information and knowledge  contributed to the assessment of Canada’s resilience
NRCan information and knowledge contributed to the assessment of    Canada’s resilience
Percent of    survey respondents
To a great extent
29 %
To a moderate extent
55 %
To a small extent
8 %
Not at all
8 %
Interviewees  also believed that resilience in Canada had improved over the last decade. Some  mentioned that improved communications and information-sharing across  jurisdictions enabled communities to rebound after experiencing recent hazardous  events such as wildfires and floods, and it reasoned this experience would be  applicable to other events. Other interviewees placed caveats on the level of  resilience attained. For example, the experts interviewed cautioned that while  there were good indications of progress as in low loss of life statistics,  Canada had not been tested with a true catastrophe. Therefore, the progress on  resilience could not be proven.
In  addition, even though the Insurance Bureau of Canada estimated that eight  dollars in losses was avoided for every dollar invested in disaster risk  reduction, many of those interviewed cautioned that the measurement of  resilience in monetary terms did not factor in the human costs. The impact of  trauma in a community due to a disaster for example, was cited as one area that  was challenging to measure. Appropriate indicators to measure resilience have  been identified by the DRR community as a need for measuring performance under  the Sendai Framework.
Program Design and Delivery
Question 3: Does the program model support the  achievement of program objectives?
Indicators
Evidence that program design (e.g.,  decision-making structures, resource allocation, design and delivery  mechanisms, collaborative agreements and working arrangements) supports program  objectives and reflects guidance under the Sendai Framework and EM Strategy
Factors influencing program performance and  assessment of their impact
Summary    of Findings:
The Program model supported the    achievement of program objectives, particularly those related to research and    science objectives. However, key challenges facing the Program in achieving    its objectives fell largely outside the immediate Program responsibility –    both externally and internally to NRCan. Addressing these challenges would have    required coordination with groups internal and external to NRCan. The program    within NRCan overlapped with others. In addition, the role of the Program in    the overall emergency management and disaster risk reduction responsibilities    of the Government of Canada did not lend itself well to dealing with the    challenges faced with respect to uptake of the Program information.
Recommendation 2
:    The ADM, LMS should    initiate a forward-looking discussion on disaster risk reduction and risk    assessment activities across NRCan sectors in order to improve internal    coordination of overlapping activities. At minimum, the ADM-LMS should    support the GKCS Program to explore the linkages between climate change and    hazards research in an effort to a) review LMS’s efforts in knowledge    translation to decision-makers under the Emergency Management Strategy    funding (Budget 2019) and b) for GSC’s Public Safety Geoscience program, in    particular, to advance research linkages between climate change and hazards    research for hazards expected to be altered by a changing climate.
The Program design supported the immediate Program outcomes to a large  extent
The  Program was well-designed to support the immediate Program outcomes. Projects  undertaken within the evaluation period were well-executed. For example, the  case study evidence demonstrated that in all three cases – Thompson Valley  landslide, space weather, and NEMI – projects were successfully scoped and  completed as planned with budgets aligned to actual spending.
All  sources indicated that the research model adopted by the Program was highly  effective. It was characterized by collaboration and supported by a high level  of scientific and technical expertise. Through formal collaborations, the  research in PSG attracted funding from other federal government departments and  external organizations. For example, in 2018-19, each dollar spent on project  activities from NRCan departmental resources (A-base excluding salary) within  PSG leveraged about seven dollars in outside funding. The ability to attract  funds confirmed the alignment to stakeholder need and strength of the research.  However, it also raised the risk that science and research activities  fundamental to evidence-based decision-making could become reliant on temporary  funds. Some interviewees noted that this limited long-term research commitments  and also reduced opportunities to develop the long-term relationships critical  to successful uptake of information at the local and regional levels.
"The      existence of the MOU is incredibly helpful. For us it streamlines the legal      work. With the MOU being in place, it allows us to go right to sorting out      the contract. It saves massive amounts of administrative time. It’s been      used by other people in the company for other projects. "
- External Interviewee (Industry)
Collaborations were supported by formal agreements such as memoranda  of understanding, interdepartmental agreements and letters of intent. These  arrangements supported research and monitoring by allowing for data sharing,  infrastructure support and joint investigation. In one case where the  relationship was multi-faceted, NRCan created a single umbrella agreement that enabled  multiple projects to be initiated. Other agreements for longer-term research  were extended based on the mutual benefits of the agreement. For example, in  2015 an existing 10-year Letter of Agreement between the Department of Fisheries  and Oceans Canada, NRCan, and UNAVCO Inc. was extended to 2025. The agreement  enabled the installation and monitoring of seismic equipment covering the  Pacific north-west.
External  interviewees involved with collaborative activities said that they were able to  achieve more in a shorter time period, and attributed project success to the  involvement of Program staff as previously noted. A couple also mentioned that  the use of formal agreements provided clarity on responsibilities and roles.  For example, an agreement with the ministère des Transports du Québec clarified  the role of the Program and the Province of Québec with respect to landslides  and interaction with municipalities. Canada’s interdisciplinary membership in  GEMF was cited in several interviews as a key collaboration that enabled the  Program share expertise within and outside Canada. One of the experts  interviewed specifically mentioned that the unique membership approach adopted  by Canada in GEMF helped ensure a multidisciplinary sharing of information  within the country, and was a model that other countries might want to consider.  One of the interviewees for the Thompson River Valley landslide project noted  that permitted access to existing right of ways along the railway corridor was  a factor in advancing the research. It would have been more difficult without  the involvement of the railways themselves.
While  collaboration was a cornerstone for conducting research and monitoring  activities with external organizations, there was room for improvement in how  the components in the Program interacted to deliver the Program. The previous  evaluation report (2014) found that CHIS and PSG worked more effectively with  external stakeholders than with each other, and noted that opportunities for  collaboration between the two were being missed.
13
The  evaluation concluded that this finding was still largely true. Some of this  dissonance could be attributed to the operational versus research orientation  of each component, which was further exacerbated by internal reorganization in  2017. However, the evaluation observed that collaboration on issues of public  safety and disaster risk reduction within NRCan was low overall. Evidence from  all lines of evidence demonstrated that NRCan lacked a well-defined internal strategy  for coordinating overlapping activities related to public safety and disaster risk  reduction.
Design was somewhat limited in supporting uptake and  use of information for decision-making
Interviewees  noted overlap with climate change adaptation, floodplain mapping, wildfire risk  management and other risk assessment work to enhance public safety. For some of  the internal and external interviewees, the role and interaction among these  NRCan groups was unclear and ad-hoc. They noted several examples where improved  clarity could enhance performance and optimize capacity, including: (1)  coordinating access to experts and engaging with local and regional  jurisdictions; (2) establishing and reporting on the NRCan contribution to the SF indicators; and (3) sharing  information within NRCan to support project work.
Internal  interviewees noted there were no formal internal mechanisms to coordinate work  between these separate teams. While early planning information from the PSG indicated  an awareness of the benefit of collaborating with the CCGP, there was little  evidence of collaborative planning or activity between the two. During the  development of the federal plan to implement the EMS, NRCan coordinated its  contribution. Several internal and other government department interviewees  noted the effectiveness of that process and suggested a similar table be  established more permanently. Developing indicators and performance measures to  report on the SF was a work in progress and was challenging due to the lack of  internal cohesiveness in reporting across the Department.
Internal  interviewees reported that this fragmentation was such that the Program found  out about the work of its departmental colleagues from external stakeholders.  In addition, several of the internal staff noted challenges in accessing data found  in other parts of the Department that would be helpful in conducting work on  landslides, tsunamis, earthquakes and volcanoes. As a result, Program staff  believed they were missing opportunities to achieve economies of scale and to  streamline communication and engagement with external stakeholders that would  support the production and uptake of information.
Similar  observations were made by external stakeholders. Two of the other government  departmental stakeholders and several of the other external stakeholders  interviewed, including two from the group of experts, expressed the view that  the uncoordinated approach taken by NRCan created the risk of disjointed risk  assessment systems in floods, wildfires, earthquakes and other hazards. From  their perspective, it would be difficult to integrate hazard-specific approaches  in a multi-hazard approach consistent with the vision of the SF at later stages  in development. Since programming was at the early stages, there was an  opportunity to integrate right from the start. Some of the internal and  external interviewees noted that local stakeholders’ capacity was limited for  engaging with multiple groups from NRCan and created confusion, particularly  for what was viewed as essentially the same purpose – public safety and  disaster risk reduction.
Overall,  challenges within the projects were effectively mitigated where they were  controlled directly by the Program. However, on-going challenges occurred with  respect to computer technology and equipment and data communications which were  outside the control of the Program. In the NEMI case study, timely support was  considered a constant challenge in procurement of computer technology and  technical equipment. Program documents also identified lengthy periods for  reviewing proposed equipment purchases and delayed response in making repairs  to equipment as challenges for mission critical operations within CHIS.
In  the strategic interviews, as well as other internal interviews, IT equipment  challenges were identified as ongoing throughout the evaluation period. Some  internal interviewees reported developing “work-arounds” to facilitate data  sharing with external partners. Some of the external interviewees who engaged  in sharing data commented on the challenges with cumbersome methods of  transferring and accessing data for collaborative work.
Based  on the interview evidence, the unique expertise housed at NRCan was a key  element of success in the initial phases of risk assessment and hazard  identification at the local level. However, as noted previously, a particular  challenge for the Program was in conducting the outreach and engagement  necessary to support uptake of information for decision-making. Allocating  science capacity to develop the long-term relationships and engagement  necessary to support the uptake could run counter to the fundamental scientific  objectives of the Program. In addition, it could impede career advancement for  those scientists.
The  involvement of the responsible jurisdictions was also a key factor in success.  For example, advances made in British Columbia were facilitated by the direct support  of the Government of BC. Work in the Ottawa-Montréal seismic corridor was  facilitated by the involvement of the Cities of Gatineau, Ottawa, and Montréal.
Stakeholders  suggested some ways to increase alignment to the SF and the EMS and thereby  improve the program design in supporting the achievement of its intermediate outcomes.  The key area being a platform for discussion of disaster risk reduction and  increased coordination within NRCan on activities with similar purpose. Factors  impacting program performance were largely linked to the whole of society  approach engendered by the SF and the EMS, role and the lack of formal  structures for coordinating activities related to Public Safety internally  within LMS, and within NRCan overall. Outside of these challenges, program  performance was also impacted by hard to replace expertise, and data and  technological challenges.
Equity, Diversity  and Inclusion (EDI)
Question 4:  To what extent does the Program consider EDI factors?
Indicators:
Evidence that program activities and outputs  consider EDI factors, particularly in engagement, consultation, integration of  Indigenous knowledge, and communications strategies
Documented examples of accommodation of EDI  factors
Summary of Findings:
The Program advanced in    considering EDI factors in program design and delivery. Consideration of EDI related    factors was a notable aspect of the Sendai Framework, and the whole of    society approach was a foundation of the Emergency Management Strategy for    Canada. The program made significant advancement in engagement with    Indigenous populations, and integration of Indigenous knowledge in research.    For the Program overall, EDI factors were most relevant in how science was    conducted, and in risk assessment. However, both stakeholders and Program    staff recognized that more needs to be done, particularly in relation to risk    assessment for vulnerable populations.
The  Government of Canada has committed to ensuring that subgroups of the population  are not adversely affected by its programming due to an intersection of  demographic characteristics. It does so through gender-based analysis plus  (GBA+), which is an analytical approach to help assess and identify objectives  around equity, diversity, and inclusion. Under the Directive on Results, evaluation teams were directed to consider  GBA+ where relevant to consider EDI factors. This was consistent with Priority  #1 of the Sendai Framework, which states that Disaster risk management needs to  be based on an understanding of disaster risk in all its dimensions of  vulnerability, capacity, exposure of persons and assets, hazard characteristics  and the environment.
There  was evidence that EDI factors were considered by the Program in its design and  delivery. Program planning documents for the 2014-2019 iteration of the PSG  showed the Program increasing its efforts to integrate Indigenous knowledge  into its research activities. Interview evidence confirmed that such efforts  positively impacted the research. For example, a significant historic west  coast tsunami was more accurately described through comparison with the oral  history of the local Indigenous peoples. In another case, Indigenous knowledge  influenced the location of sampling sites for fieldwork on landslides in Hudson  Bay. According to the interview evidence, this had the further benefit of  relationship-building between Indigenous communities and NRCan and generated  interest in further collaborative research on geo-hazards. One international  expert interviewed for the evaluation recognized the engagement and  collaborative work on the west coast of Canada in relation to earthquakes and landslides  as best practice.
In  its dissemination strategy, the Program communicated research results directly  to Indigenous and northern communities. The document review identified at least  23 presentations on research findings and geohazards were made to Indigenous  associations / communities and partners between 2018 and 2020. Program  documents also showed that sharing research results with local communities and  stakeholders was built into some of the research project activities. In  northern Canada, presentations were made in Inuktitut to enhance reception  within communities. These arrangements were largely funded or facilitated  through other programs or external partners’ support.
"In terms of      hazards – it doesn’t matter in terms of people – the hazard is not going to      change, it does matter when you look at risk."
- External Interviewee (Academic)
Evidence also pointed to the fact that more needed to be done. Only  54% of the survey respondents agreed that hazard risk assessment considered  vulnerable populations. A majority of interviewees pointed to the need for  local data as a key ingredient in risk assessment that consider impacts on  vulnerable people. According to the interview and documentary evidence however,  the low integration of geolocation data with hazard risk and socio-economic  data limited risk assessment for vulnerable populations. Program documents  consistently cited the challenge of interoperability of modeling and risk assessment  tools as a challenge in supporting risk assessment at the local level. External  interviewees stated that the need for local data impacted the ability of the  local planners to effectively target plans to reduce risk for vulnerable  populations. A couple of the stakeholders from other government departments  noted the dissemination of alerts as a concern. Cultural considerations were a  key issue in how different populations responded to alerts. For these  interviewees, reviewing alert systems and content were an important element for  improving alert response among sub-populations.
Interviewees  made various suggestions for improving the consideration of EDI within the  Program. Suggestions mostly related to consideration of Indigenous populations.  Figure 11 illustrates examples of how the Program considered GBA+ factors. Suggestions  made during interviews included the following:
Recognize Indigenous knowledge and credit it  appropriately, as well as work done at the community level.
Continue to engage with communities to expand  opportunities to share learning and skills. Science Day in Tuktoyuktuk and  delivering research results directly to communities were examples of this.
Enhancing opportunities for employment in  geo-hazards research activities for Indigenous populations.
Figure 11: Considering EDI - Examples
Text Version
Infographic showing examples of EDI considerations, consisting of five  columns with a double-sided arrow at the bottom.
The first column states, “placement of earthquake sensors in vulnerable  areas within Canada”.
The second column states, “Northern and Indigenous engagement through  student field trips, and Tuktoyutuk Science Day”.
The third column states, “Indigenous and local knowledge informing  landslides work, the planning of field trips, and dating of historical  Tsunamis”.
The fourth column states, “increasing accessibility to research  findings by having Inuit Translators at community sessions and written  presentations in Inuktitut”.
The fifth column states, “cancellation/revision of Fieldwork plans in  light of local concerns”.
Regarding  the management of resources, program interviewees indicated that they strove  for gender balance in leadership roles by rotating leadership opportunities in  research projects to provide managerial experience more broadly. External  interviewees generally expressed the view that the field of emergency management  was male dominated, but noticed that the demographics of the scientists was  changing and more diversity emerging. However, they also noted that the skill  level was very high and hard to find. Therefore, the requisite skills was the  most important consideration. Generally, they expressed optimism that new  generations of scientists were more consultative and open to engaging with  stakeholder groups, which helped to mitigate (but not fully overcome) the lack  of diversity.
Best Practices and Lessons Learned
Question 5: Are there any best practices and  lessons learned related to the design and delivery of the program?
Indicators:
Views of stakeholders of alternatives in the  design and the delivery of the program
Identification of lessons learned and evidence  of best practices applied
Summary of Findings:
The evaluation found that stakeholders have    identified several lessons learned related to the design and delivery of the    Program. All lines of evidence revealed that the Program has applied a number    of best practices, particularly as it pertains to: upholding a collaborative    approach to scientific research; developing mid-year and end-year reports;    and reporting on project progress and outcomes.
Several lessons learned related to the design and delivery of the Program.
Lesson Learned: Collaboration and relationship-building take time
Document  review and interviews revealed several lessons learned related to the design  and delivery of the Program. The first lesson learned was that collaboration  and relationship building is time-intensive, and required dedicated capacity.  Stakeholders indicated that although Program scientists put in a lot of effort  engaging with local communities and other organizations, the Program’s work in  this regard was often only possible because of capacity tied to their  in-progress research activities. Accordingly, it often ended when the research  activities were completed. This situation undermined the Program’s ability to  foster strong, long-term relationships with stakeholders that facilitated increased  understanding of risk, which was a key component of the Sendai Framework for  Disaster Risk Reduction.
Lesson Learned: Role definition within NRCan
The  second lesson learned was that various teams within NRCan working on hazard  areas related to public safety and disaster risk reduction lacked internal  mechanisms for collaborating and had roles that were poorly defined in relation  to each other. External stakeholders indicated that this was confusing as they were  sometimes unsure which team within NRCan they should be contacting with respect  to information about specific research areas. Internal stakeholders indicated  that this reduced opportunities for intradepartmental collaboration and created  confusion regarding reporting responsibilities, and increased the risk of an  inefficient allocation of Program resources.
Program’s application of best practices
Best Practice: Collaborative research approach
Document  review and interviews revealed several best practices applied by the Program. One  best practice is that the Program applied a collaborative research approach. For example, the Program collaborated  with the Government of British Columbia on identifying earthquake risk and had  a key role in many of its Understanding  Risk BC workshops. The Program was also a member of the GEMF, and worked  collaboratively with other stakeholders on several projects including: Space  Weather; CSSP; and DRR Pathways projects. The Program’s willingness to  collaborate with stakeholders increased participants’ uptake of scientific  information, as NRCan scientists worked closely with them to ensure that they were  able to access, understand, and make use of the Program’s outputs.
Throughout  all of its collaborations, the Program defined its role with internal and  external stakeholders through written agreements, ensuring that all parties had  a clear understanding of the scope of their respective contributions. The  Program’s collaborative approach also leveraged program resources in a  hyper-efficient manner, which has helped PSG leverage its funds to generate $7  of value for every $1 allocated to the Program.
Best Practice: Mid-year and year-end reports
Another  best practice was Mid-year and year-end reports produced within the GSC. This helped the Program identify any  potential issues as early as possible and enabled changes as needed to unsure  the optimal use of program resources. In development of these reports, the  Program also documented the challenges and accomplishments of the Program in  real-time, which allowed for the efficient tracking of performance metrics and  the proactive advancement of improvement strategies.
Best Practice: CHIS NEMI project documentation and reporting
The  NEMI project was notable for its best practice in reporting and project  documentation. The use of the dashboard for senior management that reported  progress was regularly updated. A complete set of project team meetings was  available which documented ongoing challenges and progress. The project also  developed a summary presentation of the accomplishments within the project.  Field trips were blogged that provided a unique look at the work undertaken  within the Project.
Based  on the evidence provided throughout the report, key factors that facilitated  and challenged the Program can be summarized as presented in Figures 12 and 13.
Figure 12: Facilitators of  Program Performance
Text Version
Infographic showing the facilitators of program performance, consisting  of four rows.
The first row comprises of “expertise”, which includes: Respect and  trust; and high quality science.
The second row comprises of “collaboration  and relationship-building”, which includes: Resources (attracts $); idea  germination and information-sharing; and engagement of  Provinces/Territories/Municipalities.
The third row comprises of “opportunities  to expand learning”, which includes: Leadership opportunities within program;  and skills to carry out roles.
The fourth row comprises of “relationship  with Public Safety Canada (PS)”, which includes: Emergency Management Framework  and Emergency Management Strategy for Canada; and opportunities for dialogue.
Figure 13: Challenges Impacting  Program Performance
Text Version
Infographic showing the challenges impacting program performance,  consisting of four rows.
The first row comprises of “human  resources”, which includes: Expertise hard to replace; skills match – what  skills are needed?; and inclusion of multi-disciplinary expertise for risk  assessment.
The second row comprises of “IT”, which  includes: Data transfer/analysis; and delays in service by Shared Services  Canada.
The third row comprises “program model”,  which includes: Low capacity to implement whole of society approach; uncertain  level of priority in future; and lack of internal coordination among multiple  groups at NRCan.
The fourth row comprises “capacity at local  level”, which includes: Low capacity for technical/science data; and  opportunities for dialogue.
Conclusions
The  objective of this evaluation was to assess the relevance, effectiveness, and  design of the GKCS program. The evaluation was designed to consider the  significant changes in the Program’s operating environment with respect to the  Sendai Framework and the Emergency Management Strategy for Canada, and assess  whether there were any impacts on the Program. In terms of effectiveness, it  focused on the intermediate and longer-term outcomes that previous evaluations  could not assess. With respect to program design, the evaluation examined  whether the design supported the achievement of results, and documented lessons  learned and best practices applied in the Program.
Overall,  the evaluation found that the Program achieved meaningful progress towards  expected results. This was particularly evident at the immediate outcomes level  and where the Program had well established relationships with stakeholders. The  expertise located within the program is considered an asset for Canada in  disaster risk reduction, and stakeholders credited the program with improving  their understanding of geo-hazards and associated risks. The program’s research  agenda was relevant and efficiently implemented. In this regard, direct collaboration  was an especially effective tool for developing and implementing research  around questions relevant to targeted stakeholders. These strengths added to  the reputation of the Program as an effective and valued player in the fields  of emergency management and disaster risk reduction.
The  GKCS program performed very well in the role for which it was originally designed  and intended – as the subject matter expert on geo-hazards under the Emergency  Management Act providing scientific and technical information to primarily  technical and scientific users. However, the implementation of the whole of  society approach through the signing of the Sendai Framework and the  implementation of the Emergency Strategy for Canada shifted the operating  environment for the Program. While the Program took measures to adapt to the  changing context, limitations in the original conceptualization manifested over  the evaluation period. More specifically, these limitations are associated with  Program role, Program reach and Program design.
This  shift in the Program operating context drives new expectations and needs around  knowledge translation that extend beyond the technical and scientific  stakeholder groups originally targeted by the Program. Each has implications  for the Program role, achievement of results and program design that warrants consideration  by Program management to ensure the Program is well-positioned to address the  changes.
The  whole-of-society approach rests on a foundation that involves a wider and more  diverse range of stakeholders. However, the current Program targets highly  technical and scientific stakeholders. The need for technical and scientific  information will remain, but a growing demand by general and non-technical  users involved in DRR and EM planning will increase demands for less technical  information products and direct access to the Program expertise. An increased  reliance on science is expected in advancing EM and DRR strategies overall. However,  the Program role vis a vis meeting those emerging demands remains unarticulated.  In addition, a key finding is that the implementation of the Sendai Framework  and the Emergency Management Strategy for Canada impacted the role of the  program and had implications for the Program design. Chief among these is the  role of the program relative to other federal players in the emergency  management and disaster risk reduction. With its focus on involving a wider  range of stakeholders, and the increased reliance on the unique program  expertise looking forward, the question of how to manage the demand on program  capacity with the primary role of science and research become more urgent.
Collaboration is a cornerstone  of a multi-hazard, whole of society approach to DRR. Internal to NRCan, various  groups involved in DRR, either directly or indirectly, have no mechanisms to effectively  collaborate. While this is more of a challenge in relation to stakeholder  engagement and strategic policy levels than at the operational level, it  creates a risk that approaches to DRR developed by NRCan groups with external  stakeholders remain siloed. Fundamentally then, the objectives of the EMS and  the Sendai Framework would not be fully realized. Recognizing and responding to  these areas requires further attention and will position the GKCS program and  NRCan to carry out its role more effectively and contribute more ably to the  achievement of results.
Appendix  A: Evaluation Matrix
Issues/Questions
Indicators
1. Is the program role appropriate and necessary within    the context of changes in the program operating environment?
1.1 Extent to which the activities of the Program align    and respond to i) the needs of the intended beneficiaries and stakeholders;    and ii) the guidance provided in the Sendai Framework and Canada’s EM    Strategy
1.2 Extent to    which the role played by NRCan is complementary to other federal    organizations and viewed as appropriate by stakeholders
1.3 Evidence that the NRCan role is clear and well    understood within NRCan, and among external stakeholders
2. To what extent    has the program progressed on achieving its intended outcomes?
2.1 Evidence that outputs are    produced and disseminated as planned
2.2 Evidence of Program contribution to achieving    intended outcomes
Immediate Outcomes
2.1 Authoritative science foundation on geo-hazards and    related risk assessments is available to stakeholders in emergency planning    and disaster risk reduction. (PSG primarily)
Stakeholder level of satisfaction    with accessibility and usability of program information
Evidence that stakeholders view    NRCan information as authoritative (e.g., requests for information/expertise,    references to program outputs)
2.2 Decision-making support    tools, models, and approaches are available to stakeholders in emergency    planning and disaster risk reduction (CHIS and PSG)
Evidence of direct dissemination to    targeted stakeholders
Evidence that best practices identified in the Sendai Framework    are being applied in the development of decision-making support tools and    risk assessments
2.3 Information to support    decision-making during a hazard event is provided to Canadians and other    stakeholders in real-time (CHIS primarily)
Evidence that notifications and    alerts are provided to stakeholders within prescribed time parameters
Evidence that alert and notification    systems are coordinated among those who provide alerts and notifications
Intermediate Outcomes
2.4 Responses and mitigation    strategies to hazard events integrate scientific knowledge and alert    information
Evidence of i) action taken, ii)    decisions made, iii) policies and regulations developed based on scientific    (NRCan) information
Trends in stakeholder views    regarding their understanding of hazards and their impacts (increasing /    improving over time)
Stakeholder views and documented    evidence that stakeholders rely on CHIS alerts and notifications in their    decision-making
2.5 Emergency and disaster management stakeholders are    equipped to plan for, and respond to, hazard events
Evidence that decision-making    support tools are adapted to regional and local needs
Stakeholder views that that the    information and tools provided i) meet their needs and ii) enable effective    decision-making
Evidence that mechanisms to share    information and collaborate are in place, are operating, and are considered    effective by stakeholders (both in advance of, during, and after hazard    events)
Long-term and Ultimate Outcomes
2.6 Canada’s preparedness,    response, and recovery from natural disasters is enhanced (Long term outcome)
Evidence that information gaps are    collaboratively identified and plans to reduce gaps are developed and    resourced
Stakeholder level of confidence that    they are better prepared to act during hazard events
Expert opinion that Canada’s    preparedness for natural disasters has improved since 2005
2.7 Canada is resilient to natural hazards (Ultimate    outcome)
Expert opinion to the trend in    Canada’s resilience since 2005 (Hyogo Framework)
Perceived extent to which the    Programs helps Canada to be more resilient to natural hazards
Evidence of incremental improvement    on Canada’s resilience to natural hazards (losses avoided, relative recovery    time, etc.)
3. Does the program model    support the achievement of program objectives?
3.1 Evidence that program design (e.g., decision-making    structures, resource allocation, design and delivery mechanisms,    collaborative agreements and working arrangements) support program objectives    and reflect guidance under Sendai Framework and EM Strategy
3.2 Identification of factors influencing program    performance and assessment of their impact
4. To what extent does the    program consider EDI factors?
4.1 Evidence that program activities and outputs    consider EDI factors, particularly in engagement, consultation, integration    of Indigenous knowledge, and communications strategies
4.2 Documented examples of accommodation of EDI factors
5. Are there any best    practices and lessons learned related to the design and delivery of the    program?
5.1 Views of stakeholders of alternatives in the design    and the delivery of the program
5.2 Identification of lessons learned and evidence of    best practices applied
Appendix  B: Description of Sendai Priorities
Sendai     Priority
Description
Program Role /     Example
Understanding disaster risk
Policies and    practices for disaster risk management should be based on an understanding of    disaster risk in all its dimensions of vulnerability, capacity, exposure of    persons and assets, hazard characteristics and the environment. Such    knowledge can be leveraged for the purpose of pre-disaster risk assessment,    for prevention and mitigation and for the development and implementation of    appropriate preparedness and effective response to disasters.
Central function of the Public Safety Geoscience Program and Canadian Hazards Information Service
Strengthening    disaster risk governance to manage disaster risk
Disaster risk    governance at the national, regional and global levels is of great importance    for an effective and efficient management of disaster risk. Clear vision,    plans, competence, guidance and coordination within and across sectors, as    well as participation of relevant stakeholders, are needed. Strengthening    disaster risk governance for prevention, mitigation, preparedness, response, recovery and rehabilitation is therefore necessary    and fosters collaboration and partnership across mechanisms and institutions    for the implementation of instruments relevant to disaster risk reduction and    sustainable development.
PSG    negotiated Canada’s Global Earthquake Model Foundation (GEMF) membership with    partners. A steering committee was struck, and workshops on GEMF’s OpenQuake    software were conducted.
Risk Project    staff contributed to organizing a key panel discussion at Fifth Regional    Platform for Disaster Risk
Reduction in the Americas in Montreal.
Program is    reporting performance information reflecting the Sendai Priorities, and is    involved in the development of appropriate indicators for measuring Canada’s    alignment to the SF.
Investing    in disaster risk reduction for resilience:
Public and    private investment in disaster risk prevention and reduction through    structural and non-structural measures are essential to enhance the economic,    social, health and cultural resilience of persons, communities, countries and    their assets, as well as the environment. These can be drivers of innovation,    growth and job creation. Such measures are cost-effective and instrumental to    save lives, prevent and reduce losses and ensure effective recovery and    rehabilitation.
Earthquake    monitoring infrastructure upgrade
Earthquake    Early warning system
Monitoring of    water movement at Ripley landslide.
Enhancing    disaster preparedness for effective response and to “Build Back Better” in    recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction:
The steady    growth of disaster risk, including the increase of people and assets    exposure, combined with the lessons learned from past disasters, indicates    the need to further strengthen disaster preparedness for response, take    action in anticipation of events, integrate disaster risk reduction in    response preparedness and ensure that capacities are in place for effective    response and recovery at all levels. Empowering women and persons with    disabilities to publicly lead and promote gender equitable and universally    accessible response, recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction approaches    is key. Disasters have demonstrated that the recovery, rehabilitation and    reconstruction phase, which needs to be prepared ahead of a disaster, is a    critical opportunity to “Build Back Better”, including through integrating    disaster risk reduction into development measures, making nations and    communities resilient to disasters.
Involvement in “La Grande Secousse” in Québec
Involvement    in Can /(BC)/US drill
Comparison of    risk level before and after suggested retrofit using ER2 risk assessment tool
Investment in early earthquake warning
Consideration    of GBA+ factors of vulnerability
Contributions    to the National Building Code of Canada
Footnotes
1
Public  Safety Canada. (2019). The
whole of  society approach
is one that seeks to leverage the existing knowledge,  experience and capabilities within emergency management partners in order to  strengthen the resilience of all. See
Emergency  Management Strategy for Canada: Toward a Resilient 2030
, PDF – 375 KB
2
A  catastrophic incident is one of such extreme and remarkable severity or  magnitude that a nation’s collective capability to manage all response  requirements would be overwhelmed, thereby posing potential threats to national  security, national economic security, and/or the public health and safety of  the nation. See
Centre  for Disaster Philanthropy
.
3
. Natural  Resources Canada. (2014, May).
Evaluation  of the Geohazards and Public Safety Program Sub-activity (PAA Sub-activity  3.1.5)
, Ottawa (ON).
4
.  Insurance Bureau of Canada/AIR Worldwide. (2013, July)
Study of Impact and the Insurance and  Economic Cost of a Major Earthquake in British Columbia and Ontario/Québec
,  p. 18.
5
. Global  News. (2016, November 22). “
Major  B.C. quake could have devastating, long-term effects on Canadian economy:  report
”.
6
. Public Safety Canada.  (2019)
Emergency  Management Strategy for Canada: Toward a Resilient 2030
, Ottawa (ON). PDF –  375 KB
7
. UN Office for Disaster Risk Reduction. (2019).
Local  Disaster Risk Reduction and Resilience Strategies – Words into Actions
. Implementation  guide for local disaster risk reduction and resilience strategies. Geneva  (Switzerland). PDF – 10.9 KB.
8
. Sendai  Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 (UNISDR
2015
). PDF – 271  KB.
9
.
Kristoffer Albris
,
Kristian Cedervall Lauta
&
Emmanuel Raju
(2020). “Disaster Knowledge Gaps: Exploring the  Interface Between Science and Policy for Disaster Risk Reduction in Europe”,
International Journal of Disaster Risk Science
volume 11
, pages 1–12(2020).
10
. Public  Safety Canada.
Canada's  Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR)
was established in 2009 as a  multi-stakeholder national mechanism that coordinates and advises on areas of  priority requiring concerted action.
11
. Natural Resources Canada. Geological  Survey of Canada. Wagner, C L; Journeay, J M; Hastings, N L; Prieto, J A. (2015).
Risk map atlas: maps from the  earthquake risk study for the District of North Vancouver
, Open File 7816,  2015, 66 sheets. Vancouver, (BC). PDF – 97.1 MB
12
. Respondents were asked to reference their careers in order to identify any  difference in attribution to the Program that related to year of experience or  field of expertise as identified in other questions.
13
. Natural Resources Canada. (2014).
GHPS  Evaluation
. Ottawa (ON)
Figure Footnotes
*1
. Q28. To what extent has NRCan research and information contributed to your understanding of geohazards?
Base: n=75; all respondents.
*2
. Q29. From your  perspective, has the overall level of understanding of natural hazards and  their impacts increased among those responsible for emergency management and  disaster risk reduction during the course of your career? Base: n=75; all  respondents
[RIGHT] Q30. In your opinion, to what extent did NRCan  information contribute to that increased general understanding? Base: n=58;  those who said their understanding increased.
*3
. Q20. All things considered,  to what extent does the geohazards information provided through NRCan meet your  or your organization's needs for information in this area?
Base: n=75; all respondents.
*4
. [LEFT] Q34. Thinking back over your career, how confident are you that  you/your organization is better prepared to act during hazards events now?  Base: n=75; all respondents. [“Not familiar enough to comment” removed: n=4.  “Not applicable to me or my organization” removed: n=10.]
[RIGHT] Q35. To  what extent has the information from NRCan contributed to your level of  confidence about acting during a hazard event? Base: n=61; those who said they  were confident, to some level, about acting during a hazard event.
*5
. [LEFT] Q36. Over the course of your career, how would you characterize Canada’s resilience to natural hazards? Would you say Canada is…? Base: n=75; all respondents [“Not familiar enough to comment” removed: n=26].
[RIGHT] Q37. To what extent has the information and knowledge provided through NRCan contributed to your assessment of Canada’s resilience? Base: n= 49; those who said Canada is less resilient, about the same or more resilient to natural hazards over the course of their careers.
Report a problem on this page
Please select all that apply:
A link, button or video is not working
It has a spelling mistake
Information is missing
Information is outdated or wrong
I can't find what I'm looking for
Other issue not in this list
Submit
Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries,
contact us
.
Date modified:
2022-10-21