Executive summary
The purpose of this evaluation report is to provide Canadians, the Commissioner, Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) management, and the Board of Management with an assessment of the outcomes achieved and the effectiveness of CRA’s administration of the Income Tax Rulings Directorate.
The Income Tax Rulings Directorate is the centre of income tax interpretive expertise within the CRA. The directorate's role is to interpret Canada's income tax laws and explain how they apply to different situations. The directorate provides its interpretations through a variety of products including advance tax rulings, technical interpretations and income tax folios. It also provides the Dedicated Telephone Service for tax practitioners. The directorate also plays a key role consulting with the Department of Finance and the Department of Justice with respect to proposed income tax legislation and litigation.
The evaluation team found that both internal and external stakeholders consistently praised the directorate’s staff and the quality of the interpretive positions issued and that they viewed the directorate as the authoritative voice of income tax interpretive expertise in the Government of Canada. The quality of the directorate’s work provides stakeholders with the support they need to comply with Canada’s income tax laws. In addition, stakeholders see folios and the Dedicated Telephone Service as beneficial to their compliance efforts and abilities to respect their obligations.
The timeliness of the directorate’s interpretive positions was stakeholders’ most cited concern. This issue is impacted by a variety of factors, both within and outside of the directorate’s control. Timeliness was particularly a concern for external interpretations responding to a tax practitioner’s submission because the directorate prioritizes other services, such as urgent internal workloads. Ultimately, a lack of timeliness is impacting requests for interpretive positions. The number of requests decreased over the period reviewed by the evaluation. This decrease could be a sign that taxpayers, practitioners and CRA auditors are relying less on the directorate for guidance and that they are either seeking alternative interpretations from the private sector or risk-managing their tax positions through the appeals process. In the long term, these two scenarios could weaken voluntary compliance.
The evaluation team’s review of other tax administrations found that some use a decentralized program model to develop interpretive positions. The directorate could use some of these practices as a means to leverage technical expertise and address workload challenges. Currently, some gaps in performance measurement practices exist within the directorate such as reporting on service standard results that are more transparent for Canadians with regard to meeting expectations.
Overall, the directorate plays a leading role in the consistent application of the Income Tax Act across the CRA and the Government of Canada. At the same time, opportunities exist to align resources and practices with priorities, which will allow the directorate to achieve its intended outcomes and meet stakeholder expectations.
Summary of recommendations
In order to meet stakeholder expectations, the Income Tax Rulings Directorate should develop a strategy to manage how services are prioritized, delivered, measured and reported on. This strategy should leverage technical capacity across the CRA and incorporate enhanced performance measurement practices.
Management response
The Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs Branch agrees with the recommendations in this report and has developed related action plans. The Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch has determined that they appear reasonable to address the recommendations.
1.1.  Importance
The CRA administers tax, benefits, and related programs and ensures taxpayer compliance on behalf of governments across Canada. In doing so, it contributes to the ongoing economic and social well-being of Canadians.
This evaluation is important because Canada’s tax system relies on taxpayers to self-assess and pay the income taxes that they owe. Taxpayers’ ability to comply with legislation depends on their understanding of how the rules apply to their circumstances. To reduce uncertainty, the Income Tax Rulings Directorate serves as the authoritative voice of the CRA in interpreting the application of income tax laws for taxpayers, tax auditors, and other government stakeholders. When the intent of income tax laws is not clearly communicated, taxpayers might develop their own interpretations that incentivize tax avoidance. The consequences of not providing accurate and timely interpretive positions could impact the CRA’s ability to support taxpayers in meeting their tax obligations.
2. Background
The Income Tax Rulings Directorate is the centre of income tax interpretive expertise within the CRA. Its mandate is to provide the CRA’s interpretation of the Income Tax Act, the Income Tax Regulations, all related statutes, and the Income Tax Conventions that Canada has with other countries. In the 2018 to 2019 fiscal year, the directorate had 181 staff members, including senior managers, support staff, rulings officers, and managers. The directorate is primarily responsible for providing taxpayers with information through its interpretive positions of technical information relevant to taxpayers’ particular situations.
The directorate also liaises with taxpayers, their authorized representatives, and other CRA employees to improve information sharing, build relationships, and provide technical support and guidance on income tax legislation. The directorate delivers National Technical Capacity Building Forums for employees to develop their technical capacity. The directorate also consults with the Department of Finance and the Department of Justice with respect to proposed income tax legislation and litigation, chairs key committees (such as the General Anti-Avoidance Rule Committee), and participates in roundtable discussions with key external stakeholders.
The directorate provides interpretive positions to internal and external stakeholders through the following key activities:
Advance income tax rulings: A taxpayer or their representative can request an advance income tax ruling if they would like to understand how the CRA will apply a specific provision of income tax law to a proposed transaction. The directorate charges a fee for this service, and the result is binding on the CRA.
Technical interpretations: The directorate provides taxpayers, their representatives, and CRA employees (such as Compliance Programs Branch employees) and, at times, other government departments with written technical interpretations on specific provisions of Canada’s income tax law. A fee is not charged for a technical interpretation. The directorate also responds to other enquiries on a range of technical topics, including past interpretations.
Folios: The directorate publishes folios that provide the CRA’s technical interpretation of and position on certain provisions contained in the Income Tax Act. Folios are organized by chapters; each chapter summarizes the CRA’s interpretations related to a specific subject. Between April 2014 and March 2019, the directorate received over 4.8 million visits to its income tax folios on the CRA website.
Dedicated Telephone Service: During the 2014 Red Tape Reduction consultations, small businesses and their representatives identified a need for greater access to technical expertise to respond to increasingly complex technical enquiries. As a result, the directorate launched the Dedicated Telephone Service pilot project in July 2017. In 2019, it became a permanent program.
For an overview of these activities and how they support the directorate’s outcomes, see Appendix A for the logic model.
3. Methodologies
The evaluation study covers a five-year period, between fiscal years 2014 to 2015 and fiscal year 2018 to 2019. The evaluation team used the following methodologies:
data analysis of the directorate’s workloads
case studies of advance income tax rulings through the tax continuum
file and document reviews of the directorate’s published positions and working papers
internal and external surveys of users of the directorate’s services
interviews with the directorate’s staff and stakeholders
review of five other tax administrations and their rulings functions
Evaluation issues and research questions are included in Appendix B, along with a detailed description of the methodologies used. See Appendix C for a list of stakeholders and Appendix D for a glossary of terms. See Appendix E for a high-level summary table of the review of other income tax ruling programs from other tax administrations.
4.1 Stakeholders were generally satisfied with the Income Tax Rulings Directorate staff and the quality of the interpretive positions issued.
One of the most important ways that the directorate serves stakeholders is by providing them with the certainty that they need to make informed decisions. Confidence in the quality of their work and the validity of their positions provide stakeholders with the assurance that they need to voluntarily comply with Canada’s income tax laws.
The evaluation team conducted internal and external surveys among requestors of interpretive positions over the evaluation period to assess user experience and understanding as well as the quality of the directorate’s interpretive positions. For the most part, these survey results were positive across the board, as shown in Figure 1.
Interviews corroborated the survey findings. Stakeholders found the directorate to be knowledgeable and professional, and they valued the depth of analysis and the overall quality of the interpretive positions.
The directorate credits the quality of their positions to their multi-tiered quality assurance process, which validates analysis of the interpretive positions before they are released to stakeholders. Rulings officers, managers, and directors all hold technical expertise within their specific divisions. As interpretive positions are finalized and reviewed, interpretive positions are vetted at each level of the division. The directorate has a documented procedure to ensure that this process takes place for every file.
4.2. Although the timeliness of the Income Tax Rulings Directorate’s interpretive positions is influenced by a variety of factors, it is a concern for stakeholders.
The timeliness of the directorate’s advance income tax rulings and technical interpretations is a key outcome to ensure that stakeholders have the information they need to interpret and comply with Canada’s income tax laws.
The primary method that the directorate uses to measure its performance is through service standards based on timeliness. The directorate has two service standards to ensure that taxpayers are provided with timely information. The first is that 80% of advance income tax rulings issued by the CRA are provided within 90 business days of receiving all essential information from a requester.  The second is that 85% of technical interpretations issued by the CRA are provided within 90 business days of receiving all essential information from the client. These service standards provide taxpayers, their representatives and internal users with the expectation on when they should receive a response from the directorate.
Figure 2 shows that from 2014 to 2015 fiscal year to 2018 to 2019 fiscal year, in most cases, the directorate either achieved or nearly met its service standards for its rulings and technical positions. One noteworthy outlier is the service offered to tax practitioners for an external interpretation via an individual submission as outlined on the CRA’s website (Information Circular 70-6R9). Besides the directorate’s participation at external conferences, this is the primary service offered to tax practitioners who are seeking a technical interpretation. In the 2018 to 2019 fiscal year, this service met the service standard 68% of the time.
It is important to highlight that the directorate’s 90-day target is measured on a basis of “receiving all essential information.” This means that, when calculating the service standard, the directorate does not take into account the time spent waiting for stakeholders to provide additional information that the directorate considers is pertinent to issue a position. Once the request has been received, if the directorate determines that additional information is required, the file is put on hold until the additional information is submitted. Over the review period of the evaluation, 93% of advance income tax rulings, 32% of external interpretations and 41% of internal interpretations were put on hold.
To measure timeliness as an overall outcome, the evaluation team considered the total time that it takes to complete a ruling or a technical position. This duration more closely reflects the time that a stakeholder waits to receive the information that they requested. When considering “on hold” time, the length of time to issue an interpretive position can be significantly longer, as shown in Figure 3. In particular, for an advance income tax ruling, the average on hold time is longer than the actual time the directorate is working on the file. Advance income tax rulings are often highly complex transactions that typically require a large amount of supporting information to ensure that all provisions of income tax laws have been considered. As such, they can take a long period of time to complete.
During interviews, stakeholders often noted that the total elapsed time to receive a ruling or technical interpretation was long. A survey among external and internal stakeholders showed that about two-thirds of external stakeholders expressed that responses were timely, while half of internal stakeholders expressed the response was timely (see Figure 4).
4.2.1. Timeliness is at times outside of the Income Tax Rulings Directorate’s direct control.
From the directorate’s perspective, considering the problems of legal uncertainty and its consequences, the directorate must ensure that its rulings and technical interpretations are as accurate as possible. As such, it cannot move forward on a request without having all of the pertinent information. There are instances when taxpayers or their representatives hesitate to provide the directorate with all of the necessary facts without obtaining official assurance of the tax consequences. This behaviour increases the amount of time that a file is on hold.
External stakeholders expressed a range of perspectives in interviews in regard to timeliness. Some communicated that the directorate sometimes requested facts that were not relevant to the transaction, and they believed that they had provided all the required information with the initial submission. Others expressed that a lack of communication regarding expectations early on in the process resulted in additional time being needed to gather information. However, some external stakeholders understood that certain files are complex by nature and require the directorate to do its due diligence and take the time needed.
From an internal stakeholder perspective, particularly that of CRA auditors, the procedures to receive the directorate’s services can present barriers. For certain complex files, field auditors have to go through a series of gating processes before reaching the directorate (such as working through the program area’s technical application teams) before submitting the request to the directorate. This process can result in delays even before the directorate has received the request.
4.2.2. The Income Tax Rulings Directorate’s competing priorities impact some workloads more than others thereby influencing the timeliness of services
The directorate’s staff expressed that the timeliness of issuing advance income tax rulings and technical interpretations is impacted by competing priorities and constraints on capacity. Staff cited a rise in other highly prioritized workloads, such as ministerial mail, media requests, and Assistant Commissioner and Commissioner requests which take precedence over other workloads. As illustrated in Figure 5, an analysis of workloads shows that advance income tax rulings, external interpretations, and internal interpretations represented 74% of recorded hours in the 2014 to 2015 fiscal year for files completed. In fiscal year 2018 to 2019, that number fell to 65%.
The directorate’s written procedures state that advance tax rulings should have the highest priority, followed by internal interpretations, and then external interpretations. The evaluation team analyzed the directorate’s case management data and interviewed staff to understand how the directorate prioritizes workloads. The evaluation team found that how the directorate prioritizes their work in practice is not always aligned with their stated priorities. Figure 6 broadly illustrates the evaluation team’s view of how the directorate prioritizes its workloads in practice, with the notable exceptions described below.
In practice, the directorate prioritized interpretations based on a number of factors such as importance, and urgency of each incoming request by assessing when and how much time will be spent on it, as well as the degree of technical expertise required (and available) to do the work.
High profile and time sensitive internal requests receive first priority (queries from the Minister’s office, Commissioner’s office, media enquiries and ATIP requests from the Public Affairs Branch) with other types of internal requests also receiving high priority such as:
appeal referrals
audit referrals with pending statute bar dates
legislative drafting consultations requests from the Department of Finance
requests for materials or opinions related to the litigation process from the Department of Justice
Other internal referrals with pending deadlines are also prioritized - such as requests for technical reviews of forms and guides that are in final circulation prior to publication. For remaining workloads the directorate considers critical stakeholder deadlines when completing work, with rulings given priority to the extent possible. The directorate also considers the importance and potential impact of the interpretation (number of taxpayers impacted, vulnerability of community etc.).
Given all of these considerations, competing priorities have impacted the directorate’s ability to respond to external interpretations via a taxpayer’s submission as they have become the least prioritized service. As a result, they take longer to complete. Despite being one of the largest recorded activities in terms of hours worked and a publicly offered service, when weighed against other demands, these requests can be pushed down the queue. For external stakeholders, the directorate prioritizes external interpretations delivered through conferences. These technical positions are submitted on behalf of various tax associations, who vet and triage the most pressing areas for the tax community. As such, they are viewed as having a greater impact on the tax system. In turn, the external interpretations delivered through conferences can impact the timeliness of internal interpretations as the directorate must divert resources to meet the influx of work during the time of year where multiple conferences are being held.
The directorate acknowledges that prioritizing is necessary as the program strives to action all eligible requests with a finite number of resources. An international comparative study conducted by the evaluation team found that the five other tax administrations who were reviewed do not offer interpretations on an individual external request basis; whereas the CRA was the only tax administration to provide this service.
The approach used by other tax administrations is to publish technical positions proactively based on observed trends; consultations with the tax community, the public, and professional bodies; or changes in legislation. This is similar to the directorate’s approach in participating at conferences and working with tax associations to vet the most important tax topics in need of interpretation.
4.3. Requests for interpretive positions are decreasing. Stakeholders rely on timely interpretive positions for tax certainty.
Seeking out a ruling or a technical interpretation from the directorate is voluntarily done by stakeholders who wish to have tax certainty from the CRA. From an outcome perspective, the evaluation considered the extent to which stakeholders seek out the directorate for its services in their efforts to voluntarily comply with Canada’s income tax laws.
Figure 7 shows that between fiscal years 2015 to 2016 and 2018 to 2019, requests for rulings and technical positions decreased. Advance income tax rulings decreased by 40%, external interpretations by 26%, and internal interpretations by 22%.
4.3.1. Stakeholders identified timeliness as a deterrent to seeking the Income Tax Rulings Directorate’s services due to the increasing speed of business.
Internal and external stakeholders repeatedly mentioned in interviews that the speed of business is increasing and that obtaining clarity on the CRA’s interpretations in a timely manner is becoming more and more critical. Accordingly, stakeholders reported their unwillingness to wait for an interpretive position. Instead, they risk managed their tax position through the appeals process.
External stakeholders suggested that businesses will alter a planned transaction to one with greater tax certainty instead of pursuing a new ruling or a technical position. Alternatively, external stakeholders will forgo certainty from the CRA and come to their own opinion. Or, they will seek alternative sources of information, such as positions offered externally by the private sector, which risk being inconsistent with those of the CRA. External stakeholders suggested that a ruling provides the most value when it meets three key criteria: the materiality of the transaction is high, the uncertainty of tax treatment is high and, most importantly, the transaction is not time-sensitive.
With respect to internal stakeholders in the CRA, field auditors reported their willingness to take a position rather than wait for a response from the directorate. There is a disincentive to seek a technical position as CRA field auditors prioritize completing files or closing audits before statute-barred dates, rather than waiting for an interpretive position. The Appeals Branch expressed anecdotally that audit assessments are at times overturned due to misinterpreted tax legislation and that these cases could have been avoided had the auditor sought an interpretation. The CRA does not track the frequency of these scenarios.
These scenarios might partially explain the decrease in rulings and interpretation requests.  Other contributing factors include external stakeholders now having access to all past rulings and technical positions through third-party publishers and stakeholders having greater access to the directorate’s databases. In the long term, a trend of decreasing service requests could undermine the directorate's role in supporting voluntary compliance.
4.4. Folios and the Dedicated Telephone Service support stakeholders in their compliance efforts.
In addition to delivering new rulings or technical positions, the directorate delivers a number of services to provide stakeholders with greater access to the information that they need to support their compliance efforts. In particular, the directorate publishes folios that summarize past CRA positions by topic. Also, in 2017, it launched the Dedicated Telephone Service to provide tax practitioners with access to technical expertise to respond to complex technical enquiries.
4.4.1. A wide range of both internal and external stakeholders rely on folios and request more coverage of tax topics.
Stakeholders, both internal and external, were generally complimentary toward published folios. They found folios comprehensive and easily understood. Figure 8 shows the key survey results.
Interviews revealed that folios are particularly important to both generalist accountants providing advice to a wide range of clients as well as CRA auditors in the field.
As revealed by the survey, respondents felt that there is a lack of topic coverage. When folios were first conceived by the directorate, the intent was to replace the previous practice of interpretation bulletins. However, the goal of widespread coverage of past bulletins has experienced delays. An analysis of workloads showed that folio development dropped after a major push in the 2016 to 2017 fiscal year. The directorate cited a lack of resources and other pressing priorities taking precedence over folio development.
Because folios do not cover all topics, stakeholders are pressed to navigate between the folios and past interpretation bulletins. However, interpretation bulletins are only relevant at the time of publication and are not evergreen like folios. Furthermore, the Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat policy has resulted in the interpretation bulletins being categorized as “Archived Content” on the CRA website.   Therefore, there is confusion about the validity of the interpretation bulletins among the tax community. The 2018 evaluation study, CRA Administration of Domestic T3 Trusts, also highlighted problems of clarity due to archived bulletins.
A survey among tax practitioners that was conducted for the 2020 evaluation study, CRA information resources for small businesses, further supports these findings. This survey revealed that, within the tax community, folios are the most relied upon CRA resource after E-services.
4.4.2. The Dedicated Telephone Service is a value-added practice.
The Dedicated Telephone Service provides small and medium businesses and their representatives access to CRA technical expertise. The Dedicated Telephone Service was launched in 2017 and received funding to become a permanent program in 2019.
The international comparative study found that the CRA was the only tax administration to provide a specialized and dedicated phone line for complex interpretive tax questions. The directorate also supported the pilot phase of the service through post-call and annual satisfaction surveys. In the 2018 to 2019 fiscal year, the post-call survey showed a satisfaction rate of 98%, and the annual survey of 78%. Most negative feedback from the survey related to the lack of client-specific advice, but this is outside the intended scope of the service (that is, to help callers find the information and guidance they need to resolve their interpretive income tax issues – and not to provide a determination).
When the phone service was first launched, it was estimated that it would process 12,000 calls a year. In the 2017 to 2018 fiscal year, the directorate received 3,102 calls, and in 2018 to 2019 it received 3,730 calls. The directorate associated the low call volumes with the lack of an awareness strategy (given its launch as a pilot), the slow national roll-out of the service, and the restricted eligibility of people who could use the service. At the time of the evaluation, these areas were addressed as the service expanded into a full program.
4.5 Internal and external stakeholders rely on and value the Income Tax Rulings Directorate's expertise in supporting their efforts to voluntarily comply with Canada’s income tax laws.
The directorate delivers a variety of services to bring certainty to Canada’s income tax laws. The ultimate outcome of these activities is to provide the assistance and information stakeholders need to voluntarily comply with their tax obligations.
In interviews, stakeholders were unanimous in highlighting the directorate as the best resource for technical income tax expertise in the Government of Canada, and they emphasized their strong and professional working relationships.
Aside from the core mandate of issuing advance income tax rulings and technical interpretations, the directorate works horizontally across the CRA and with other government departments to ensure an accurate and consistent application of the law. Examples of this work include:
chairing the CRA’s General Anti-Avoidance Rule committee
participating as a member of the Audit File Resolution Committee;
reviewing forms and guides across the CRA to ensure accuracy and consistency
working with the Department of Finance on the development of new or amended income tax laws
working with the Department of Justice on matters of tax litigation
The directorate also maintains a repository of its interpretive positions together with other research resources in a searchable format. Internal procedures are in place to ensure that out of date positions and/or reversed positions are flagged, with reference to needed research sources. Internal stakeholders rely on this database to ensure internal consistency and for accuracy in applying the law.
One of the largest benefits cited by CRA stakeholders when working with the directorate was receiving informal advice. This was seen as a more direct and timely means of getting a response. Various stakeholders across the CRA have built informal networks over time with the directorate so that they feel comfortable calling an employee directly at the directorate. The drawback of this approach is that these interactions are entirely dependent on personal networks, informal advice is often not formally or institutionally captured, and some groups are at a disadvantage for not knowing who to speak with. Interviewees reported that the directorate would benefit from having a more formal, albeit simple, form of outreach and networking so that the technical areas across the CRA are aware of whom to contact.
The evaluation team found limits to the directorate’s influence on voluntary compliance when supporting new, or complex legislation. In interviews, some external stakeholders indicated that the directorate does not act proactively enough to support voluntary compliance. In particular, these stakeholders cited the recent new legislation surrounding the tax on split income (TOSI), where they expressed frustration with both the TOSI legislation itself, and subsequent interpretations provided by the CRA. The evaluation team conducted a case study to examine stakeholder feedback.
4.6 Technical expertise is in high demand and the Income Tax Rulings Directorate faces internal competition to retain qualified personnel.
During interviews with employees of the directorate, the most prominent challenge cited was ensuring that there was an adequate number of staff with the right technical capacity. The concern is based, in part, on an increase in competition for technical experts across the CRA.
The directorate often linked its ability to retain and develop technical expertise to its ability to deliver interpretive positions in a timely manner. At the time of the evaluation, the directorate was working on a new comprehensive human resources strategy. This strategy included examining business priorities, identifying gaps in the workforce and technical capacity, and bridging these gaps through  recruitment and training.
The international comparative study showed that program structures of income tax rulings functions vary across tax administrations. Some tax administrations have a centralized model, such as the directorate. Others are decentralized and a counsel’s office will work horizontally with various compliance functions to issue rulings and technical interpretations. In one case, non-complex rulings are completed by compliance program staff.
This decentralized model was mentioned in interviews with CRA stakeholders. They suggested that it would be beneficial to the CRA if the various technical experts across program areas worked more collaboratively with the directorate. The compliance functions in the CRA commented that increased networking could be a way to share knowledge and build stronger working relationships.
4.7 There are gaps in performance measurement practices.
A common practice in evaluation is to assess the program’s performance measurement practices. This is done to determine the adequacy by which the program measures and reports expected outcomes.
The directorate applies the service standard on technical interpretations to a variety of interpretive services and then aggregates the services into one overall indicator. These services include the core activity of an external interpretation for tax practitioners as described on information circular IC70-6R9, internal interpretations to CRA and other government stakeholders, and a suite of interpretive work that the directorate groups under this indicator when reporting on the CRA’s official performance results.
These other types of services vary significantly, have different clients and expectations, and do not necessarily meet the characteristics of an issued technical interpretation. Some of these items are high volume and quick turnaround, and as such are responded to promptly (much sooner than the 90-day service standard expectation). As Figure 9 below shows, in the 2018 to 2019 fiscal year, external interpretations via submission only represented 20% of the volume that is amalgamated under the service standard indicator.
5. Conclusion
Overall, the evaluation team found that stakeholders both within and outside the Government of Canada recognized the Income Tax Rulings Directorate as an authoritative voice on matters requiring income tax technical expertise. The directorate plays a critical role in Canada’s tax system by providing the tax certainty Canadians need to comply with their obligations. The directorate works with taxpayers, their authorized representatives, other government departments and within the CRA itself to improve information sharing, build relationships, and provide technical support and guidance on income tax legislation.
The directorate was consistently praised for the quality of its work, but it is under increasing scrutiny to deliver positions in a timely manner. External and internal pressures, such as the increasing speed of business and the difficulty of developing and retaining technical expertise, are putting more and more pressure on the directorate and the CRA to work more quickly and develop new approaches to meet expectations.
The directorate can potentially mitigate these pressures by understanding which workloads or services provide the most value and exploring how the CRA can work better horizontally.
6. Acknowledgements
In closing, we would like to acknowledge, recognize, and thank the Income Tax Rulings Directorate; the Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch; the Appeals Branch; the Collections and Verification Branch; the Compliance Programs Branch; the Legal Services Branch; the Department of Finance; the Canadian Bar Association; l’Association de planification fiscale et financière; the Canadian Tax Foundation; and the Department of Justice for the time dedicated and the information provided during the course of this engagement.
Appendix A: Logic model
Appendix B: Evaluation issues and methodologies
Issue 1: To what extent are the Income Tax Rulings Directorate’s activities achieving expected outcomes?

To what extent do the Directorate’s programs provide stakeholders with timely, consistent, and accurate interpretations of Canada’s income tax laws?
To what extent do the Directorate’s programs support stakeholders’ application of Canada’s income tax laws?
To what extent does the assistance and information provided by the Directorate support stakeholders in their effort to voluntarily comply with Canada’s income tax laws?
To what extent does the Directorate contribute to taxpayers’ compliance with Canada’s tax laws?

Issue 2: Are there alternatives that could strengthen the Income Tax Rulings Directorate’s administration of its programs?

What changes, if any, could make it easier for taxpayers to meet their tax obligations through the services provided by the Income Tax Ruling Directorate?


What alternative strategies or best practices could be adopted from other tax administrations?

Methodology
The methodology for examination included the following:
Appendix B: Evaluation issues and methodologies
Issue 1: To what extent are the Income Tax Rulings Directorate’s activities achieving expected outcomes?
To what extent do the Directorate’s programs provide stakeholders with timely, consistent, and accurate interpretations of Canada’s income tax laws?
To what extent do the Directorate’s programs support stakeholders’ application of Canada’s income tax laws?
To what extent does the assistance and information provided by the Directorate support stakeholders in their effort to voluntarily comply with Canada’s income tax laws?
To what extent does the Directorate contribute to taxpayers’ compliance with Canada’s tax laws?
Issue 2: Are there alternatives that could strengthen the Income Tax Rulings Directorate’s administration of its programs?
What changes, if any, could make it easier for taxpayers to meet their tax obligations through the services provided by the Income Tax Ruling Directorate?
What alternative strategies or best practices could be adopted from other tax administrations?
Methodology
The methodology for examination included the following:
Appendix C: Stakeholders
Appendix D: Glossary of terms
Appendix E: Comparison of income tax ruling programs across international tax administrations
Page details
Report a problem on this page







Date modified:
2021-06-11
