Executive Summary
Introduction
This report presents the findings, conclusions and recommendations of the Enforcement and Disclosures Programs Evaluation.
The issues pursued by this study were:
To what extent has the Enforcement and Disclosures Directorate (EDD) been successful in achieving its mission and enhancing the Agency's efforts to address non-compliance?
Does the Agency have a comprehensive approach to enforcement?
To what extent do internal and external factors impact the ability of EDD to achieve its objectives?
Background
The Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) makes every attempt, through the provision of information and education, to assist taxpayers to voluntarily comply with their tax obligations. It also has the means to use both civil and criminal interventions on those who deliberately choose not to comply.
The CRA response to addressing the most serious forms of non-compliance is focussed within the EDD. The EDD is situated within the Compliance Programs Branch and tasked with a mission to deter, detect and correct tax evasion and non-compliance in the criminal economy.
The size of the “criminal economy” [Footnote 1] , the magnitude of tax fraud/evasion and the extent of criminal attacks on the CRA are all unknown. However, various indicators suggest that:
The criminal economy in Canada may represent billions of dollars in untaxed revenues;
Tax evasion/fraud is a serious problem; and
Increasingly, tax administrations are the victims of serious criminal attacks by organized crime and others.
The two programs within the EDD tasked with dealing with criminal non-compliance and the criminal element are the Criminal Investigations Program (CIP) and the Special Enforcement Program (SEP).
The CIP has broad based powers to investigate and gather evidence to support a prosecution of “tax evasion” or fraud. These powers are similar to the powers of any law enforcement agency with some limitations. During 2008-2009 with 453 full-time equivalents (FTEs), 199 full-scale investigations were referred for prosecution; 292 cases were prosecuted [Footnote 2] and 97% resulted in a conviction. Convictions resulted in almost $29 million in additional tax revenues, fines of just over $19 million, 42 prison sentences and 13 community services sentences.
The SEP conducts civil audits and undertakes other civil enforcement actions on individuals known or suspected of deriving income from illegal activities such as drug trafficking, fraud, prostitution and money laundering including motorcycle gang members and members of other organized crime syndicates. During 2008-2009 with 182 FTEs, SEP conducted 1,176 audits resulting in just over $101 million in assessments.
Two other programs within EDD that do not necessarily deal with criminal non-compliance or with the criminal element are the Voluntary Disclosures and Informant Leads Programs. The mandate of the Voluntary Disclosures Program (VDP) is to facilitate voluntary compliance with the legislation administered by the CRA by fostering and processing voluntary disclosures by non-compliant taxpayers and/or their representatives. The Informant Leads Program receives and processes tips or leads provided by the public regarding cases of potential non-compliance.
Evaluation Methodology
A range of data collection and analysis methodologies were used in conducting the evaluation study. These included: internal and external interviews; detailed questionnaires sent to three foreign tax administrations (New Zealand, Australia and the United Kingdom); document, literature and file reviews; data analysis; and consultations with EDD middle and senior management. The evaluation also relied on an advisory committee to provide expert advice at critical points during the evaluation.
Main Findings
Our evaluation of the EDD has identified that it is achieving results. Between 2004-05 and 2008-09, CIP contributed to the successful prosecution and subsequent conviction of almost 1,200 cases of criminal non-compliance. During the same period, almost 5,000 SEP audits of the criminal element resulted in the identification of over $428 million in federal tax revenues owing. However, the evaluation uncovered substantive issues that may be limiting the program's ability to achieve its mission of deterrence, detection and correction.
First, detection and referral of potential enforcement cases is largely occurring outside the EDD program in isolation of any comparative assessment against other cases. Selection or rejection of cases is office specific and not necessarily based on how those cases align to strategic objectives.
Second, with respect to deterrence, there appears to be little awareness on the part of the public about the Agency's enforcement capacity. Efforts to publicize convictions of prosecuted cases lack a proactive engagement of the media. The Agency has no knowledge of the take up rate of press releases relating to tax crime convictions. Although outside the Agency's direct realm of control, the average number of convictions resulting in custodial sentences for tax cases fall well below the average of other tax administrations and of white collar crime cases prosecuted in Canada. Data indicates that just over half of all fines levied by the courts with respect to convictions go uncollected. We found that over 85% of SEP assessments go uncollected. Further, there is no evidence that the Agency has a clear well publicized deterrence strategy that clearly links to a coordinated detection capability.
Third, although the EDD is accountable for program outcomes it lacks complete authority for program delivery. This has had an impact on partnerships, detection, case selection and the ability to achieve their mission.
Fourth, key to the success of EDD programs are the relationships with public prosecutions, law enforcement agencies, collections and audit. We found that each of these relationships is showing signs of strain or incompatibility directly impacting objectives achievement.
We also found that both the Informant Leads Program and the VDP perform review processes focussed on a taxpayer group that would normally be addressed by regular audit areas. Only a small percentage of leads and voluntary disclosures are referred to CIP or SEP. While analysis of leads and disclosures may be a source of “strategic and tactical intelligence”, the majority of cases are not among the criminally non-compliant or suspected to be in the criminal economy.
Overall, the Agency has a decentralized and somewhat disparate approach to enforcement and lacks a clear well articulated and operationally entrenched enforcement strategy. Shared ownership of objectives achievement is not clearly understood and managed and accountability with only limited authority has impacted the EDDs efforts to achieve its mandate.
It is important to note that the issues identified in this report are not unique to the CRA. Within the last 10 years tax administrations in the United States, Australia and the United Kingdom have all confronted many of these same issues.  The Webster Report, commissioned by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service, identified concerns with the Criminal Investigations delivery model, communication strategy and partnerships with legal counsel.  In the United Kingdom, the HMRC examined and modified processes around the use of intelligence and broader enforcement powers.  The Australian Tax Office has also modified its delivery model and established a new partnership approach to deal with egregious forms of non-compliance with the introduction of Project Wickenby.
Recommendations
Based on the findings we offer the following recommendations:
The Agency should determine the extent to which it wishes to strengthen its capability to pursue both criminal non-compliance and non-compliance in the criminal economy and then develop a comprehensive enforcement strategy. 
The EDD should engage internal and external partners in dialogue to discuss roles, expectations, impediments and responsibilities and seek solutions to the factors that appear to be negatively impacting partnerships. 
The Agency should review the appropriateness of the location of the Informant Leads Program and the VDP within the EDD.
This report also identifies a number of alternative structures and processes employed by other tax administrations, both domestic and international, that provide options to consider.
1.0 Introduction
Compliance Programs Branch (CPB), requested assistance from the Program Evaluation Division to assess the effectiveness of EDD in achieving its mandate. Program Evaluation Division responded by developing an Evaluation Framework that defined the scope and approach of the evaluation study. The framework was approved by the Agency Management Committee in July 2008.
The issues pursued by this study were:
To what extent has EDD been successful in achieving its mission and enhancing the Agency's efforts to address non-compliance?
Does the Agency have a comprehensive approach to enforcement?
To what extent do internal and external factors impact the ability of EDD to achieve its objectives?
This report presents the findings of the evaluation of EDD programs.
2.2.2 The Special Enforcement Program
The SEP conducts civil audits and undertakes other civil enforcement actions, such as enforcing the filing of tax returns, on individuals known or suspected of deriving income from illegal activities. The program objectives are:
to reduce the accumulation of unreported illicit wealth amassed by these individuals, thereby limiting the financial ability to continue or expand illegal activities
to reduce tax non-compliance in the criminal economy
In contrast with voluntarily and contingently compliant taxpayers who generally have reasonable records available when they undergo regular audits, it's unlikely that individuals who are involved in illegal activities keep records of their criminal proceeds. Most transactions are likely of a cash nature to minimize tracking their revenues. Auditing these individuals is therefore very difficult and often requires establishing the net worth of the individual by comparing their standard of living to reported income.
SEP audits target individuals involved in drug trafficking, fraud, prostitution and money laundering including motorcycle gang members and members of organized crime syndicates [Footnote 9]. There is an inherent risk to the SEP auditor in auditing persons involved in criminality.
The SEP is dependent on the following partnerships and close working relationships with other organizations both external and internal to the CRA in achieving its objectives:
The RCMP, municipal and provincial police agencies and FINTRAC for the detection and referral of audit cases.
Taxpayer Services and Debt Management Branch (TSDMB) is responsible for administering collections actions for SEP assessments.
During 2008-2009 SEP conducted 1,176 audits resulting in just over $101 million in “Tax Earned by Audit” (TEBA). Figure 3 presents the trends in key SEP audit results from 1997-1998 to 2008-2009.
Figure 3
2.2.3 The Voluntary Disclosures Program
The mandate of the VDP is to facilitate voluntary compliance with the legislation administered by the CRA by processing voluntary disclosures by non-compliant taxpayers and/or their representatives. The linkage between the VDP mandate and the Directorate's mandate to “deter, detect and correct, tax evasion and criminal non-compliance” is unclear.
The VDP is designed to encourage taxpayers to voluntarily make disclosures to correct inaccurate or incomplete information, or to disclose information not previously reported without penalty or prosecution and sometimes with reduced interest.
During 2008-2009, 11,390 processed voluntary disclosures resulted in almost $572 million in additional federal tax revenues, as well as about $38.6 million in additional “provincial tax” revenues. The penalties waived on accepted voluntary disclosures amounted to about $107 million during 2008. There was also about $86 million in interest waived as a result of accepted voluntary disclosures during this period.
2.2.4 The Informant Leads Program
The Agency cannot possibly identify every case of non-compliance; therefore, the Agency encourages Canadians, through the Informant Leads Program, to provide it with tips or leads to assist it in better addressing non-compliance.
The Informant Leads Program is delivered with support from CRA audit programs. Audit staff regularly work with the Leads units in reviewing leads obtained and selecting those for more in-depth examination.
There were 24,280 leads received during fiscal 2008-2009. Average growth in the number of leads received has remained flat from 1998-1999 to 2008-2009, though there have been fluctuations during this period.
3.0 Methodology
All of the following data collection and analysis methodologies have been used in the conduct of this evaluation to yield balanced and supportable findings.
Interviews (internal to the CRA) - Individual and group interviews were carried out with 200 Agency management and staff from the EDD, Audit, TSDMB, Appeals Branch, Public Affairs Branch (PAB) and the Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs Branch (LPRAB) involved in or impacted by enforcement programs across the various Headquarter (HQ) branches, regional offices and TSOs. 
 Interviews (external to the CRA) - Individual and group interviews were carried out with 150 representatives from external partners and other organizations with enforcement responsibilities (e.g. PPSC, RCMP, Ontario Securities Commission, Competition Bureau, Criminal Intelligence Services Canada and Ontario, Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation (CMHC), Service Alberta, Ministère du Revenu Québec (MRQ), Insurance Bureau of Canada, Justice Alberta).
 Comparison to Other Tax Administrations (Domestic and Foreign) - Questionnaires were sent to three foreign tax administration (New Zealand, Australia and the United Kingdom) to gather information on their enforcement programs. Meetings with representatives from the US Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and US Department of Justice (DOJ) also took place in Washington. Interviews were also held with representatives of the MRQ.
 Document and File Review - Relevant documents and electronic media were reviewed including: Agency and EDD annual reports; EDD policies and procedures; Agency press releases; and, Memoranda of Understanding. 
 Literature Review - An extensive review of over 150 reports, surveys, journals, studies and other literature pertaining to regulatory enforcement was carried out.
 Data Analysis - Program data was analyzed using descriptive statistics to identify trends, patterns, profiles and results. Program data files were linked to tax audit data, assessing data, objections and appeals data and “non-filer enforcement” data. Available data regarding white collar crime, tax evasion, fraud and other types of crime were also gathered and analyzed.
 File Review - A review of 208 CIP and SEP files was carried out at three TSOs.
 EDD Symposium - Broad consultation and discussions on draft evaluation findings was undertaken with EDD senior management, Assistant Directors of Enforcement and Regional Program Advisors during the May 2010 Enforcement and Disclosures Symposium. Additionally, presentations were made by three other tax administrations about their respective enforcement programs.
An evaluation advisory committee was also established to review evaluation plans, findings and conclusions and to offer advice. The advisory committee was comprised of senior Agency executives and subject matter experts who were selected on the basis of their skills, knowledge, and experience.
5.1 Informant Leads and Voluntary Disclosures Programs do not align with EDD mandate
As indicated earlier, the Informant Leads Program is largely a processing function that screens informant leads to determine if there is non-compliance with tax legislation. Cases that contain elements of non-compliance are referred to the relevant compliance program area for action. Almost three quarters of all leads are abandoned as they lack sufficient evidence of non-compliance. The vast majority of accepted leads are accepted by regular audit programs with less than 6% accepted by SEP and CIP (see Figure 4). Leads information can potentially serve as a source of intelligence about emerging trends in tax evasion and criminal non-compliance. However, given that the leads are primarily a source of information for programs outside of EDD, it may be better situated elsewhere.
Figure 4 presents the percentages of leads accepted by different areas within the CPB during the 2006-2007 and 2007-2008 fiscal years. There were about 22,000 Leads received during each of 2006-2007 and 2007-2008.
Figure 4
5.2.1 Detection and Case Selection
Detection is only one element of a multifaceted approach to enforcement that should not be considered in isolation; it must be examined within the context of referral and caseload selection and within the context of a deterrence strategy.
Detection and referral of potential enforcement cases occurs outside the EDD program. Approximately 92% of CIP cases are identified by audit programs and just over 70% of SEP cases are identified by external law enforcement agencies. Currently, detection and subsequent referral of potential enforcement cases is based on the merits of each case determined by the person making the referral and not necessarily based on how the case aligns to an overall enforcement strategy or against other files of merit.
Each office selects its caseload based on parameters and factors unique to those offices (e.g. workload pressures, performance agreements, size of case, collectability, chances for success) and largely in isolation of what other offices across CRA are doing or what cases they are selecting. Cases that could potentially represent significant criminal non-compliance can be rejected by a specific TSO enforcement group because of limited resources or other workload pressures.
Data and interviews suggest that offices are choosing smaller cases of a lower dollar value that do not necessarily represent the greatest risk. Figure 6 presents the percentage distribution of convictions resulting from CIP investigations by range of “tax on which convicted” by region. Convictions resulting in less than $100,000 in “tax on which convicted” accounted for 84% of all convictions. In all regions, with the exception of Quebec, just over 60% of cases result in “tax on which convicted” of less than $40,000. This supports the observations by some program staff that offices are choosing smaller cases that represent “quick hits”.
Figure 6
5.3.1 Public Prosecution Service Canada
Both CIP and PPSC interviewees acknowledged that the relationship between CIP investigators and PPSC lawyers is strained. Rejection rates, personalities, lack of consistency and lack of training were all cited as contributing factors. Both lawyers and investigators agreed that the current relationship is affecting objectives achievement.
The quality of the partnership between the CIP Investigators, who are tasked with developing a case, and the PPSC lawyers who determine which cases should be selected for prosecution, can be assessed in a couple of ways. First, data from other tax administrations that track the number of “cases accepted for prosecution” can be used as a point of comparison to gauge the relative success of the Canadian partnership. Further, the perspectives of CIP investigators and PPSC lawyers can shed light on how partnership participants feel about it.
Many of the tax administrations with which Canada traditionally compares itself enjoy relatively high rates of case acceptance. In the IRS, for example, the percentage of tax related investigations rejected by the Department of Justice decreased from 5 percent in fiscal year 2003 to just over 3 percent in fiscal year 2005. The ATO has estimated their rejection rate between 5 and 7 percent.
Based on the relative proportion of cases accepted, the PPSC/CRA partnership appears less successful when placed in this comparative context. A review of CIP statistics indicates that the average percentage of referrals rejected for prosecution over the five year period between 2004-2005 and 2008-2009 was about 23%, ranging from a high of 27% in (2005-2006) to a low of 20% in (2004-2005). Approximately one-quarter of total investigation time (with a range of 12% to 59% depending on the region) was dedicated annually to these cases. In terms of hours invested, CIP investigations required an average of 2,073 hours of investigation time per prosecuted case to complete based on 2008-2009 data.
There may be several plausible explanations relating to the high levels of rejections that the CRA is experiencing (comparatively). A 2009 study of the HMRC Enforcement and Compliance business group concludes that “the Revenue and Customs Prosecution Office become involved in cases at an early stage and therefore, other than a few frontier referrals, all cases are adopted”. Involvement of legal counsel much earlier in the investigation process has been cited by all three tax administrations as a best practice that significantly affects the acceptance rate of cases by their respective prosecutorial bodies. Another factor, which came out of interviews with CIP management and staff, relates to consistency in what constitutes acceptable cases. An example is that in some offices cases referred from SEP to CIP are rejected due to potential issues pertaining to “Jarvis and Ling” jurisprudence whereas in others they would be accepted.
The majority of PPSC prosecutors interviewed expressed concern over the quality of investigative work completed by CIP investigators. Though they all felt that CIP investigators possess excellent accounting skills, PPSC prosecutors noted that cases have become more complex than in the past, especially criminal cases involving tax fraud. They emphasized the importance of training and the level of experience of investigators and commented that many cases are lacking the detailed investigative evidence to support a conviction.
Several human resource management factors may be contributing to this situation. On the one hand, minimal previous experience requirements and modest training may be contributing to a steep on-the-job learning curve. A review of staffing requirements for CIP investigator positions found that potential recruits do not require investigations experience or previous training. Once hired, successful candidates receive two weeks in-house training designed and provided by investigations staff (less than their international counterparts [Footnote 25]). Seasoned CIP investigators and representatives from other tax administrations commented that much of their learning has occurred with experience on-the-job and that it takes approximately five years to become proficient in the field of tax investigations. On the other hand, recent and projected turnover rates suggest that many CIP investigators have not, or will not be, in their positions long enough to develop the skills and knowledge required to consistently deliver consistently good cases to PPSC. Annual turnover in EDD field offices has been estimated by ADEs to be 15% to 25% and within the last year there has been a 50% turnover in ADEs alone. Retirement rates are also projected to remain high in the coming years [Footnote 26]. CIP interviewees have also indicated that lack of career path and classification levels lower than their audit counterparts is affecting turnover.
5.3.2 Royal Canadian Mounted Police
The Agency has two distinct MOUs with the RCMP involving EDD programs. The first deals with the involvement of CIP investigators as members of IPOC units. The second involves referrals to SEP from RCMP investigative units.
The IPOC MOU establishes the CRA involvement within the context of the creation of the IPOC program. IPOC is an inter-departmental initiative that brings together staff of various governmental organizations with mutually supporting programs into working units with the goal of identifying, assessing, restraining and forfeiting illicit and unreported wealth accumulated through criminal activities. [Footnote 27]  IPOC units operate under the control and responsibility of the RCMP through a designated Officer in Charge (OIC). Upon becoming team members of the IPOC unit, CRA criminal investigators are expected to provide audit assistance from the earliest stages of proceeds of crime (POC) investigations. The CRA investigator is principally responsible and accountable to the OIC and typically receives “supernumerary special constable” status (SSC). CRA investigators within IPOC units do not have access to CRA databases and can not disclose taxpayer information to the RCMP except under specific circumstances provided for under the Income Tax Act (ITA) and the Excise Tax Act (ETA).
The SEP MOU sets forth the framework for a relationship between RCMP Federal Investigative Units and CRA Special Enforcement Program. The purpose of the relationship is to address more effectively the accumulation of unreported illicit wealth amassed by those involved in earning income from illegal activities. The scope of this MOU is limited to the activities supporting the referral of information and documents by the RCMP Federal Units to SEP.
The evaluation identified that both MOUs are producing results where TSO Assistant Directors of Enforcement are actively engaged or have established relationships with RCMP investigative units. For example, in offices where SEP auditors are working with IPOC units in the capacity of SEP liaison officers (SLO's) data reveals that significant numbers of potential audit cases are referred representing substantial amounts of unreported income. Figure 11 identifies cases referred by IPOC to SEP that were subsequently audited.
Figure 11: Cases referred to and Audited by SEP
Appendix A - Enforcement Within other Jurisdictions
Detection
IRS
The 2000 IRS re-organization of the Criminal Investigation (CI) function created centralized Lead Development Centers to provide strategic and “tactical intelligence” and develop cases to the point that they can be referred to primary investigation. The IRS also established Fraud Detection Centers that work closely with CI field offices to develop criminal cases and stop fraudulent refunds. CI established a close working relationship with audit divisions that is geared toward specific market-segment taxpayers for the purposes of providing anti-fraud education and identifying appropriate fraud cases for referral. The relationship is reinforced through participation on the IRS Compliance Council.
ATO
The creation of the Serious Non-Compliance (SNC) Business Line by the ATO in 2006 placed a prominent emphasis on workload selection that is influenced by a risk and intelligence focus and priorities set under the SNC Line Delivery Plan. In 2007, the SNC established two new forums to help the transition from case based work allocation to a project based allocation. Under these new forums, the SNC identifies and allocates resources to work aligned to SNC's strategic risks.
The SNCI-Prioritisation Mode (an internal document) provides guidelines to SNC Intelligence officers on how to assess referrals using a range of internal and external systems and data sources. Referrals are given an initial priority rating based on the information at hand having regard to impact, leverage, priority, budget, duration, compliance effect and revenue at risk.
In addition the ATO moved from a more localized process of case selection to a more national case selection process.
“Appropriate case selection is crucial to SNC meeting its objectives. Successful case selection should be aligned with national strategic priorities and assist in maintaining and enhancing community confidence. Historically, a regionally focused process allowed significant variances in case selection across Australia. Over time regions have developed particular skill sets and cases were chosen to reflect these skill sets. The Tax Office must effectively leverage from the cases that are chosen under the compliance model to ensure the greatest impact in line with its national strategic objectives.
To address the regionally based focus of previous case selection, the Tax Office has revised its case approval process to greater reflect national and strategic priorities. Established in August 2007, the PMF was set up to, amongst other things, approve cases and programs following consideration at the regional level. The PMF endorsed National Case Selection Process only came into operation in September 2008.” [Footnote 29]
HMRC
During the re-organization of 2005, the UK HMRC created the Detection Directorate to centralize the detection and development of enforcement cases. The directorate includes a strategic and tactical intelligence function which identifies emerging trends and develops intelligence to support the detection and development of cases related to these emerging areas of non-compliance.
Deterrence
ATO
Within Australia, a 2009 Australian National Audit Office (ANAO) audit of the ATO's Management of Serious Non-Compliance emphasized the importance of measuring the deterrence impact of publicity and communications efforts. In response, the ATO has developed their Tax Evasion, Avoidance and Crime Communications Strategy and conducted research to establish baseline information to assess its effectiveness. The ATO SNC also measures their deterrent effect through examining trends in survey results about taxpayer perceptions about how well fraud and serious evasion risks are being managed. Trends in these perceptions are then examined in relation to deterrence activities (including publicity) to assess the effectiveness of these activities.
As part of their Tax Evasion, Avoidance and Crime Communications Strategy, the ATO has also put considerable effort into increasing awareness of the consequences of tax crime using the internet. They have developed an electronic publication of a quarterly e-magazine titled “Targeting Tax Crime” which is available on their website. [Footnote 30] The magazine explicitly describes the role of enforcement and the Agency's focus on tax crime.
HMRC
The UK HMRC also recognizes that more and better use needs to be made of publicity in influencing public behaviour and increasing levels of compliance and voluntary disclosure. This follows earlier criticism by a National Audit Office audit which observed that:
“... more and better use needs to be made of publicity in influencing public behaviour and increasing levels of compliance and voluntary disclosure. ... They could do more to publicise specific compliance activities, including the use of publicity in advance of compliance work in specific sectors, to heighten the perception that the likelihood of detection is high and encourage voluntary disclosure.” [Footnote 31]
HMRC is now beginning to publicize their compliance work through periodic briefings to the media, writing articles for the professional press and through press releases on, for example, certain projects. They are attempting to publicize specific compliance activities, including the use of publicity in advance of compliance work in specific sectors, to heighten the perception that the likelihood of detection is high and encourage voluntary disclosure.
Alternative Delivery Models
IRS
The IRS enforcement function was facing challenges during the 1990s that are strikingly similar to the situation currently at the CRA. Two significant reasons set the stage for the re-organization of the criminal investigation function. Firstly, the Restructuring and Reform Act of 1998 (RRA 98) set the groundwork for the IRS to re-design to serve taxpayers and tax practitioners more effectively and efficiently. Secondly, the Review of the Internal Revenue Service's Criminal Investigation Program, written in 1999 by Judge William Webster, made dozens of detailed recommendations, including the major structural changes described below. Recommendations from these reports led to a re-organization of the enforcement function in 2000. The following table describes the key changes resulting from this re-organization.
Overview of Key Changes in the IRS
Line Authority  – The IRS CI has line authority through the Chief CI who reports directly to the Commissioner. The objective was to ensure that case management is the responsibility of professional law enforcement officials within the IRS.
  Geographic Structure  – CI territory offices were aligned with the boundaries of federal judicial districts. Centralized management approach was implemented to increase consistency in the application of CI compliance strategy.
  Strategic and Tactical Intelligence  – Lead Development Centers were established to perform “strategic and tactical intelligence” and develop cases to the point they can be referred to primary investigation.
  Detection  – Structural and process changes were made within the Operating Divisions to revive the referral program. Fraud Detection Centers were created to develop criminal cases.
  Relationships with the Department of Justice  –Counsel/Special Agent Team Counsel positions were created to be involved in CI cases from the very beginning to provide legal guidance and advice.
  Partnerships with Operating Divisions  – CI was set up to work closely with the four operating divisions. The relationship between CI and the operating divisions was reinforced through participation on the IRS Compliance Council. The relationship with Audit was re-aligned to focus on specific market-segment taxpayers.
  Publicity and Deterrence  – IRS CI Special Agents began to work as Public Information Officers. They began to serve as the contact point for all internal and external communication including issuing press releases.
Source: Summarized from “What Has Changed for IRS Criminal Investigation and Our Relationship with the Department of Justice” by Mark Matthews, p. 1, US Attorneys' Bulletin, Volume 49, Number 4, July 2001
The IRS CI re-organization also resulted in a modified program mandate to foster confidence in the tax system and compliance with the tax law. The re-organization focussed on achieving the mandate by: promoting the detection and prosecution functions through enhanced relationships and partnerships and the creation of a centralized risk and intelligence function; and, promoting deterrence through new direct CI responsibility for publicity.
ATO
In the ATO, a re-organization in 2006 created the Serious Non Compliance (SNC) business line. As noted earlier, the SNC was created as a separate business line (within the Compliance sub-plan) that places a strong emphasis on project-oriented cases developed primarily through a central internal risk, strategy and intelligence area. Decisions about SNC project resources are made largely by the SNC Program Steering Committee with representation from other parts of the ATO.
The re-organization also resulted in the SNC becoming the conduit between the broader law enforcement community and the ATO. Their work is undertaken in cooperation with other law enforcement agencies - often as part of a multi-agency taskforce.
HMRC
With respect to the UK HMRC, re-organization in 2005 created the Criminal Investigations Directorate and allocated criminal investigations powers to four HMRC Directorates. The following table presents an overview of the key changes resulting from the 2005 re-organization.
New Directorates Resulting from Key Changes in the UK HMRC
Criminal Investigations  – Responsible for most criminal investigations
  Internal Governance  – Responsible for civil and criminal internal investigations
  Detection  – Responsible for detecting individuals and organizations trying to evade HMRC controls
  Risk and Intelligence  – Responsible for intelligence and profiling work
Source: Survey Response from the UK HMRC
The re-organization resulted in the complete separation of criminal and civil investigations. Like the CRA, HMRC is not responsible for criminal prosecutions. Detection and intelligence were again central components of the re-organization with the creation of the Detection and Risk and Intelligence Directorates.
Training
HMRC
The UK HMRC training of new investigators covers 15 weeks of which 8 weeks are classroom designated followed by the remainder of the 12 months under a training assessment period. During this period new recruits are assessed against a personal training record. Other training requirements must be met during this period.
ATO
In Australia, employees primarily engaged in preventing, detecting or investigating fraud have to meet the required fraud control competency requirements for Government. Investigators new to the ATO (or existing staff without the qualification) are required to attain the Certificate IV in Government (Investigations) as a minimum standard, within 12 months of starting work. Successful participants are awarded the Certificate IV in Government (Investigations) through Charles Sturt University.
IRS
In the U.S., CI Special Agents are trained through four primary means:
A formal 27 week comprehensive initial training program, of which 12 weeks focus on basic criminal investigation training, for all new Special Agents prior to beginning work in a CI field office
A one to two year on-the-job training program, under the guidance of an experienced agent 
A Continuing Professional Education seminar every year in each District for all Special Agents
A  two-week formal training program - Advanced Special Agent Training, for experienced agents
Appendix B - Examples of CIP and SEP cases
CIP Cases
Income Tax and GST Tax Evasion Case
A local business was a chronic non-filer. Following non-filer enforcement action, a review of the filed return led to the corporation and its owner being referred for audit. Non-Filer Enforcement recommended proceeding directly to a net worth audit. The net worth audit discovered assets and shareholder contributions that didn’t coincide with the corporate losses and low personal incomes declared on the tax returns. Additionally, the requested cash register tapes were said to have been destroyed. However, an analysis of deposits found cash and credit card deposits exceeded sales. A total income discrepancy of over $450,000 was found by the audit and the case was referred to CIP. CI investigators prepared and implemented a Search Warrant for the owner’s home where they found a large amount of cash and the business cash register tapes. An analysis of the tapes found that the cash register totals were rung off twice each day. The taxpayer only reported 1 of the totals in the sales journal. In one year, these deleted transactions amounted to over $400,000. The final factual unreported sales amounted to over $1.25 million. The initial trial found the taxpayer guilty of tax evasion for one half of the period the CRA charged him for. The judge calculated unreported income on his own amounting to almost $600,000 and income tax and GST owing of almost $175,000. The judge also applied a fine in the amount of 200% of the federal tax owing. The outcome of the trial was published in many local and regional newspapers. Both sides appealed the decision. The appeal resulted in the CRA winning. The business owner is currently awaiting sentencing.
Project Colisée
The CRA had been a full member of Project Colisée for two years. The Project was led by the Combined Forces Special Enforcement Unit (CFSEU), a joint unit working under the coordination of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP), with the collaboration of the Sûreté du Québec, the Service de police de la ville de Montréal (SPVM), the Service de protection des citoyens de Laval, the Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA), as well as the Canada Revenue Agency.
On November 23, 2006, the partners of the Combined Forces Special Enforcement Unit, dealt a serious blow to traditional organized crime in the Montréal region. Over 70 persons were charged with close to 1,000 offences. The purpose of these charges was to tackle a major criminal organization on several fronts. Over 150 officers of the CRA executed 24 search warrants that day as part of seven on-going criminal investigations into tax evasion and tax fraud under Project Colisée. On November 23, 2006 the CRA issued assessments and seized certain goods, including two homes and investments over $4.4 million with a potential collection of $ 2.5 million. These investigations are on-going with the potential for over 40 follow-up audits and other criminal investigations into tax evasion and tax fraud on key players involved in this criminal organization.
SEP Cases
PROTECTED
Appendix C - Glossary of Terms
Actus Reus  - Actus Reus is a legal term describing the condition of carrying out illegal actions.
  Cases Accepted for Prosecution  - Once the full-scale investigation is completed, it is referred to the PPSC for prosecution. The referral is reviewed by attorneys working for the PPSC to assess whether there is sufficient evidence of mens rea, sufficient tax potential, sufficient quantum of evidence, whether there are Charter of Rights and Freedoms issues and whether the investigation was carried out properly to yield a conviction. If the referral is deemed to meet these criteria it is accepted for prosecution by the PPSC.
  Contingent Non-Compliers  - This term describes taxpayers that are currently compliant, but who would be inclined to be non-compliant if they feel there is a reasonable possibility they can succeed without being caught. 
  Criminal Economy  - Part of the underground economy where illegal activities provide a source of income. Examples of these types of activities include drug trafficking, prostitution and fraud, among others. Taxes are almost always never remitted in relation to these illegal activities. In some cases, taxes may be remitted when money from illegal activities is laundered through legitimate enterprises. 
  Delinquent Actions - Federal Tax Increase  - The federal tax increase resulting from delinquent action refers to the federal taxes assessed as a result of successful prosecution related to s.238 of the Income Tax Act requiring a taxpayer undergoing a SEP audit to file their return. The delinquent action is administered directly by SEP. 
  Full-Scale Investigation  - A CIP investigation proceeds through three stages. The first two stages assess the referral to determine if there is sufficient evidence of mens rea, sufficient tax potential, and sufficient quantum of evidence and whether there are Charter of Rights and Freedoms issues that would prevent conviction. When the case is found to meet these criteria, it proceeds to the full-investigation stage. At this stage, evidence is gathered and reviewed to develop the case for prosecution by the PPSC.
  Gross Negligence Penalty  - A Gross Negligence Penalty is the most serious civil penalty administered by the regular audit function. This penalty is applied when the auditor finds there is evidence that the person knew there were issues with his tax affairs (it does not necessarily mean there is strong likelihood of tax evasion and mens rea has not been proven).
  IMET  - Integrated Market Enforcement Teams (IMETs) are specialized teams that work in partnership with Public Safety Canada and the Public Prosecution Service of Canada to target financial crime and protect the integrity of the Canadian economy and its capital markets.
  IPOC  - The Integrated Proceeds of Crime (IPOC) units within the RCMP have the goal to contribute to the disruption, dismantling and incapacitation of targeted organized criminals and crime groups. They do this by seizing criminal proceeds of crime including cars, houses, boats, among others. 
  Jarvis and Ling Cases  - The Ling v. Her Majesty The Queen and Jarvis v. Her Majesty The Queen Supreme Court of Canada cases were both successful challenges of CIP cases related to violations of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. The challenge relates to the point within a civil audit where criminal activity becomes evident. At this point, the court judged that the civil audit must be ceased and a formal criminal investigation process must begin. As part of the formal criminal investigation process, the taxpayer must be notified by the CRA that he/she is under criminal investigation.
  Mens Rea  - Mens Rea is a legal term describing conditions where there is evidence of “the guilty mind” associated with illegal activities. In other words, the illegal activity was wilfully carried out in full knowledge that it is illegal.
  Non-Compliance in the Criminal Economy  - This refers to tax non-compliance among those involved in and receiving income from illegal activities. 
  Non-Filer   Enforcement  - Non-filer enforcement is primarily carried out within the Taxpayer Services and Debt Management Branch (TSDMB), though the SEP program can also implement non-filer enforcement actions (called delinquent actions) in relation to a SEP audit. Non-filer enforcement activities within TSDMB use matching techniques to try and identify taxpayers that have not filed returns. Subsequent enforcement activities can range from sending a letter to the taxpayer requiring them to file their return to formal prosecution under s.238 of the Income Tax Act (ITA). Similar enforcement actions are carried out within the SEP program to require taxpayers audited under SEP to file returns.
  PPSC  - The Public Prosecution Service of Canada (PPSC) reports to Parliament through the Attorney General of Canada. The Director of Public Prosecutions Act states that the Director of Public Prosecutions acts "under and on behalf of the Attorney General of Canada."
  Provincial taxes  - When a SEP audit or a CIP civil audit is completed, federal and provincial taxes owing are identified and penalties and interest may be administered. Subsequent assessments and reassessments formally identify the federal and provincial taxes to be remitted. Under current Tax Collection Agreements (TCAs) established under section 7 of the Federal-Provincial Fiscal Arrangements Act, the federal government is responsible for transferring the provincial tax component assessed or re-assessed resulting from the audit while the responsibility for collecting the provincial tax lies with the CRA. The assessed amounts are transferred whether collections efforts are successful or not.
  Rebel Non-Compliers  - This term describes a group that will be non-compliant with respect to their tax requirements irrespective of what consequences are in place.
  Risk Assessment  - Risk assessment generally assigns a probability of an outcome of non-compliance occurring to broad categories of businesses or individuals. Strategic risk assessment generally assesses risks to the tax administration using an environmental scan, reviews of internal processes and anticipated strategic shifts in the future. The ATO SNC utilizes strategic risk assessment to identify key enforcement risks which, in turn, feed into the ATO strategic risk assessment used to identify priorities, allocate its resources and develop performance measures.
  s . 238 (ITA)  - Section 238 of the Income Tax Act (ITA) describes the consequences for not filing a tax return. Under s.238, if the individual does not file their tax return, prosecution actions can be undertaken. If convicted, the individual can be liable to a fine between $1,000 and $25,000 or both a fine and imprisonment not exceeding 12 months.
  s.241 (ITA)  - Section 241 of the Income Tax Act states that “Except as authorized by this section, no official shall (a) knowingly provide, or knowingly allow to be provided, to any person any taxpayer information; (b) knowingly allow any person to have access to any taxpayer information; or (c) knowingly use any taxpayer information otherwise than in the course of the administration or enforcement of this Act, the Canada Pension Plan, the Unemployment Insurance Act or the Employment Insurance Act or for the purpose for which it was provided under this section.”  Section 241 does not permit EDD to share taxpayer information with external enforcement agencies.
  s . 295 (ETA)  - Section 295 of the Excise Tax Act is similar to s.241 of the ITA. Section 295 also prohibits the EDD from sharing GST/HST information with external enforcement agencies.
  Supernumerary Special Constable  - An Investigator who has been appointed a supernumerary special constable by the Commissioner of the RCMP pursuant to paragraph 7(1)(c) of the RCMP Act. The special constable has the same powers conferred on regular members of the RCMP.
  Strategic Intelligence  - Within CRA, strategic Intelligence would be used to describe patterns and trends in tax evasion, tax non-compliance in the criminal economy, and serious non-compliance in the future.
  Tactical Intelligence  - Tactical intelligence identifies specific individuals or businesses that are known or suspected of serious non-compliance based on informant leads, police information, open source or other data that has been evaluated.
  Taxable Equity  - Equity gained as proceeds of criminal activities that is identified as taxable income following a SEP net worth audit.
  Tax Evasion  - Tax evasion describes the act of deliberately not paying taxes where there is evidence of both mens rea (the guilty mind) and actus reus (the illegal activity). 
  Tax On Which Convicted  - Tax On Which Convicted is a term used within CIP to describe the amount of taxes the taxpayer found guilty of tax evasion (as a result a CIP investigation) is required to remit to the CRA.
  TEBA  - Tax Earned by Audit refers to the federal tax amount identified by an audit (including a SEP audit). In most cases, the results of the audit (including the TEBA amount) are referred for tax assessment or re-assessment which, in turn, results in a tax statement being provided to the taxpayer indicating the amount of federal taxes to be remitted to the CRA.
Appendix D - Example of an Agency Press Release for a Conviction of Tax Fraud
Brothers' tax evasion scheme nets each $59,444 fine
Surrey, British Columbia, May 6, 2010... Surrey businessmen, developers and brothers, Sohan Singh Dhesa and Nahar Singh Dhesa, were sentenced in Surrey Provincial Court on May 5, 2010, after pleading guilty to income tax evasion. The brothers were each fined $59,444 representing 75% of federal taxes evaded. Sohan Singh Dhesa and Nahar Singh Dhesa were also handed a 14 month Conditional Serve Order.
A Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) investigation determined that the brothers formed a family partnership and purchased two properties for development purposes. The partnership subdivided these properties and subsequently sold them to two nominees. On review, it was revealed that the individuals, who acted as nominees for the Dhesas, were never the beneficial owners of the lots. Most of the money the nominees received from the sale of the lots was paid to the Dhesas or their beneficiaries. In fact, it was determined that the Dhesas sold the properties to various third parties for more than the amount originally disclosed. In doing so, the Dhesa brothers understated taxable income in the amount of $334,565 for the 2002 and 2003 taxation years, and evaded federal taxes of $79,392 each.
When individuals are convicted of income tax fraud, they must still repay any amounts fraudulently received, plus interest and any civil penalties that may be assessed by the CRA. In addition, the court may fine them up to 200% of the refund sought and impose a jail term of up to five years.
Individuals who have not filed returns for previous years, or who have not reported all of their income, can still voluntarily correct their tax affairs. They will not be penalized or prosecuted if they make a full disclosure before the Agency starts any action or investigation against them. These individuals may only have to pay the taxes owing, plus interest. More information on the Voluntary Disclosures Program can be found on the CRA's website at www.cra.gc.ca/voluntarydisclosures.
The information in this news release was obtained from the court records.
