Appendix A: Glossary of Terms
Application Review Committee (ARC) – Applications received through the CPOP that meet the screening criteria are forwarded to an Application Review Committee (ARC). The ARC includes representation from the CRA and the sector. Depending on the nature of the applications, representatives from other federal departments, the provinces, territories, and academia may also be involved in the review. The Committee considers factors such as innovativeness, sustainability, and scope of the project when evaluating the applications.
Blue Ribbon Panel (BRP) – The Blue Ribbon Panel was an independent panel commissioned in June 2006 by the President of the Treasury Board Secretariat. The panel conducted a six-month review of the administration of federal grant and contribution programs and recommended measures to make the delivery of these programs more efficient while ensuring greater accountability.
Charitable purposes - The courts have identified four categories of charity:  (1) the relief of poverty; (2) the advancement of education; (3) the advancement of religion; and (4) certain other purposes that benefit the community in a way the courts have said is charitable. An organization's purposes must fall within one or more of these categories to be considered for registration as a charity.
Charitable sector – The charitable sector is defined by those charities that are federally registered under the Income Tax Act.
Contribution – Is a transfer payment subject to performance conditions specified in a funding agreement. A contribution is to be accounted for and is subject to audit.
Contribution agreement –Is a written agreement or documentation constituting an agreement between the Government of Canada and an applicant or a recipient setting out the obligations or understandings of both with respect to one or more transfer payments.
Formative evaluation – A formative evaluation is a type of evaluation that has the purpose of ongoing program improvement. It is usually conducted early in the implementation of a program, and used to evaluate if the program is on the right track to achieving its objectives. This type of evaluation usually focuses on issues such as implementation, relevance and possible alternatives or modifications.
Grant – Is a transfer payment subject to pre-established eligibility and other entitlement criteria. A grant is not subject to being accounted for by a recipient nor normally subject to audit by the department. The recipient may be required to report on results achieved.
Official Donation Receipts – Registered charities can issue official donation receipts (also referred to as "tax receipts") to acknowledge gifts. An official donation receipt is subject to particular requirements under the Income Tax Regulations including identification that it is an official receipt for income tax purposes.
Non-profit organization – A non-profit organization is an association, club, or society that is operated exclusively for social welfare, civic improvement, pleasure, recreation, or any other purpose except profit. It is not a charity. No part of the organization's income can be payable to or available for the personal benefit of any proprietor, member, or shareholder, unless the recipient is a club, society, or association whose primary purpose and function is to promote amateur athletics in Canada.
Performance measurement strategy – Is the selection, development and ongoing use of performance measures for program management or decision‑making.
Recipient – Is an individual or entity that either has been authorized to receive a transfer payment or that has received that transfer payment.
Registered charity – A registered charity refers to a charitable organization, public foundation, or private foundation that was established in Canada and is resident in Canada. It is operated for charitable purposes and must devote its resources to charitable activities. A registered charity has received a registration number from the Canada Revenue Agency and is exempt from paying tax on its revenue. It can issue donation receipts for gifts that it receives.
Summative evaluation – Summative evaluations are typically conducted further into the implementation of a program and focus on the achievement of results. This type of evaluation focuses on program results, especially for making decisions about program continuation, expansion, reduction and funding. It addresses outcomes in order to evaluate the program in terms of effectiveness as compared with similar type programs.
Terms and conditions – Is a document, approved by the Treasury Board Secretariat or a minister, which sets out the parameters under which transfer payments may be made for a given program.
Transfer payment – Is a monetary payment, or a transfer of goods, services or assets made, on the basis of an appropriation, to a third party, including a Crown corporation, that does not result in the acquisition by the Government of Canada of any goods, services or assets. Transfer payments are categorized as grants, contributions and other transfer payments. Transfer payments do not include investments, loans or loan guarantees.
Treasury Board Policy on Transfer Payments – The objective of this policy is to ensure that transfer payment programs are managed with integrity, transparency and accountability in a manner that is sensitive to risks; are citizen and recipient-focused; and are designed and delivered to address government priorities in achieving results for Canadians.
Voluntary sector –The voluntary sector is one of the three pillars, along with the public and private sector, which make-up Canadian society. The voluntary sector, in its broadest sense, is composed of all non-profit organizations (including registered charities) that exist in Canada.
Top of Page
Appendix B: Registered Charity versus Non-profit organization
Registered charities are often referred to as non-profit organizations. However, while both types of organizations operate on a non-profit basis, the two types are defined differently under the ITA.
Appendix C: Contribution Recipients and Projects
Top of Page
Appendix D: Map of Contribution Recipients 
View a larger version of this image
Appendix D provides a map of contribution recipients. There have been five calls for applications under the CPOP and a total of 28 contribution agreements have been signed with 15 registered charities and 1 non-profit organization. Applications were received from various organizations across Canada.  The following organizations received funding: Community Sector Council Newfoundland and Labrador; Legal Information Society of Nova Scotia; Public Legal Education and Information Service of New Brunswick; Actions interculturelles de développement et d'éducation (Quebec); Université du Québec à Montréal and Éducaloi; Canadian Association of the Deaf (Ontario; Centre for Voluntary Sector Research and Development (Ontario) and Canadian Council for International Co-operation (Ontario); Ontario Community Support Association; Imagine Canada (Ontario); Public Legal Education Association of Saskatchewan; Legal Resource Centre of Alberta Ltd; Centrepoint Non-Profit Management (Alberta); Mount Royal University - Centre for Non-Profit Studies (Alberta); and, Fraser Valley Centre for Social Enterprise (British Columbia). Some of these organizations were funded for more than one project.
Page details
Report a problem on this page







Date modified:
2011-07-07
Appendix D: Map of Contribution Recipients
View a larger version of this image
