Executive summary
Background:
The provinces of New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Newfoundland and Labrador, Ontario and Prince Edward Island, referred to as the participating provinces, harmonized their provincial sales tax with the Goods and Services Tax (GST) to create the Harmonized Sales Tax (HST). The Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) assesses and collects the sales tax for the participating provinces and supplies the Department of Finance (DOF) with information that is used to allocate distributions to these provinces.
The GST and HST assessed from all provinces (as applicable) are combined into one revenue pool. The revenue pool in conjunction with the straddle allocation formula is used to allocate federal and provincial shares of revenues from the assessment of GST and HST. The straddle allocation formula is applied to allocate the revenue pool amongst periods of time that straddle the calendar year, periods when tax rates for GST/HST change, or when additional provinces harmonize or de-harmonize their sales taxes. Remittances to the CRA are processed through existing GST and Revenue Ledger (RL) systems.
The province of Prince Edward Island (PEI) adopted the HST framework on April 1, 2013. The new HST has a combined rate of 14% for PEI, representing the provincial portion of nine per cent and the federal portion of five per cent. With the implementation of HST, registrants in PEI became responsible to collect and remit this tax at the new rate. Between July 1, 2010 and March 31, 2013, British Columbia (BC) was a participating province with the HST rate of 12%. Effective April 1, 2013, BC opted out of the HST framework.
The remittances by registrants in PEI straddled April 1, 2013 (HST implementation date) and their total remittance would effectively include both 5% GST collected prior to March 31, 2013 and 14% HST from April 1, 2013.
Whereas, the remittances by registrants in BC straddled to include 12% HST collected prior to March 31, 2013 and 5% GST from April 1, 2013.
As a result of these changes, Finance and Administration Branch (FAB) requested an independent assurance that the required system and process changes were implemented effectively (i.e. meeting prescribed FAB requirements). Additionally, the Office of the Auditor General (OAG) relied on Internal Audit Division’s work in carrying out their financial statement audit of the CRA for the year ending March 31, 2014.
Objective:
The objective of the audit was to provide assurance with respect to the accuracy and completeness of the automated flow through of HST information, and that the straddle allocation formula is functioning as intended.
The examination phase took place between May and June 2014 and was conducted in accordance with the International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing.
Conclusion:
The enhancements relating to the new accounts created for PEI were considered to be appropriate and mapped to the correct RL accounts. The flow through of data transmitted from the source documents to the RL systems was complete. The straddle allocation formula was applied correctly with respect to the allocation of GST/HST remittances for BC and PEI and the amounts posted to the RL were accurate. The sample analysis of BC audit reassessments did not identify any concerns with BC GST cut-off as of March 31st, 2013. The Average Effective Tax Rates provided by the DOF were properly reflected in the RL to calculate the subsequent Revenue Pool to allocate federal and provincial shares of revenues post April 1, 2013.
Introduction
The provinces of New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Newfoundland and Labrador, Ontario and Prince Edward Island, referred to as the participating provinces, harmonized their provincial sales tax with the Goods and Services Tax (GST) to create the Harmonized Sales Tax (HST). The Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) assesses and collects the sales tax for the participating provinces and supplies the Department of Finance (DOF) with information that is used to allocate distributions to these provinces. The DOF is responsible for forecasting provincial sales tax payable to the participating provinces for each taxation year (calendar year), and ensures that appropriate installment payments are made.
The GST and HST assessed from all provinces (as applicable) are combined into one revenue pool. The revenue pool in conjunction with the straddle allocation formula is used to allocate federal and provincial shares of revenues from the assessment of GST and HST. The straddle allocation formula is applied to allocate the revenue pool amongst periods of time that straddle the calendar year, periods when tax rates for GST/HST change, or when additional provinces harmonize or de-harmonize their sales taxes.
The province of Prince Edward Island (PEI) adopted the HST framework on April 1, 2013, replacing the previous Provincial Sales Tax and the GST in the province. The new HST has a combined rate of 14% for PEI, representing the provincial portion of 9% and the federal portion of 5%. With the implementation of HST, registrants in PEI became responsible to collect and remit this tax at the new rate. Remittances to the CRA are processed through existing GST and Revenue Ledger (RL) systems.
Between July 1, 2010 and March 31, 2013, British Columbia (BC) was a participating province with the HST rate of 12% representing the provincial portion of 7% and the federal portion of 5%. Effective April 1, 2013, BC opted out of the HST framework.
The remittances by registrants in PEI straddled April 1, 2013 (HST implementation date) and their total remittance would effectively include both 5% GST collected prior to March 31, 2013 and 14% HST from April 1, 2013.
Whereas, the remittances by registrants in BC straddled to include 12% HST collected prior to March 31, 2013 and 5% GST from April 1, 2013.
As a result of these changes, Finance and Administration Branch (FAB) requested an independent assurance that the required system and process changes were implemented effectively (i.e. meeting prescribed FAB requirements). Additionally, the Office of the Auditor General (OAG) relied on Internal Audit’s (IA) work in carrying out their financial statement audit of the CRA for the year ending March 31, 2014.
The CRA did not significantly change the systems and processes used to receive HST as enhancements were implemented when HST was initially implemented. Required changes to the systems and process have been implemented in order to facilitate the orderly flow-through of GST/HST information.
Focus of the audit
The objective of the audit was to provide assurance with respect to the accuracy and completeness of the automated flow through of HST information, and that the straddle allocation formula is functioning as intended.
The examination phase took place between May and June 2014 and was conducted in accordance with the International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing.
Conclusion
The enhancements relating to the new accounts created for PEI were considered to be appropriate and mapped to the correct RL accounts. The flow through of data transmitted from the source documents to SA and posting of amounts to RL systems was complete.
The straddle allocation formula was applied correctly with respect to the allocation of GST/HST remittances for BC and PEI and the amounts posted to the RL were accurate. The BC audit reassessments support that there are no concerns with BC GST cut-off as of March 31, 2013. The AETRs provided by the DOF were properly reflected in the RL to calculate the subsequent Revenue Pool to allocate federal and provincial shares of revenues post April 1, 2013.
