Background
The Institute of Internal Auditors’ (IIA) International Professional Practices Framework (IPPF) requires that an external assessment of the internal audit function be conducted by a qualified independent reviewer at least once every five years. Canada Revenue Agency’s (CRA) Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch (AERB) previous external assessment of its internal audit function was finalized in 2011. As per the IIA, external assessments are designed to contribute to the improvement of public or private sector management by ensuring a strong, credible, effective, value added and sustainable internal audit function.
Objective and Scope
The principal objective of this external assessment was to assess CRA’s internal audit function’s (“CRA-IA” or “IA”) conformance to the Mandatory Guidance of the IIA, including the Code of Ethics, the Definition of Internal Auditing and the IIA International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing (IIA Standards).
The assessment criteria used to conduct this external assessment were taken from the IIA Standards.
The following scale was used for purposes of completing the external assessment and is aligned with the prescribed scale as per the IIA (2013):
Generally Conforms is the highest rating achievable. It means that there is general conformity to the majority of the underlying IIA Standards, and partial conformity to the others.
Partially Conforms means that the Internal Audit activity is making good faith efforts to conform to the requirements of the underlying IIA Standards, but has fallen short of achieving some of their major objectives.
Does not Conform means that the Internal Audit activity is not aware of, is not making good faith efforts to comply with, or is failing to achieve many or all of the objectives of the individual IIA.
The internal audit activities covered by this external assessment are the two year period of January 1, 2014 to December 31, 2015.
Overall Conclusion and Summary Findings
Overall, CRA-IA “Generally Conforms” to the requirements of the IIA. This conclusion was reached through the external assessment team’s review of relevant documentation and through interviews with IA and key stakeholders.
In support of that overall conclusion, the external assessment identified a variety of strengths including:
Positioning. CRA-IA is positioned and supported within the Agency to be independent, effective and value-added.
Reputation and Profile in the Agency. IA’s Chief Audit Executive (CAE) and staff are well regarded within the CRA and by the Audit Committee of the Board of Management (hereafter “the Committee”). The CAE was noted as successfully fulfilling his role and maintaining his independence, while still being very responsive to management requests and concerns, adopting a consultative, advisory and collaborative approach, and adding value to the CRA.
Audit Committee of the Board of Management (the Committee). An appropriate Committee has been put in place which provides the CAE and the CRA with valuable insight and is viewed by key stakeholders as a key component of the Agency oversight function.
Reporting. Stakeholders believe that the internal audit function adds value and provides governance, risk and control recommendations that are insightful and helpful to the Agency.
The external assessment also identified a number of opportunities for continued enhancement and improvement of practices. These findings, however, did not impact the conclusion that, on an overall basis, CRA-IA “Generally Conforms” with the prescribed assessment criteria. There were two specific IIA standards that were noted to be partially conformed to. The opportunities have been grouped under two categories as follows:
Internal audit performance monitoring There is an opportunity to enhance CRA-IA performance monitoring by expanding and formalizing processes to track, report on, and manage against a broader set of key performance indicators used to measure the effectiveness and efficiency of the internal audit function. 
 IA working paper file documentation There is an opportunity to enhance audit working paper file documentation and referencing to ensure there are clear linkages between all documents to support risks identified, work performed, and findings/recommendations that are reported.
As requested by the CRA-IA, the external assessment team also provided enhancement opportunities based on leading practices. Three other enhancement opportunities were noted as good internal audit practices that the CRA internal audit function could benefit from.  It should be noted that these findings are based on leading practices, and are not specific requirements in the IIA standards, but are being provided for CRA-IA’s consideration.  The enhancement opportunities are summarized as follows:
Audit methodology enhancement: The audit methodology developed by CRA-IA is clear, thorough and well defined.  Having said that, there is an opportunity to enhance audit reporting by supplementing the information currently provided in IA reports with a clear statement explaining that the observations/recommendations presented in the report are of high significance; and with additional commentary on the potential impact or risk exposure to the Agency for each finding/recommendation provided by CRA-IA in its audit reports.
 Audit coverage and reporting: There is an opportunity to supplement current information in CRA-IA’s risk-based audit plan by including a mapping of all key Agency risks to planned/upcoming audits and previously (e.g. number of years of coverage to be defined with the Assistant Commissioner (AC)) conducted audits, along with additional explanation and rationale for CRA-IA’s planned coverage of Agency risks, which Agency risks are not being covered as significantly and why.  Similarly, past and planned coverage of CRA-IA’s audit universe may also be useful information to report on.  Based on discussions with CRA-IA, we understand that this type of information was included in previous audit plans but was removed to streamline the document.  We also understand that CRA-IA will be including this information in its 2016-17 audit plan. Finally, it was also noted that there is an opportunity to increase the amount of information provided in the risk-based audit plan and the CAE’s annual report in relation to CRA-IA’s performance indicators (note that this ties to the “Internal audit performance monitoring” finding noted above). 
Staff engagement/communication: CRA-IA should continue to provide additional communications and information to its staff with regards to strategic CRA-IA decisions such as envisioned audit projects, rationale for audit project selection, audit project staffing processes and decisions, updates on project status, and so on. Also, in alignment with leading practices, CRA-IA should continue with its current efforts that are already underway to develop internal audit learning paths, which would serve as a support to the individual training plans currently developed for its staff.
The external assessment team wishes to express its appreciation for the cooperation and assistance afforded by the CAE and IA staff. We would be pleased to respond to further questions concerning this report and to provide any additional information.
1.1. Background
In accordance with the IIA Standards, an external assessment of the internal audit function must be conducted at least every five years by a qualified assessor or assessment team from outside the organization, competent in the professional practice of internal auditing and the external assessment process.
The CRA internal audit function underwent external assessments in 2011 and 2006. Those assessments took the form of a self-assessment with independent external validation. Nearly five years have elapsed since the last external assessment.
1.2. Objective and Scope
The objective of this external assessment was to evaluate the CRA-IA conformance to The Institute of Internal Auditors’ (IIA) mandatory guidance, i.e. the Definition of Internal Auditing, Code of Ethics, and International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing (IIA Standards). Specifically, the external assessment team assessed conformance to the International Professional Practices Framework (IPPF) mandatory guidance, identifying opportunities to enhance internal audit processes, and offering suggestions to improve effectiveness of the internal audit function.
The internal audit activities covered by this external assessment are the two year period of January 1, 2014 to December 31, 2015.
1.3. Approach and Methodology
The external assessment was performed using the IIA guidance and a customized version of Deloitte’s Internal Audit External Assessment Review methodology. The external assessment was conducted between January and March 2016.
The following scale was used for purposes of completing the external assessment:
Generally Conforms is the highest rating achievable. It means that there is general conformity to the majority of the underlying IIA Standards, and partial conformity to the others.
Partially Conforms means that the Internal Audit activity is making good faith efforts to conform to the requirements of the underlying IIA Standards, but has fallen short of achieving some of their major objectives.
Does not Conform means that the Internal Audit activity is not aware of, is not making good faith efforts to comply with, or is failing to achieve many or all of the objectives of the individual IIA Standards.
1.4. Procedures Performed
To perform this external assessment, the following key activities were completed:
Review of key CRA-IA policies, procedures, and manuals;
Review of various IA plans and reports;
Review of a sample of internal audit project working paper files;
Interviews with the Audit Committee Chair, the Chief Audit Executive (CAE), CRA-IA management and staff, and CRA Senior Management;
Development of a summary report; and,
Presentation of the report to CRA.
This report summarizes the results of the external assessment.
The comments and analysis in this report are made as a result of the work undertaken. CRA-IA leadership remains responsible for the strategic direction of Internal Audit and for setting its mandate and audit plan. CRA is responsible for determining what, if any, changes should be implemented as a result of this external assessment. This engagement was an external assessment of the CRA-IA; thus, we assessed the conformance of the CRA-IA with the Mandatory Guidance of the IIA. We have not performed an audit in the course of this engagement, and accordingly we do not provide an audit opinion on the information provided in this report.
2.1. Conclusion
Overall, CRA-IA “Generally Conforms” (note this is the highest rating achievable) with the requirements of the IIA. This conclusion was reached through the external assessment team’s review of relevant documentation and through interviews with CRA-IA and key stakeholders.
The external assessment did identify a number of strengths as well as opportunities for continued enhancement and improvement of practices (summarized below). These findings, however, did not impact the conclusion that, on an overall basis, CRA-IA “Generally Confirms” to the prescribed assessment criteria.
2.2. Strengths
Examples of areas of CRA-IA strengths identified through this external assessment include:
Positioning. CRA-IA is positioned and supported within the CRA to be independent, effective and value-added. Appropriate reporting structures are in place and the CAE is an engaged member of the senior management team. CRA-IA provides both assurance and advisory services, and is managing this balance without compromising its objectivity.
Reputation and Profile in the Agency. Results of interviews reflect that CRA-IA staff and the CAE are well regarded within the CRA and by the Committee. The reputation of CRA-IA is generally good and the team is well respected by the Senior Management team members interviewed across CRA. Stakeholders spoke very highly about the CAE, noting that he is successfully fulfilling his role and maintaining his independence, while still being very responsive to management requests and concerns, adopting a consultative, advisory and collaborative approach, and adding value to the CRA.
Audit Committee of the Board of Management (the Committee). An appropriate Committee has been put in place and is operating effectively. The Committee provides the CAE and the Agency with valuable insight and is viewed by key stakeholders as a key component of the Agency’s oversight function.
Reporting. The Committee and executives interviewed believe that the internal audit function adds value and that the CRA-IA risk and control recommendations are insightful and helpful to the CRA. The Committee and executives rely on CRA-IA to provide them with an independent viewpoint on how the organization is functioning.
2.3.2 Performance standard
2330 – Documenting Information
2.4. Other enhancement opportunities
As requested by the CRA-IA, the external assessment team also provided enhancement opportunities based on leading practices. Three other enhancement opportunities were noted as good internal audit practices that the CRA internal audit function could benefit from. It should be noted that these findings are based on leading practices, and are not specific requirements in the IIA standards, but are being provided for CRA-IA’s consideration.
2.4.1. Audit Methodology Enhancements

CRA-IA’s audit reports note the key findings and related recommendations that result from each audit engagement.  Based on discussions with stakeholders, there may be a benefit to supplementing the information provided in IA reports with a clear statement explaining that the observations/recommendations presented in the report are of high significance; and with additional commentary on the potential impact or risk exposure to the Agency for each key finding/recommendation provided by CRA-IA in its audit reports. The additional commentary would be useful to stakeholders to ensure clarity and alignment on the criticality of the finding/recommendation, and to provide context to assess whether management action plans are adequate and timely enough to address the risk exposure appropriately.
Gathering feedback from auditees is important for CRA-IA as the feedback can be used to define or refine needs and expectations of CRA-IA’s clients.  As such, follow up surveys have been developed by CRA-IA and the Agency’s IA methodology requires that surveys be sent for each engagement. Based on the five year period reviewed by this external assessment, it was noted that there was an opportunity to enhance the consistency of auditee feedback processes to ensure post-audit surveys are sent and responded to.  Based on information provided for the last year within our scope, it appears that CRA-IA has modified its processes to address this issue.  CRA-IA should continue to focus on this area to ensure feedback surveys are sent on a regular basis.
2.4.2. Audit coverage and reporting

 The Risk Based Audit Plan lists the risks related to each planned audit based on the CRA Corporate Risk Profile, links it to the audit universe, explains how the plan has been developed (the methodology) and provides an overview of the coverage by OPI (Office of Primary Interest). However, based on discussions with stakeholders, there may be benefits to including in the risk-based audit plan a mapping of all key Agency risks to planned/upcoming audits and previously (e.g. number of years of coverage to be defined with the AC) conducted audits.  In conjunction with this mapping, there may be benefits to spending more time in the risk-based audit plan, providing additional explanation and rationale for CRA-IA’s planned coverage of Agency risks, which Agency risks are not being covered as significantly and why. Similarly, there may be benefits for the audit plan to supplement current descriptions of coverage of CRA organizational units with information (visualized where possible) on the coverage (e.g. number of years of coverage to be defined with the AC) of internal audit’s audit universe. This would provide stakeholders with a clearer perspective on where CRA-IA has conducted work in recent years, and potentially stimulate discussions about the appropriateness of planned go-forward coverage using that as additional context. Based on discussions with CRA-IA, we understand that this type of information was included in previous audit plans but was removed to streamline the document.  We also understand that CRA-IA will be including this information in its 2016-17 audit plan. 
In conjunction with the observation raised previously related to enhancing performance monitoring, there is an opportunity for the risk-based audit plan and the Chief Audit Executive’s annual report to further address and comment on key performance indicators.  The risk-based audit plan could indicate planned targets for each performance indicator (including clear planned start and end quarter and level of effort for each audit project) to allow audit committee members and senior management to provide feedback on the planned schedule and effort.  The annual report could report on actual results against those and other performance indicators, to provide stakeholders with a perspective on the performance of CRA-IA as compared to its performance plan. There may also be benefits to including summary perspectives in the annual report on key themes (e.g. significant risk exposures and/or control issues, governance issues, and other matters) that CRA-IA has observed as a result of its collective audit activities.
2.4.3. CRA-IA staff engagement/communication

Based on the interviews with audit staff, there appears to be an opportunity to continue to provide additional communications and information with regards to the strategic CRA-IA decision such as envisioned audit projects, rationale for audit project selection, audit project staffing processes and decisions, updates on project status, and so on.  We understand that CRA-IA management is currently enhancing its approach to communications to assist in enhancing employee satisfaction and engagement.
To ensure CRA-IA effectiveness, it is critical that the audit team have the knowledge, skill sets and other competencies required to perform the function’s audit engagements. We understand that CRA-IA is in the process of developing internal audit learning paths, which would serve as a support to the individual training plans currently developed for its staff.  The external assessment team notes that this would be in alignment with leading practice and recommends that CRA-IA use the learning paths to confirm its overall training requirements, staff development plans, and any hiring/resourcing implications.
3. Specific Assessment Results
3.1. Conformance ratings against IIA Standards
Page details
Report a problem on this page







Date modified:
2016-10-13
