Executive Summary
Background: An internal audit was originally planned to be conducted in fiscal year 2010-2011; however, Taxpayer Services and Debt Management Branch (TSDMB) management requested that CAEB undertake both an internal audit and an evaluation of the Debt Management Call Centre (DMCC) in 2009-2010. By undertaking both an audit and evaluation at the same time Corporate Audit and Evaluation Branch (CAEB) was able to provide a more comprehensive review of the DMCC, including assessments of both program management and program delivery controls (audit) and program effectiveness (evaluation). A separate report has been prepared on the results of the program evaluation. Although the focus of the audit and evaluation differ, reference has been made to the program evaluation results, when appropriate.
The Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) addresses outstanding receivables through strategies used by TSDMB. The strategies combine to form the debt management continuum and can be divided into front-end activities that are the responsibility of the Debt Management Research and Analytics Directorate (DMRAD) and field operations that are the responsibility of the Accounts Receivable Directorate (ARD) and Debt Management Compliance Directorate (DMCD). System identification and assignment of accounts is done by the Revenue Enforcement Management Information Tracking System (REMITS) that scores accounts primarily based on the balance owing and the age of the debt. Other branches within the CRA play a significant role in supporting TSDMB in achieving its objectives. This includes activities such as payment and return processing, communications and technology platforms.
According to the CRA Annual Report to Parliament 2008-2009, at the end of the 2008-2009 fiscal year, total tax debt amounted to $24.4 billion, an increase of $1.2 billion (5.2%) over 2007-2008. $3.8 billion of the debt will be subject to lower cost, risk-based debt management strategies, including automated communications, correspondence, and action by the DMCC. Amounts requiring tax services office (TSO) analysis and investigation total $18.1 billion; $1.5 billion was the responsibility of Revenu Québec and the remaining $1 billion of miscellaneous debt were assigned for handling by other means.
The DMRAD is responsible for the front-end debt management activities for the $3.8 billion of the 2008-2009 debt subject to lower cost debt management strategies. DMRAD is also responsible for modernizing core business functions by developing and implementing the Integrated Revenue Collections (IRC) technology platform in order to enhance its ability to analyze taxpayer behaviour, report on debt components, and assess risk.
The Front End Operations Division (FEOD), previously known as the Front End Operations, Research and Analytics Division, in DMRAD has responsibility for the prevention and/or detection of taxpayer's non-compliance with their filing and remitting obligations, and the early resolution of accounts prior to their entry into any resource intensive workflows. FEOD is accountable for the development, deployment and delivery of all high-volume, risk based debt management and compliance strategies that leverage paper or electronic mediums, automated system responses and/or telecommunications.
FEOD has responsibility for all DMCC debt collections management and compliance activities. DMCC is responsible for making outbound calls on call centre status accounts and answering inbound collection and charities calls. More complex field operation activities are carried out by staff located in National Collection Pools, National Compliance Inventory Centres, and/or TSOs. When front-end activities do not result in payment of outstanding debt, strategies are in place to divert accounts to the Pools and TSOs.
The TSDMB's vision, as outlined in the 2008 Program Delivery Model (PDM), is that by increasing its focus on front-end operations, through the use of enhanced data and technology such as Integrated Revenue Collection (IRC), and through leveraging capacity in the DMCC, the TSDMB will be able to resolve a greater number of these accounts earlier in the debt management continuum, thereby reducing the number of accounts that require a more costly and time intensive series of actions. This approach will free-up collection officers in the field to focus on more complex and high risk accounts that require more in-depth collections interventions. The PDM action plan recognizes the unique position of the DMCC and the opportunities available within the debt management continuum.
Objective: The objective of the audit was to determine whether program management and program delivery internal controls exist and are working as intended. The focus of the audit was on the DMCC debt management and compliance controls, the role of the FEOD and the ability to measure the impact of the DMCC in the debt management continuum.
The audit was conducted in accordance with the International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing.
Conclusion: The DMCC has a structure that supports the achievement of its stated goals and objectives with clearly defined roles, responsibilities, and accountabilities. The DMCC has provided the tools and guidance required for staff to carry out their functions. There are, however, opportunities to strengthen program management and program delivery controls, including refining performance measurement indicators and increasing adherence to policies and procedures.
A comprehensive oversight framework to obtain assurance that the DMCC is operating as intended has not been established or implemented by the FEOD. As such, the FEOD may be missing the opportunity to identify opportunities to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of the DMCC. Currently the FEOD focus is on measuring the number and value of arrangements made at the DMCC. DMCC arrangements include accounts where DMCC agents communicate with taxpayers and agreements are reached to pay outstanding amounts or file required GST/HST returns. The ability for the TSDMB to assess the contribution of the DMCC in the debt management continuum is limited with the current performance measurement indicators. Comparing DMCC performance with Pools/TSOs is difficult because performance for Pools/TSOs is based on the dollars collected and GST/HST returns filed. In addition, there is no evidence that the TSDMB measures the effectiveness of the DMCC in resolving accounts prior to diversion to the more labour-intensive field operations.
In its Debt Management Program Delivery Model Action Plan, the TSDMB has made a commitment to review performance measurement throughout the debt management continuum and to make necessary adjustments including the establishment of meaningful performance indicators. The plan, with established timeframes and benchmarks, should be implemented focusing on the ability to measure the effectiveness of the DMCC in the debt management continuum. Indicators should be established to measure the dollars collected/returns filed through DMCC actions and to measure the effectiveness of the DMCC in resolving accounts without intervention by Pools/TSOs.
The DMCC has established and implemented a program delivery monitoring framework that focuses on improving agent performance. Opportunities to improve program delivery monitoring are evident given that the framework does not include a process to ensure that corrective actions are taken to address deficiencies identified from monitoring. In addition, there is no monitoring of outbound calls, which could affect the ability for the DMCC to identify opportunities to improve performance.
Action Plan: TSDMB agrees with the recommendations and the action plans with milestones are included in this report.
Introduction
An internal audit was originally planned to be conducted in fiscal year 2010-2011; however, TSDMB management requested that CAEB undertake both an internal audit and an evaluation of the Debt Management Call Centre (DMCC) in 2009-2010. By undertaking both an audit and evaluation at the same time CAEB was able to provide a more comprehensive review of the DMCC, including assessments of both program management and program delivery controls (audit) and program effectiveness (evaluation). A separate report has been prepared on the results of the program evaluation. Although the focus of the audit and evaluation differ, reference has been made to the program evaluation results, when appropriate.
The Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) has several collection strategies available to address outstanding receivables, ranging from automated notice of assessments and letters and front-end call centre operations to field operations activities such as face-to-face meetings and field visits. These “strategies” used by Taxpayer Services and Debt Management Branch (TSDMB) combine to form the debt management continuum. System identification and assignment of accounts is done by the Revenue Enforcement Management Information Tracking System (REMITS) that scores accounts primarily based on the balance owing and the age of the debt. Other branches within the CRA play a significant role in supporting TSDMB in achieving its objectives. This includes activities such as payment and return processing, communications and technology platforms.
The strategies related to the collection of outstanding debt within the debt management continuum can be divided into front-end and field operations and are managed by the Debt Management Research and Analytics Directorate (DMRAD), the Accounts Receivable Directorate (ARD), and the Debt Management Compliance Directorate (DMCD) of TSDMB. The Front-End Operations Division (FEOD), previously known as the Front End Operations, Research and Analytics Division, is responsible for collection strategies such as self-resolution, automated letters, and telephone contact by the DMCC. Complex field operations enforcement actions are carried out by collection management and compliance staff located in National Collection Pools, National Compliance Inventory Centres, and/or TSOs.
According to the CRA Annual Report to Parliament 2008-2009, at the end of the 2008-2009 fiscal year, total tax debt amounted to $24.4 billion, an increase of $1.2 billion (5.2%) over 2007-2008. $3.8 billion of the debt will be subject to lower cost, risk-based debt management strategies, including automated communications, correspondence, and action by the Debt Management Call Centre (DMCC). Amounts requiring tax services office (TSO) analysis and investigation total $18.1 billion; $1.5 billion was the responsibility of Revenu Québec and the remaining $1 billion of miscellaneous debt were assigned for handling by other means.
The DMRAD is responsible for the front-end debt management activities for the $3.8 billion of the 2008-2009 debt subject to lower cost debt management strategies. DMRAD is also responsible for modernizing core business functions by developing and implementing the Integrated Revenue Collections (IRC) technology platform in order to enhance its ability to analyze taxpayer behaviour, report on debt components, and assess risk.
For the fiscal year ending March 31, 2009, approximately $35.1 billion of tax unpaid at the time of assessment during 2008-2009 was resolved[footnore1] compared to approximately $30.5 billion in 2007-2008 (an increase of $4.6 billion or 15.1%). Of this $35.1 billion about $17.5 billion was resolved through front-end automated and DMCC strategies, before moving to the higher cost risk-based field operations strategies. The TSDMB estimates that DMCC actions resulted in total payment arrangements of more than $1.5 billion[footnore2]; the amount of payments made from those arrangements was not provided.
The FEOD has functional responsibility for all DMCC collections and compliance activities. The Accounts Receivable Directorate (ARD) had responsibility for the Government Programs workflow until April 2010 when the FEOD assumed responsibility. The Charities Directorate in the Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs Branch is functionally responsible for the charities workflow.
The main responsibility of the DMCC is to attempt to collect the following types of accounts receivables and returns:
Individual taxpayers (T1) with outstanding balances of less than $100,000; 
Corporate (T2) outstanding balances of less than $100,000; 
Goods and Services Tax/Harmonized Sales Tax (GST/HST) debt of less than $50,000; and
Outstanding (GST/HST) returns with an estimated payable of $20,000 or less.
DMCC staff are responsible for making outbound calls on T1, T2, and GST/HST accounts categorized as call centre status accounts through the use of a predictive dialler. The predictive dialler is a computerized system that automatically dials batches of telephone numbers for connection to agents. In addition, DMCC staff answers inbound collection calls as well as charities enquiries.
The TSDMB vision, as outlined in the 2008 Program Delivery Model (PDM), is enhanced data and technology, and through leveraging capacity in the DMCC, the TSDMB will be able to resolve a greater number of these accounts earlier in the debt management continuum, thereby reducing the number of accounts that require a more costly and time intensive series of actions. This approach will free-up collection officers in the field to focus on more complex and high risk accounts that require more in-depth collections interventions. The PDM action plan recognizes the unique position of the DMCC and the opportunities available within the debt management continuum.
Focus of the Audit
The objective of the audit was to determine whether program management and program delivery internal controls exist and are working as intended. The focus of the audit was on the DMCC collection and compliance controls, the role of the FEOD, and the ability to measure the impact of the DMCC in the debt management continuum. The examination phase of the audit took place from April 2009 to December 2009.
The audit was conducted in accordance with the International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing.
1. Program Management
The goals and objectives for the DMCC, to make arrangements for payment of outstanding amounts and filing of GST/HST returns, are linked to the CRA and TSDMB goals for the timely collection of overdue accounts and returns. In addition, since the costs incurred by the DMCC are lower than those that would be incurred in the more labour-intense Pools and TSOs, the DMCC has a direct impact on the efficiency of the debt management continuum. The ability for the TSDMB to measure the effectiveness of the DMCC is, however, limited with the current performance measurement indicators.
Interview responses and documents reviewed confirm that the DMCC has established a structure that supports the achievement of its stated goals and objectives with clearly defined roles, responsibilities, and accountabilities. The DMCC has provided the tools and guidance required for staff to carry out their functions.
2. Program Delivery
The DMCC has provided the tools and guidance required for staff to carry out their functions. Interviews and document review confirm that DMCC specific policies and procedures have been established and communicated to DMCC staff. Agent adherence to established guidelines is supported by a monitoring framework focusing on improving agent performance.
There are, however, opportunities for improvement. Strengthening the monitoring framework will enable the DMCC to obtain better assurance that the DMCC is operating as intended and would increase assurance that the policies and procedures in place at the DMCC do not inadvertently impede activities performed in the Pools/TSOs.
CONCLUSION
The DMCC has a structure that supports the achievement of its stated goals and objectives with clearly defined roles, responsibilities, and accountabilities. The DMCC has provided the tools and guidance required for the staff to carry out their functions.
TSDMB's ability to obtain assurance that the DMCC is operating as intended would be strengthened by:
Developing and implementing performance measurement indicators which assess DMCC's contribution to the debt management continuum;
Establishing and implementing a continuous improvement process; 
Improving communications with stakeholders; and
Strengthening the program delivery monitoring framework.
