Executive Summary
Introduction
The Treasury Board Submission for the Softwood Lumber Products Export Charge Act, 2006 (SLPECA, or the Act) committed the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) to undertake a formative evaluation within the first three years of the initiative. The submission indicated that the evaluation would "highlight the level of success of implementation and provide action plans for the shortcomings or gaps determined in the administration of the Softwood Lumber Products Export Charge Act, 2006."
This evaluation pursued three issues:
Is the CRA effectively administering its portion of the SLPECA?
Have the CRA and its delivery partners worked in a collaborative and coordinated manner?
Are there indications that the intended outcomes related to CRA's administration of the SLPECA are being achieved?
Background
Since the expiry of the 1996 Canada-United States Softwood Lumber Agreement on March 31, 2001, the Government of Canada sought a durable resolution to the softwood lumber dispute that would provide predictable and stable access to the United States market for Canadian softwood lumber producers. On April 27, 2006, the Prime Minister announced that Canada and the United States had reached a framework agreement that would provide the basis for resolving the softwood lumber dispute, and the Softwood Lumber Agreement, 2006 (Agreement) was signed by the Minister of International Trade and the United States Trade Representative on September 12, 2006. Canada and the United States implemented the Agreement on October 12, 2006. A major component of the Agreement is the imposition of export measures, including an export charge, to be levied by Canada. The SLPECA is the implementing legislation for the charge. CRA's administration of the SLPECA includes the processing of monthly returns and payments within Assessment and Benefits Services Branch (ABSB) and a requirement for development and implementation of an effective compliance and verification program within Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs Branch (LPRAB).
Evaluation Methodology
The methodologies used in conducting the evaluation study included document and file review, examination of data from the Rulings and Interpretations Tracking System (RITS), interviews with CRA managers and staff involved in administering the SLPECA, provincial representatives and representatives of the Foreign Affairs and International Trade Canada (FAITC). The evaluation also included an online survey of lumber company representatives.
Findings and Recommendations
Without the benefit of a comparison program or a long program history, it appears that the CRA's administration of the SLPECA has been effective, particularly in light of the modest turnaround time between the signing of the Agreement and its proclamation into law. On the questions of continuously striving for greater efficiency, horizontal management and the monitoring of performance, only minor changes have been suggested. The working relationship with FAITC, the main delivery partner, has matured and works well. An on-line survey of registrants, a review of available program (compliance) data, and the perspective of provincial clients also suggest that, with the exception of some minor concerns, CRA is effectively administering the SLPECA.
The evaluation makes three recommendations to strengthen CRA's administration of the SLPECA. LPRAB should:
Develop a national quality assurance program to ensure consistency and accuracy of audits; 
Consult with duty officers with the intent of developing system change proposals for consideration by ABSB to improve the Other Levies Assessing System (OL) and, to a lesser extent, the Rulings and Interpretations Tracking System (RITS); and,
Examine ways to better educate registrants so that the frequency of common, less technical errors is reduced, and that voluntary compliance is enhanced.
1. Purpose
The Treasury Board Submission for the Softwood Lumber Products Export Charge Act, 2006 (SLPECA, or the Act) committed the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) to undertake a formative evaluation within the first three years of the initiative. The submission indicated that the evaluation would "highlight the level of success of implementation and provide action plans for the shortcomings or gaps determined in the administration of the Softwood Lumber Products Export Charge Act, 2006."
2. Background
2.1 An overview of the SLPECA
Since the expiry of the 1996 Canada-United States Softwood Lumber Agreement on March 31, 2001, exports of softwood lumber to United States from the Canadian forest products industry had been subject to punitive trade actions by the United States Department of Commerce. These actions resulted in the May 2002 imposition of United States anti-dumping and countervailing duties on most softwood lumber exports to the United States. Canada challenged the United States trade actions under the North American Free Trade Agreement, and before the World Trade Organization and the United States Court of International Trade.
The Government of Canada sought a durable resolution to the softwood lumber dispute that would provide predictable and stable access to the United States market for Canadian softwood lumber producers and end the cycle of litigation that had plagued the industry for over two decades. On April 27, 2006, the Prime Minister announced that Canada and the United States had reached a framework agreement that would provide the basis for resolving the softwood lumber dispute, and the Softwood Lumber Agreement, 2006 (Agreement) was signed by the Minister of International Trade and the United States Trade Representative on September 12, 2006. Canada and the United States implemented the Agreement on October 12, 2006, leaving only a few weeks for the CRA to develop the initial infrastructure to administer the Act.
Under the Agreement, the United States countervailing and antidumping duty orders on Canadian lumber have been fully revoked and almost US$4.535 billion has been returned to Canadian exporters. A major component of the Agreement is the imposition of export measures, including an export charge, to be levied by Canada, which in turn is returned to the provinces net of expenses. The SLPECA is the implementing legislation for the charge.
The Agreement excludes from the export measures softwood lumber products first produced in the Atlantic Provinces from logs originating in the Atlantic Provinces or Maine, those produced in the Territories, as well as those produced by 32 specific companies in Quebec and Ontario. The SLPECA provides exemptions from the export charge to the products excluded under the Agreement.
Under the Agreement, the regions affected choose between an export charge ("Option A") or a lower export charge rate plus a volume restraint ("Option B"). Each region has two opportunities throughout the term of the Agreement to change the Option it has selected: January 1, 2010 and January 1, 2013. The export charge rate is determined monthly, based on the most recent four week average of the weekly framing lumber composite prices.
Figure 1 provides a summary of the options chosen by Canadian provinces/regions:
Figure 1: Export Options
3. Evaluation Issues
Based on consultations and research conducted in preparation of the Softwood Lumber Results Based Management and Accountability Framework, the Program Evaluation Division identified three evaluation issues. These issues and the associated research questions pursued during this study were as follows:
Issue 1: Is the CRA effectively administering its portion of the SLPECA?
1.1 Has the program been developed and administered in a cost-efficient manner?
1.2 Has the CRA effectively coordinated its efforts among all the branches involved?
1.3 Have managers appropriately monitored the delivery of the SLPECA?
Issue 2: Have the Canada Revenue Agency and its delivery partners worked in a collaborative and coordinated manner?
2.1 Have the external partners provided each other with the support and materials they require to carry out their roles and responsibilities in a timely manner?
2.2 Are the governance structures in place appropriate for facilitating collaboration and coordination amongst the external partners?
Issue 3: Are there indications that the intended outcomes related to CRA's administration of the SLPECA are being achieved?
3.1 Is CRA fostering trust with registrants and clients through its management of the SLPECA?
3.2 Are affected lumber companies complying with their obligations under the SLPECA?
3.3 What other challenges, if any, have hindered compliance or made it more challenging to comply with the Softwood Lumber Agreement?
4. Methodologies
The following methodologies were employed during the conduct of the evaluation study:
Document and file review: Legislation, documents, processes, policies, files and procedures were reviewed as they pertain to the SLPECA to assess workload, outputs, achievement of expected results, impacts, relationships and linkages. 
 Data analysis: Data from the Rulings and Interpretations Tracking System (RITS) and the verification unit were examined to report on compliance rates amongst registrants. 
 Interviews (internal): Interviews were conducted with 48 CRA managers and staff involved in administering the SLPECA. A total of 16 interviews were conducted with HQ representatives from LPRAB, ABSB, ITB, and Finance and Administration Branch (F&A). A visit to the Processing Unit at STC permitted an on-site review and the completion of 10 in-person interviews with members of that team. In LPRAB, telephone interviews were conducted with eight current/former Technical Advisors and 14 LPRAB duty officers. 
 Interviews (external): Five provincial representatives were interviewed by telephone regarding their perceptions of CRA's administration of the SLPECA. Six representatives from FAITC were also interviewed. 
 Survey: An on-line survey was conducted with lumber company representatives (n=46).
5. Evaluation Findings and Recommendations
5.1 Is the CRA effectively administering its portion of the SLPECA?
Four aspects of administration were reviewed: budget management, information technology (IT) upgrades, coordination and monitoring. No substantive concerns were found in any of these four areas.
Our assessment of "budget management" is based on a review of the disbursement of allocated funds. The funds available to administer the Act have been adequate, as no branch has gone over-budget based on its original allocations.
A review of the breadth, frequency and impact of IT upgrades revealed that since administration of the Act began, the Processing Unit in STC has undergone a complete software overhaul with the transition from MS Access to Other Levies System (OLAS). These changes have largely occurred semi-annually, and they bundle numerous enhancements together. Although it was not possible to cost out previous and subsequent efficiency gains, all STC Processing Unit staff were able to point to numerous changes that have occurred that have made their jobs easier for them.
Compared to STC Processing Unit staff, LPRAB's duty officers have experienced one-tenth of the total OLAS enhancements that have been implemented during administration of the Act, and according to these users, those who could recall one of these changes felt that it had no meaningful impact on their productivity. However, when probed whether there were changes that possibly could enhance their productivity, the vast majority had at least one idea for OLAS. While LPRAB duty officers had numerous ideas about changes to the IT systems that could result in increased productivity, it is unclear whether these ideas reflect a lack of familiarity with the systems or not.
As well, it was found that while members of the STC Processing Unit are consulted semi-annually by the Excise and Other Levies Section (located in HQ) on their desired OLAS changes, duty officers have not been given the same opportunity by LPRAB.
We assessed coordination by examining training and support, governance and horizontality, and data sharing systems within the Agency. For the most part, the Agency has effectively coordinated its efforts among the branches and regions involved:
Extensive training, nearly all of which originated in Headquarters, has been provided since the outset of the Act, and this continues in ABSB and LPRAB today. Those who participated in the training generally made positive assessments of it, based on its timing and the value-added it provided them in helping do their jobs. The one area where there may be an additional opportunity is in LPRAB providing its duty officers with systems training.
On the question of governance, both ABSB and LPRAB have developed formal governance structures to facilitate communications within their respective Branches. Due to the fact that LPRAB duty officers are located in 11 Tax Services Offices (TSOs) (representing all regions) across the country, a governance structure called the Technical Advisor Conference Call (TACC) has been developed to facilitate communication between HQ and the duty officers. Each region has a designated Technical Advisor, who amongst other tasks, liaises between LPRAB HQ and their region's duty officers. Overall, LPRAB Technical Advisors' appraisals of TACC are generally very positive. The main concern raised by duty officers was that information was shared by their Technical Advisors on a "need-to-know" basis rather than to the group. In spite of this impression, duty officers are generally confident that their work is accurate. Meanwhile, the Processing Unit located in the STC reported regular, effective contact with HQ. A formal governance structure has also emerged here, with rotating chair, minutes and regularly scheduled meetings. It has leveraged its small size and centralized workforce by inviting all staff to regular video conferences and other meetings.
There was no evidence of formal governance structures in place to facilitate communication across branches, but this seems to have had no impact on coordination of effort within the Agency. Coordinating reporting, which involves collaboration between F&A, LPRAB and FAITC, has worked well, as has communication between ABSB and LPRAB. There is regular contact between the parties driven by need and none of the individuals interviewed saw a need to implement a formal structure at this time.
For all the data that are shared between ABSB and LPRAB, only a few areas of concern were identified during our interviews, suggesting that, for the most part, data sharing systems are working effectively.
Monitoring of accuracy and consistency are critical. We found evidence that the monitoring of records processing and the quality of audits is taking place:
Since the outset of the Act, the STC Processing Unit has monitored to ensure accurate record processing. Meanwhile ABSB undertook a review of Surrey's processes, with the aim to improve efficiency and consistency of processing where possible.
LPRAB has developed and distributed templates to facilitate a consistent audit approach, and completed audits are monitored for quality in TSOs. However, it is not known whether those who review completed audits do so in a way that is consistent with their colleagues in other offices. It should also be noted that the results of monitoring are not communicated back to HQ for it to validate whether a consistent approach is being applied by all duty officers in every office. This feedback takes on added significance, however, as with the high annual verification coverage rates required by the Act, duty officers are now carrying out follow-up visits on registrants.
Recommendations
LPRAB should consult with duty officers with the intent of developing system change proposals for consideration by ABSB to improve OL and, to a lesser extent, RITS.
Management Response:
Agreed. The Excise Duties and Taxes Division and the GST/HST Rulings Directorate in LPRAB will continue to increase the systems functional capacity of regional Softwood officers in order to ensure that they are fully aware of all aspects of the OL and RITS systems. As system expertise increases (early 2011), regional softwood officers, team leaders, technical experts and managers as well as HQ experts will be engaged in consultations in an effort to identify potential improvements to both the OL and RITS systems.
Potential Other Levies systems enhancements will be referred to representatives of the Assessment and Benefit Services Branch, who are responsible for reviewing such amendments and submitting them to the Information Technology Branch, as timing opportunities and when resource allotments are available.
Changes to the RITS system will also be considered and examined. Given that the systems responsibility for RITS resides within the GST/HST Rulings Directorate, changes to this system can be made in a timely manner (i.e., within a week or two after changes are requested).
LPRAB should develop a national quality assurance program to ensure consistency and accuracy of audits.
Management Response:
Agreed. The Excise Duties and Taxes Division will complete its ongoing program review exercise of all regional offices by the summer or fall of 2011. Information gathered during our regional review visits will be used to establish the national Softwood program and file standards. The Division will use these national standards as the first step in setting up a quality assurance program to ensure the consistency and accuracy of audits.
5.2 Have the Agency and its delivery partners worked in a collaborative and coordinated manner?
Unlike some other Federal jointly managed programs, there is no formal governance structure in place to facilitate collaboration and coordination between FAITC and CRA. In spite of this, the working relationship between the two parties appears to have matured considerably over the past three plus years. The major factors driving this maturation process have been:
A series of successfully implemented IT upgrades which have facilitated data sharing: Specifically, management of the export permit process has improved considerably. In the three full years where data exist, the number of invalid Business Numbers has dropped significantly (64%) as has the number of inappropriately issued permits (84%) by FAITC. As well, there was no evidence of any problem associated with the exchange of costing information. 
An "educating" period where both parties learned how the other worked. FAITC officials were positive in describing their working relations with their CRA counterparts: When comparing their experiences with CRA to other inter-departmental programs that they have dealt with, FAITC representatives indicated two main points in their appraisals: there have been no "turf wars" with CRA, and CRA officials have consistently been flexible and responsive to their requests. Meanwhile, there was a general sense amongst CRA representatives that, in the past, FAITC had not always been consistent in its communications efforts and, certainly in the early days of the partnership, needed to better understand how the CRA works. Further, CRA representatives felt that information exchanges such as setting up meetings, responses to emails and phone calls, were a priority when initiated by FAITC, but were less so when originating from members of the CRA. 
The relatively small number of people involved in administration on both sides, which has allowed individuals to get to know one another and leverage their small numbers through direct contact: The network of informal communications established has been leveraged to manage unanticipated challenges, such as the Third Country Adjustment Refund[Footnote 2], as they have arisen.
5.3 Are there indications that the intended outcomes of the SLPECA are being achieved?
Although a review of outcome data is not typical of a formative evaluation, we chose to review the early results achieved in order to provide further insight into CRA's administration of the Act.
The relationship between the CRA's major activities and outputs, through to its various intended outcomes, is delineated in the Softwood Lumber Program Logic Model (Figure 2). CRA's intended SLPECA outcomes can be divided into various immediate, intermediate, end and strategic outcomes between its two clients, the softwood lumber companies (registrants) and their respective provincial governments.
The shaded boxes in the logic model (Figure 2) delineate the outputs and outcomes for which data were collected (Appendix A provides the rationale for the outputs and outcomes selected for review). The proceeding discussion on these outputs and outcomes is organized into three sections, as outlined below.
Section 5.3.1 focuses on lumber company perceptions of the outputs (read left to right in the logic model) delivered by the CRA. These include:
Responses to registrant inquiries;
Registrants issued account numbers;
Registrants sent monthly statements and notices of assessment;
Charges assessed;
Refunds issued; and
Audits and reviews conducted.
Section 5.3.2 provides available data related to the following immediate and intermediate outcomes (read from top to bottom):
Registrants understand their obligations under the SLPECA; 
Registrant registers or deregisters appropriately;
Registrant completes returns and remits fees;
Registrant is informed of the new charge assessment (if any); and
Registrant remits outstanding fees or is compliant.
Section 5.3.3 provides the perspectives on provincial representatives on the two outputs (furthest right in the model):
Revenue reports for provinces; and
Net charge distributed quarterly to the provinces.
In addition this section summarizes provincial views on the strategic outcome of "fostering trust".
5.3.1 Registrants' assessments of CRA outputs (products and services) are generally positive
In order to gauge the extent to which the CRA is seen to be supporting its Softwood Lumber client base, registrant satisfaction levels in four specific service areas ─ how enquiries have been handled, the registration process, the processing of returns/account maintenance and the performance of auditors ─ were sought.[Footnote 3]
Responses to registrant enquiries: Among those with experience making enquiries to the CRA, just over four-fifths of survey respondents said they had been provided clear information in a timely manner. Overall, when asked whether they had made any enquiries about the SLPECA to the Agency, nearly six in 10 (59%) indicated that they had done so. Of these representatives, 93% agree that the CRA had treated them respectfully and 82% agree that the CRA both responded to their inquiries in a timely fashion and had provided them with clear information.
Registrants issued account numbers: The registration process is widely viewed as easy. Nearly three-quarters (72%) of those completing the survey said that they were personally involved in the registration process for their company, and of this group, 85% described the process of registering for a business/account number for the Softwood Lumber program as either "very" or "somewhat" easy.
Figure 2: Logic Model (Outputs and Outcomes)
[View image of Logic Model (Outputs and Outcomes)]
[View text version of Logic Model (Outputs and Outcomes) image]
Registrants sent monthly statements and notices of assessment: Although reported discrepancies with account statements are not frequent, satisfaction with how these are dealt with is comparatively lower. While less than one in five (17% ) of those completing the survey said they had a discrepancy in their account statements from the CRA, 38% of those from this group (n=3) said they were satisfied with the level of service to address this situation. Only 4% (n=2) of the companies say that they sought a review of a CRA decision on a charge, and one of these two companies felt satisfied with the process and its results.
Of all the open-ended questions inviting participants to elaborate on their experiences, the one covering account statements generated the most feedback. One participant said that the Notices of Assessment statements are not informative, asking if the "Total Amounts" line refers to the total amount due, total amount paid, or total amount submitted on the export charge return. Another commented that it was difficult to talk to a CRA representative at the Surrey Office over discrepancies.
Some participants provided suggestions for improving the processing of forms. One representative, who reported faxing 50 pages per month to the CRA, suggested it would be much easier if his company could send their detailed remittance information electronically or through email. Another respondent felt that there was confusion on the issue of declared value versus the $500 cap. And another suggested that software should bring up the applicable exchange rate automatically. It was also noted that the objection to relatively minor issues should not require going through a formal Notice of Objection procedure, but this person did not specify what they had in mind with respect to "minor issues".
Refunds issued: According to results from the on-line survey with companies, nearly 40% (n=18) indicate that their company had been eligible for a refund at some point over the past 3 years. Respondents were asked about their level of satisfaction with the refund process both during and prior to 2009, and there was no change in their collective satisfaction level. Both prior to and post January 1 2009, 39% responded that they were "satisfied" with the refund process; none stated that they were "very satisfied", but equally noteworthy, none stated that they were "very dissatisfied" either. Two participants requested telephone interviews to supplement their responses to the online survey, and both raised concerns about the timeliness of their refunds.
Broadly speaking, there are two conditions within SLPECA where companies could be eligible for refunds: through the third country adjustment, or through regular account adjustments and/or an audit. The third country adjustment is more complex administratively, less frequently occurring (its conditions have been met just once), but it is also the refund that is more likely to have impacted more participating companies.[Footnote 4] Approximately 70% of companies that had a charge assessed for the periods covered by the third country adjustment actually claimed their refunds (there were 423 exporters during this period and 295 entitled companies sought refunds).[Footnote 5]
Those who did claim their refunds had to go through a specific process in order for their claims to be accepted. Although the Third Country Adjustment refund must cover six "periods" (i.e. period = month) for each of the two consecutive quarters when the unique market conditions were met, exporters were asked to file only one refund application along with a supplement (Form 278-1) to provide details for each period. In spite of this effort to simplify the process for the client, the Processing Unit still needed to process each period, or month, separately. This is why, as is presented in Figure 3 below, the number of periods is approximately six times the number of applications less periods where there was no charge (no exports by exporter).
Figure 3: Number and Percentage of Periods Processed Within Various Timeframes (in days)
6. Conclusions
Without the benefit of a comparison program or a long program history, it appears that CRA's administration of the SLPECA has been effective, particularly in light of the modest turnaround time between the signing of the Agreement and its proclamation into law. On the questions of continuously striving for greater efficiency, horizontal management and the monitoring of performance, only minor changes have been suggested. The working relationship with FAITC, the main delivery partner, has matured and works well. An online survey of registrants, a review of available program (compliance) data, and the perspective of provincial clients also suggest that, with the exception of some minor concerns, CRA is effectively administering the SLPECA.
Appendix A
Methodology Note: Rationale for the Selection of Outputs and Outcomes Included within the Scope of the Evaluation
Not all outputs and outcomes were included in the scope of the evaluation.
The logic model contained in this report (Figure 2) depicts the outputs and outcomes related to the CRA's administration of the SLPECA. However, not all of the outcomes and outputs were reviewed during the evaluation. This appendix explains the rationale for the evaluation's scope.
One pattern that emerges from the logic model is that, of the two clients, the large majority of outputs and subsequent outcomes are intended for softwood lumber companies. Working from left to right in the model, seven of the eight major activities across the top row, ranging from taxpayer assistance through to legislative matters, are all intended for the industry, leaving only "Payments/Reports to the Provinces" for the provincial governments. For softwood lumber companies, an in-depth review of all the possible outputs and outcomes delivered to them would be comparable to undertaking a small-scale review of the entire Agency.
Steps were taken to reduce the response burden on softwood lumber companies
Rather than conduct such a comprehensive review, an industry survey was developed and administered with an eye to minimizing the time requirements placed on its representatives.
The outputs intended for softwood lumber companies were prioritized so that some would be included in the survey while others would be scoped out.[Footnote 9] Criteria were established to facilitate and justify these choices. For example, the breadth or frequency of industry exposure to each CRA output was deemed one relevant consideration. Were there any outputs that had significantly less up-take than the others? It turns out that the products and services provided by both Enforcement and Appeals could be scoped out because of the limited experience most companies had had with these services.[Footnote 10] At the time of writing, there were a total of 25 appeals and no enforcement actions since the outset of CRA's administration of the Act.
As well, there are several outputs related to the "Taxpayer Assistance" and "Legislative Matters" activities that are intended to facilitate the industry's understanding of its obligations under the Act, in fact too many to examine in a systematic fashion. We did not ask specifically about various CRA outreach efforts, specific web content, or the results of rulings and interpretations, policy papers, notices or changes to the legislation.[Footnote 11] However, program data suggested that most eligible companies had contacted the CRA with at least one inquiry, so it was possible to ask them about that experience as a proxy measure for their views on feeling supported by the CRA to comply with the Act.[Footnote 12]
The result of this prioritization exercise is visually depicted in the logic model. Not only are the contents in the gray shaded boxes included in the study's scope while those in white boxes are not, but to further highlight this distinction, the SLPECA outputs are divided into two rows in a similar in-scope and out of scope fashion. Working from left to right, the softwood lumber company outputs that are in-scope are: responses to registrant inquiries, issuing of account numbers, monthly statements, Notices of Assessment, charges assessed, refunds issued, audits and reviews conducted. But it is through all of these outputs ─ those listed here as well as those "not part of the analysis" ─ that the Agency expects to achieve its immediate, intermediate, end and strategic outcomes for which it is accountable.
Besides reducing the eligible content, further efforts were made to minimize the burden placed on participating softwood lumber companies by streamlining the survey's format and administration to the greatest extent possible. First, the survey was delivered electronically rather than by telephone, mail or in-person interview. As well, the vast majority of questions posed were closed-ended, thereby further facilitating the ease of completion. Moreover, survey items focused on industry satisfaction with CRA's outputs.
Why measure satisfaction?
Canadian softwood lumber companies, operating within a heavily regulated marketplace with substantial economic interests at stake, have regularly been registering, reporting, filing and remitting to the CRA, the primary service provider on all these matters since late 2006. Given all of these factors, if there was widespread satisfaction or dissatisfaction with a particular product or service, participating companies should be in position to articulate these views by now.
