Executive summary
Performance management is integral to the success of organizations of all sizes in both the private and public sector. To provide world-class service to Canadians and deliver on its mandate, the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) must build and maintain a high-performing, diverse, innovative, and versatile workforce. A consistent, equitable, and rigorous approach to performance management allows all employees to maximize their contributions. It also leads to a workforce that strives for performance excellence, whose satisfactory performance is recognized, and whose performance challenges are addressed.
The objective of this audit was to provide the CRA's Commissioner, management, and the Board of Management with assurance that the controls related to human resources performance management are in place and working as intended to support the achievement of the CRA's strategic priorities.
The examination phase of the audit took place from May 2018 to November 2018. The audit team found that overall, the CRA's performance management program has several strengths. For instance, policies, procedures, and processes are in place to administer the program. The process is well established, and employees, as well as managers, understand their roles and responsibilities.
The audit team noted opportunities to improve the corporate policy instruments so that they ensure managers are consistently applying the performance management process and are recognizing and rewarding employees for their success. The training and tools available to managers to support them in the delivery of the performance management program should also be improved to ensure that performance issues are addressed in an efficient and timely manner. Finally, monitoring and reporting activities should be broadened to ensure that the CRA is able to determine whether it is meeting the expected outcomes of the performance management program.
Summary of recommendations
The Human Resources Branch should:
review and update corporate policy instruments, tools and communications to ensure that managers consistently apply all elements of the performance management process and employees recognize the value of the process
improve the support and guidance provided to managers to ensure that they are well-equipped to deliver all elements of the program
establish a monitoring and reporting framework to ensure that the CRA can determine whether performance management is meeting expected outcomes of the program
Management response
The Human Resources Branch agrees with the recommendations in this report and has developed related action plans. The Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch has determined that they adequately address the recommendations.
1. Introduction
To provide world-class service to Canadians and deliver on its mandate, the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) must build and maintain a high-performing, innovative, and versatile workforce. The CRA is one of the largest government agencies with 44,930 employees including 3,018 managers and 6 occupational groups with 18 different classifications.
For confidentiality purposes and in order to address any perceived or real conflict of interest, employees from the Audit, Evaluation and Risk Branch were excluded from this audit.
To achieve a workforce that is engaged and contributes to CRA priorities, the CRA needs an effective performance management program that:
sets clear performance expectations that are aligned with CRA and government priorities
provides timely and specific feedback to employees
recognizes and rewards individual successes
addresses performance challenges
The corporate policy instruments that are guiding the CRA's performance management program are:
Policy on Performance, Learning, Development, and Recognition
Directive on Performance Management and Recognition
Procedures on Performance Management and Recognition
The Human Resources Branch of the CRA is responsible for the development of strategies, policies, guidelines, and processes related to performance management. It is also responsible for reporting on the performance management program and managing the systems used for employee and management group (MG) performance management. The Branch provides managers with advice, support, and guidance on the performance management program.
Although Assistant Commissioners are accountable for performance management and recognition activities within their branch or region, managers are ultimately responsible for daily performance management activities, including initiating and carrying out all aspects of the performance management process and making decisions within their area of responsibility. Employees are accountable for meeting performance expectations and identifying and expressing their needs to their manager in order to address any gaps.
Addressing performance issues is one of managers' most challenging responsibilities. It can take tremendous amount of time and effort which adds to the already heavy workload and usually involves the collaboration between many different stakeholders such as performance management advisors, labour relations advisors, informal conflict resolution practitioners as well as union representatives. Some situations are complex and carry over multiple performance cycles.
In the CRA's performance management program, managers and employees actively work together to set expectations and monitor progress. The key steps of the process are outlined in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Performance management cycle
2.1. Objective
The objective of this audit was to provide the CRA's Commissioner, management, and the Board with assurance that the controls related to human resources performance management are in place and working as intended to support the achievement of the CRA's strategic priorities.
2.2. Scope
The audit covered performance management processes, data, and related reports for all CRA employees, with the exception the Executive Group as their performance management is a different and separate process. For confidentiality purposes and in order to address any perceived or real conflict of interest, Audit, Evaluation and Risk Branch employees were excluded.
The period covered in this audit was from April 1, 2014 to August 31, 2017.
2.3. Audit criteria and methodology
The audit criteria and methodology can be found in Appendix A.
The examination phase of the audit took place from May 2018 to November 2018.
The audit was conducted in accordance with the International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing, as supported by the results of the Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch's quality assurance and improvement program.
3.1. Governance and compliance with policies and procedures
3.1.1 The performance management policy, directive and procedures in place support the CRA Policy Framework for People Management and the achievement of CRA strategic priorities.
The CRA Policy Framework for People Management was approved and implemented in June 2014 and should be reviewed by its 5-year mark, as required for all CRA policies. This policy framework sets out overarching principles and requirements for all corporate policy instruments flowing from it that support people management governance and practices within the CRA. The Human Resources Branch has reviewed and updated the 3 corporate policy instruments related to employee and MG performance management, which are:
the Policy on Performance, Learning, Development, and Recognition – April 1, 2016
the Directive on Performance Management and Recognition – April 1, 2016
the Procedures on Performance Management and Recognition – April 6, 2018
The key elements of the Policy Framework for People Management, which are leadership, workforce, and workplace, are present in all 3 of the above corporate policy instruments.
The objectives and outcomes of the policy and directive both focus on:
building and maintaining a workforce that strives for performance excellence
creating an environment where employees are provided with clear performance expectations that are aligned with operational and CRA priorities
ensuring that challenging performance situations are managed
Overall, the audit concluded that the corporate policy instruments supported the CRA Policy Framework for People Management and the achievement of CRA priorities.
3.2. Monitoring and reporting
3.2.1 The monitoring and reporting activities in place do not allow the CRA to measure and determine if the expected outcomes of the performance management program are being achieved for both employees and MGs.
The audit revealed that the Human Resources Branch's monitoring and reporting practices are limited to tracking and reporting to the Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat (TBS) as part of the Management Accountability Framework assessment process on completion rates and ratings distribution. There is no monitoring on the quality of the completed performance assessment reports. More specifically, the CRA reports annually to the Treasury Board Secretariat on completion rates for setting expectations, completing mid-year reviews, and completing annual written performance assessments. The CRA compares these rates to established targets. In addition, as part of its Annual Report, the Human Resources Branch reports on these completion rates and the distribution of performance ratings. The CRA does not currently have a monitoring and reporting framework with defined key performance indicators.
However, these reported completion rates could be misleading since there are no controls in place preventing managers from indicating that expectations were set, mid cycle review discussions had taken place, and year-end assessments were completed without an official sign off by employees.
At the regional and branch level, monitoring occurs in the form of review committees. While the review committees are consistently in place, the monitoring is limited to a sample of assessments completed and is focused on comparing the written performance assessments and ratings.
Recommendation 4
The Human Resources Branch should establish a monitoring and reporting framework that includes relevant key performance indicators to ensure that the performance management program is meeting expected outcomes.
Action Plan 4
The Employment Programs Directorate will remind employees about how they can view their performance assessments and action logs in the Employee Self Service portal in order to verify the information entered by their manager and follow up if needed.
The target completion date is September 2019.
The Employment Programs Directorate will review and update the policy outcomes of the performance management program based on the results of the current Performance Management Redesign project.
The target completion date is April 2021.
The Employment Programs Directorate will develop and establish a monitoring framework that will include a defined governance structure and performance indicators.
The Employment Programs Directorate will develop and establish an annual reporting framework that will capture and compile data for ongoing or periodic reporting.
The target completion date is April 2022.
Gaps within the new framework will be identified and addressed after a full cycle of the annual reporting.
The target completion date is April 2023.
4. Conclusion
The objective of this audit was to provide the CRA's Commissioner, management, and the Board of Management with assurance that the controls related to human resources performance management are in place and working as intended to support the achievement of the CRA's strategic priorities.
A consistent, equitable, and rigorous approach to performance management allows all employees to maximize their contributions. It also leads to a workforce that strives for performance excellence, whose satisfactory performance is recognized, and whose performance challenges are addressed.
Overall, policies and procedures are in place and communicated with employees and managers. However, the audit team noted opportunities for improvements to ensure that employees and managers understand and apply all elements of the performance management process in a consistent manner and understand its value.
Support and guidance is in place, however certain elements can be improved to ensure that managers are well-equipped to address challenging performance issues.
A monitoring and reporting framework could ensure that the guiding principles of the performance management program are measured and met.
5. Acknowledgement
In closing, the Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch would like to acknowledge, recognize, and thank the Human Resources Branch for the time dedicated and the information provided during the course of this engagement.
Appendix A: Audit criteria and methodology
Based on the Audit, Evaluation, and Risk Branch's risk assessment, the following lines of enquiry were identified:
Appendix B: Distribution of Performance Ratings
Employee performance ratings – Text version
Manager core ratings – Text version
Manager EPM ratings – Text version
Appendix C: Core performance scale for employees and management group
Appendix D: Effective people management performance scale for management group
Appendix E: Glossary
Page details
Report a problem on this page







Date modified:
2019-07-19
