Executive summary
Introduction
During the period  between 2012 and 2017, Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC) worked  jointly with Prince Edward Island and 11 other Provinces and Territories (P/Ts)  to carry out the second cycle of the Labour Market Development Agreement (LMDA)  evaluation. The first cycle of LMDA evaluation was carried out between 1998 and  2012 and involved conducting bilateral formative and summative evaluations in  all P/Ts. Under the second cycle, the evaluation work consisted of conducting two to three studies per  year on the Employment Benefits and Support Measures (EBSMs) similar  programming delivered under these agreements. The second cycle included a cohort of individuals who participated in  programs and services between 2002 and 2005 and they were the subject of the  main incremental impact study and the cost benefit analysis study. The studies generated  evaluation evidence on the effectiveness, efficiency and design/delivery of  EBSMs for Canada overall, for Prince Edward Island and for the 11 other P/Ts  that opted for a joint evaluation process with Canada.
Under LMDAs, Canada transfers $2.14B in Employment Insurance  (EI) Part II funds to the P/Ts for the design and delivery of programs and  services to help unemployed individuals, mainly those eligible for EI, find and  maintain employment.
Responsibility for the design and delivery of LMDA programs  and services was devolved to Prince Edward Island in October 2009. Prior to  that, programs and services were co-managed by Service Canada and the province.
   
  Programs and services delivered  by Prince Edward Island have to correspond to the EBSM categories defined under  the EI Act. The following is a short description of the five categories of  programs and services examined in the evaluation:
Skills Development (Training  PEI, including Apprentices) helps participants obtain  employment skills by giving them financial assistance in order to attend  classroom training. 
Targeted  Wage Subsidies (Employ PEI) helps participants obtain on-the-job work experience by  providing employers with a wage subsidy. 
Self-Employment (Self Employ  PEI) provides financial assistance and business planning  advice to participants to help them start their own business. 
Job Creation Partnerships (Work  Experience PEI) provides participants with opportunities  to gain work experience that will lead to ongoing employment. Employment  opportunities are provided by projects that contribute to developing the  community and the local economy.
Employment  Assistance Services helps  participants with support for  counselling, job search, planning for skills development, job placement  services, and the provision of labour market information and case management.
Three additional programs and services are available under  the LMDAs: Labour Market Partnerships, Research and Innovation, and Targeted  Earnings Supplements. They were not evaluated as part of this evaluation. The  Targeted Earnings Supplements program was not used in Prince Edward Island  while the Labour Market Partnerships and Research and Innovation programs will  be evaluated at a later stage.
Table i provides an overview of the share of funding  allocated to the five EBSMs examined under the second cycle for LMDA evaluation  in Prince Edward Island and the average cost per intervention.
Table i. Share of LMDA funding and average cost per intervention in Prince Edward Island
Sources: EI  Monitoring and Assessment Reports 2002 to 2003 to 2014 to 2015.
  *Investments  in Labour Market Partnerships and Research and Innovation represented 9.5% of  EBSM expenditures in 2014 to 2015.
This report presents a summary of the findings from six  studies produced on Prince Edward Island LMDA interventions and participants.  Results are presented for active and former EI claimants, as well as for youth  (under 30 years old) and long-tenured workers when the number of  participants was sufficient to conduct quantitative analyses. Active EI  claimants are classified as those who were receiving EI benefits at the time of  their EBSM participation. Former EI claimants received EI up to three years  before starting their EBSM participation.
Key findings
Overall, incremental impacts, cost-benefit analysis and  labour market outcomes demonstrate that LMDA programs and services are  generally helping participants to improve their labour market attachment after  participation.
Incremental impacts  demonstrate that active and former EI claimants who participated in Training  PEI and Employ PEI had gains in earnings and incidence of employment when  compared to similar non-participants. As well, active EI claimants who participated in Employ PEI and Employment Assistance Services had reductions in EI use after program participation. Former claimants who participated in Employ PEI reduced their use of social assistance. The social benefits of participation exceeded the cost of the interventions over time.
Labour market outcomes demonstrate that participants in the Work Experience PEI program  showed higher average earnings and lower average proportions on EI and social  assistance during the five years after program participation when compared to  five years prior.
Effectiveness and efficiency for Training PEI, Employ PEI and Employment  Assistance Services
Participants in Training PEI and Employ PEI have a higher probability  of being employed than comparison group members
As shown in Figure i, active EI claimants who participated  in Training PEI and Employ PEI had a higher probability of being employed (in  other words, they increased their incidence of employment) compared to similar  non-participants. As well, former EI claimants who participated in Training PEI  had a higher probability of being employed compared to EI claimants who  received low intensity interventions under Employment Assistance Services.  Former EI claimants who participated in Employ EI had short-term increase in  the probability of employment.
Active EI claimants who participated in Employment  Assistance Services in 2002 to 2005 did not experience an increase probability  of being employed compared to similar non-participants. However, participants  in the 2007 to 2008 cohort did experience increased probability of employment  compared to non-participants. It is noted that Employment Assistance Services  are relatively modest activities such as counselling, job search assistance and  case management. By themselves, they are not expected to lead to substantial  effects on labour market outcomes.
Figure i. Change in  probability of being employed in participants relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure i
* The estimates are not statistically significant at the 95% confidence level. 
  Note: outcomes for participants in Training-on-the-Job should be interpreted with caution given the small number of participants (62 for active claimants and 64 for former claimants).
Increased earnings  for participants in Training PEI and Employ PEI compared to comparison group  members
As shown in Figure ii, active EI claimants who participated  in Training PEI and Employ PEI increased their employment earnings compared to  similar non-participants. As well, former EI claimants who participated in  Training PEI and Employ PEI increased their employment earnings compared to EI  claimants who received Employment Assistance Services exclusively.
As previously indicated, Employment Assistance Services are  relatively modest activities and, by themselves, are not expected to lead to  substantial effects on labour market outcomes.   In other words, these services aim to support the return to work of  unemployed participants and not necessarily to secure a better paying job than pre-participation
Figure ii. Increased cumulative earnings of participants relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure ii
* The estimates are not statistically significant at the 95% confidence level. The estimate for former claimants who participated in Training PEI is statistically significant at the    90% confidence level only. However, these participants did experience statistically significant increases in earnings at the 95% confidence level in year 4 and 5 following participation.
Social benefits of  participation exceeded costs of investments for all interventions.
As shown in Table ii, social benefits to participation exceeded  investment costs in a period ranging between the first year after program  participation to just over 11 years after participation.
Labour market outcomes for participants  in Work Experience PEI
Active and former  EI claimants who participated in Work Experience PEI in 2002 to 2005 had higher  average earnings during the five years following participation when  compared to five years prior. As well, the average proportion of participants on EI and social assistance is  generally lower following participation. Finally, the average proportion of participants employed is lower  following program participation. Possible explanations for the decrease in the  proportion of participants employed may include retirement decisions, and the  fact that some participants may not have benefitted from program participation  while others simply left the labour force for various reasons. These labour  market outcomes should be interpreted with caution given the small number of  active (n=161) and former (n=86) EI claimants’ participants.
Main challenges about program design and delivery
Key informant interviews with service providers and program  managers, as well as the reviewed documents and questionnaires completed by  Prince Edward Island representatives, revealed few challenges about program  design and delivery. Key challenges and barriers for Employ PEI and Employment  Assistance Services are highlighted below.
Employ PEI
Managing employers’ expectations of the  participants and ensuring that the program is adequately explained and  understood by employers
Explaining  to employers that well-trained and well-matched participants are more valuable  to them than the subsidy
Employment Assistance Services
Key informants indicated that service providers are expected  to use labour market information to support the programs and services. However,  they also mentioned that available labour market information is limited,  difficult to access, lacks local context, and is time consuming to obtain.
According to key informants, other challenges with respect  to the design and delivery of Employment Assistance Services included:
Lack of awareness about Employment Assistance  Services among potential participants
Service providers limit their hours of services  and job coaching based on the amount of funding in the service contract
Transportation is an issue in Prince Edward Island,  especially in rural areas
Lack of program flexibility to fund short-term  job placements and to provide support for employed individuals working in  low-paying jobs that are well below their skill set
Recommendations
A total of six recommendations emerge from the evaluation  findings. They are as follows:
A study on the timing of participation in Employment  Assistance Services at the national level revealed that receiving assistance  early after starting an EI claim can lead to better labour market impacts. As  well, key informants reported a lack of awareness about Employment Assistance  Services in Prince Edward Island.
Recommendation 1: Consideration should be given to providing Prince Edward Island with timely  access to data on new EI recipients for supporting targeting and increasing  awareness.
According to key informants, the main labour market barriers  experienced by LMDA participants are related to low educational attainment,  skills mismatch, learning disabilities and literacy issues.
Recommendation 2: Literacy/essential skills training and learning disability assessments are  essential steps in supporting individuals facing multiple barriers to prepare  for vocational training and to reintegrate into the labour market. The measures  should be reported separately from other Training PEI interventions given their  unique objectives.
Key informants confirmed the necessity of having labour  market information to support the delivery of Employment Assistance Services.  They, however, pointed to the difficulty of accessing or producing labour  market information at the regional/local level.
Recommendation 3: Consideration should be given to enhance the capacity of service providers to  access or produce, when needed, relevant local labour market information.
The evaluation was not able to produce a conclusive  assessment of Self Employ PEI effectiveness and efficiency since the income tax  records used to assess impacts on earnings may not be the best source of  information available to reflect the financial wellbeing of participants. As  well, it is not clear whether participants’ success in improving their labour  market attachment through self-employment is more closely associated with their  business idea and their entrepreneurship skills or the assistance provided  under Self Employ PEI.
Recommendation 4: Consideration should be given to examine in more detail the design and delivery  of Self Employ PEI and whether the performance indicators for this program are appropriate
Labour market outcomes produced for Work Experience PEI  participants showed a general improvement in their labour market attachment in  terms of increased earnings and reduced use of EI and social assistance.  However, the evaluation has not yet examined the design and delivery of the  program. Therefore, a lot remains unknown about how this program operates and  the factors that contribute to its effectiveness.
Recommendation 5: Consideration should be given to examine the design and delivery of the Work  Experience PEI program to better understand how this program operates.
Overall, the LMDA evaluation was able to produce a sound  assessment of EBSM effectiveness and efficiency because the team had access to  rich data on EI claimants, EBSM participation data and Canada Revenue Agency  taxation files. However, some data gaps limited the evaluation’s ability to  assess how EBSMs operate.
Recommendation 6: Improvements in the data collection process are recommended to address key  program and policy questions of interest to the federal and  provincial/territorial governments.
Specifically:
Collect data on whether participants are members  of designated groups including Indigenous peoples, persons with disabilities  and recent immigrants.
Collect data on the type of training funded  under Training PEI and the type of assistance provided under Employment  Assistance Services. Prince Edward Island, ESDC and other P/Ts should work  together to define common categories for both EBSMs.
Management response
The Department of Workforce and Advanced Learning accepts  the evaluation recommendations and has responded to the following actions in  relation to the conclusions of this evaluation:
Recommendation 1: Consideration should be given to providing Prince Edward Island with timely  access to data on new EI recipients for supporting targeting and increasing  awareness.
Response: Prince  Edward Island is open to exploring the implementation of targeting and referral  for targeted active EI applicants.   However, this will require further analysis and discussion at the senior  policy level.  Furthermore, Prince Edward  Island will need to assess the impact that this new requirement will have on  its existing service delivery model.
Recommendation 2: Literacy/essential skills training and learning disability assessments are  essential steps in supporting individuals facing multiple barriers to prepare  for vocational training and to reintegrate into the labour market. The measures  should be reported separately from other Training PEI interventions given their  unique objectives.
Response: Prince  Edward Island provides a wide range of programs and services in order to assist  Islander’s in completing their high school education and upgrade or obtain  credits required for post-secondary studies.   The province absorbs the cost of tuition for adult education programs  which ensures access for all Islanders. Prince Edward Island is currently in  discussions with the federal government regarding the Performance Measurement  Strategy under the Amended LMDA which will include various streams under skills  development.
Recommendation 3: Consideration should be given to enhance the capacity of service providers to  access or produce, when needed, relevant local labour market information.
Response:  Prince Edward Island is an active member of  the Labour Market Information Council’s Board of Directors.  Prince Edward Island will work  collaboratively with the FLMM and the Labour Market Information Council to  ensure the direction and priorities of this new organization meet provincial  needs to access relevant and timely labour market information.  From a provincial perspective, the Department  of Workforce and Advanced Learning assembles and provides local labour market  information to its partners to ensure training institutions, students, service  providers, employers and workers have access to relevant and timely labour  market information to inform their decision making.
Recommendation 4: Consideration should be given to examine in more detail the design and delivery  of Self Employ PEI and whether the performance indicators for this program are  appropriate.
Response:  Prince Edward Island consistently reviews the  design and delivery of all its programs and services.  In principle, Prince Edward Island has agreed  to endorse the Performance Measurement Strategy that will be associated with  the renewed labour market transfer agreements.   With the implementation of the Performance Measurement Strategy, new  indicators have been identified for all programs and services under the LMDA  including Self Employment. Prince Edward Island is open to exploring the  possibility of participating in a future study of Self Employ PEI.
Recommendation 5: Consideration should be given to examine the design and delivery of the Work  Experience PEI program to better understand how this program operates.
Response:  Prince Edward Island consistently reviews the  design and delivery of all its programs and services.  In principle, Prince Edward Island has agreed  to endorse the Performance Measurement Strategy that will be associated with  the renewed labour market transfer agreements.   With the implementation of the PMS, new indicators have been identified  for all programs and services under the LMDA including Work Experience PEI (Job  Creation Partnership). Prince Edward Island is open to exploring the  possibility of participating in a future study of Work Experience PEI.
Recommendation 6: Improvements in the data collection process are recommended to address key  program and policy questions of interest to the federal and  provincial/territorial governments.
Specifically:
Collect data on whether participants are members  of designated groups including Indigenous peoples, persons with disabilities  and recent immigrants.
Collect data on the type of training funded  under Training PEI and the type of assistance provided under Employment  Assistance Services. Prince Edward Island, ESDC and other P/Ts should work  together to define common categories for both EBSMs.
Response: In  principle, Prince Edward Island has agreed to endorse the Performance  Measurement Strategy that will be associated with the renewed labour market  transfer agreements.  With the  implementation of the new Performance Measurement Strategy, detailed performance  indicator information identifies data collection methodologies, frequency of  reporting, data sources and data elements for all programs and services as well  as participant and employer indicators under the amended LMDA.
1.   Introduction
During the period between 2012 and 2017, Employment and Social  Development Canada (ESDC) worked jointly with Prince Edward Island and 11 other  Provinces and Territories (P/Ts) to carry out the 2012 to 2017 second cycle of  the Labour Market Development Agreement (LMDA) evaluations. The first cycle of  the LMDA evaluation was carried out between 1998 and 2012 and involved the  conduct of bilateral formative and summative evaluations in all P/Ts. Under the  second cycle, the evaluation work consisted of conducting two to three studies  per year on the Employment Benefits and Support Measures (EBSMs) similar  programming delivered under these agreements. The second cycle included a  cohort of individuals who participated in programs and services between 2002  and 2005 and they were the subject of the main incremental impact study and the  cost benefit analysis study. The studies generated evaluation evidence on the  effectiveness, efficiency and design/delivery of EBSMs for Canada overall, for  Prince Edward Island, and for the 11 other P/Ts that opted for a joint evaluation  process with the Government of Canada.
This report presents a summary  of the findings from studies conducted for Prince Edward Island and it is  organised as follows:
Introduction with an overview of the studies  summarized in this report including their scope and methodology, and contextual  information on the LMDAs
Findings section with a discussion around the  rationale for investing in labour market programming and a summary of  evaluation evidence
Comparison of key findings by program type
Conclusions and lessons learned 
Recommendations that  emerged from the evaluation findings
1.1 Labour Market Development Agreement background
LMDAs are bilateral agreements between Canada and each P/T,  and were established under Part II of the 1996 Employment Insurance (EI) Act.  As part of these agreements, Canada transfers $2.14B annually in EI Part II  funding to P/Ts in order to design and deliver programs and services to assist  individuals to prepare for, obtain and maintain employment. Specifically,  Prince Edward Island receives approximately $23.2M in EBSM funding each year.
The Canada-Prince Edward Island LMDA was signed on May 22,  2009. The agreement transferred responsibility for the design and delivery of  programs and services to Prince Edward Island. Programs and services are  classified under two categories: 1) Employment Benefits and 2) Support  Measures. Prior to 2009, programs and services were co-managed by Service  Canada and the province.
Employment benefits
Employment Benefits funded under the LMDAs are offered to  unemployed individuals who 1) are actively on EI (active claimants); 2) ended  their benefit period within three years before participating (former  claimants); or 3) established a claim for maternity or parental benefits within  the past five years and are returning to the labour force for the first time  (former claimants).  Employment Benefits include the following  categories:
Skills  Development (Training PEI, including Apprentices) helps  participants obtain employment skills by giving them financial assistance that  enables them to select, arrange and pay for classroom training. 
Targeted  Wage Subsidies (Employ PEI) helps participants obtain on-the-job work experience by  providing employers with financial assistance to help with the wages of participants. 
Self-Employment (Self Employ  PEI) provides financial assistance and business planning  advice to EI-eligible participants to help them start their own business. This  financial assistance is intended to cover personal living expenses and other types  of expenses during the initial stages of the business.
Job Creation Partnerships (Work  Experience PEI) provides participants with  opportunities to gain work experience that will lead to ongoing employment.  Employment opportunities are provided by projects that contribute to developing  the community and the local economy.
Targeted Earnings Supplements encourages  unemployed persons to accept employment by offering them financial incentives.  This program was not offered in Prince Edward Island and therefore not covered  by the evaluation.
Support measures
Support Measures are  available to all unemployed individuals including those not eligible to receive  EI and include:
Employment Assistance  Services helps participants with support for individual counselling,  action planning, help with job search, planning for skills development,  job-finding clubs, job placement services, the provision of labour market  information, and case management and follow-up.
Labour Market Partnerships provides  funding to help employers, employee and employer associations, and communities  improve their capacity to deal with human resource requirements and implement  labour force adjustments. These partnerships involve developing plans and  strategies, and implementing labour force adjustment measures. This support  measure was not covered by the evaluation.
Research and Innovation supports activities that  identify better ways of helping people prepare for or keep employment and be  productive participants in the labour force. Funds are provided to eligible  recipients to enable them to carry out demonstration projects and research for  this purpose. This support measure was not covered by the evaluation.
Table 1 provides an overview of the share of funding  allocated to the five EBSMs examined under the second cycle for LMDA evaluation  in Prince Edward Island and the average cost per intervention. It is noted that  the average cost per intervention was calculated based on the 2002 to 2005 data  from the EI Monitoring and Assessment Reports. The 2002 to 2005 period  corresponds to the cohort of participants selected for incremental impact and  cost-benefit analysis in the LMDA evaluation.
Table 1. Share of LMDA funding and average cost per intervention in Prince Edward Island
Sources: EI Monitoring and Assessment Reports 2002-2003 to 2014-2015.
  *Investments in Labour Market Partnerships and Research and Innovation represented 9.5% of EBSM expenditures in 2014-2015.
1.2  Methodology
This  section presents key aspects of the quantitative analyses carried out as part  of the LMDA studies, while a more detailed description of the methodology is  provided in Appendix A.
All  quantitative analyses were based on administrative data from the EI Part I (EI  claim data) and Part II (EBSM participation data collected by Prince Edward  Island and transferred to ESDC) databanks that were linked to T1 and T4  taxation files from the Canada Revenue Agency. Incremental impact analyses and  cost-benefit analyses were based on 100% of participants in the reference  period selected.
Incremental impacts  analysis
Four  studies assessed program effectiveness by estimating incremental impacts from  EBSM participation on participants’ labour market experience  (including,earnings from employment/self-employment, incidence of employment, use of EI or social assistance and dependence on income support) after participation. The role of the incremental  impact analysis is to isolate the effects of participation from other factors  such as the economic cycle. In order to achieve this, the incremental impact  analyses compared the labour market experience of participants before and after  their participation with that of non-participants (see the Example of  Incremental Impact Calculation in Figure 1).
Figure 1. Example of incremental impact calculation
Text description of Figure 1
The  matching of participants and comparison group members used up to 75  socio-demographic and labour market variables observed over five years before  participation. Two different  comparison groups were used to measure impacts for active and former EI  claimants. For active claimants, the incremental impacts were measured relative  to a comparison group of active claimants who were eligible to participate in  EBSMs but did not during the reference period.
Former claimants can be underemployed and  unable to requalify for EI, out of the labour force for various reasons or on  social assistance. Based on previous evaluation methodologies, on expert advice  and given the difficulty in generating a suitable comparison for former  claimants using administrative data alone, the comparison group for former  claimants was created using individuals who participated in Employment  Assistance Services only during the reference period. This is a conservative  approach given the fact that participation in Employment Assistance Services  can lead to limited effects on labour market outcomes. In other words, the experience of former  claimants who received Employment Benefits (such as, Training PEI, Employ PEI,  Self Employ PEI and Work Experience PEI) was compared to the experience of  former claimants who received low intensity employment services (that is,  Employment Assistance Services only). Due to this difference in measurement,  incremental impacts estimated for active claimant participants should not be  directly compared to those of former claimant participants.
The number of  participants was sufficient in order to estimate the incremental impacts for  active and former EI claimants who were youth (under 30 years old) and  long-tenured workers. Long-tenured workers refer to individuals who had long-term  attachment to the labour market but not necessarily a long tenure with the same  employer.
Factors accounted for in the cost-benefit analysis
Program  efficiency was assessed through a cost-benefit analysis which compared the cost  of participating in the program for the participants and the cost of delivering  the program for the government to the benefits generated by the program.  Overall, this analysis provided insight on the extent to which the program is  efficient for the society (that is, for both the participants and the  government). The costs and benefits accounted for in the calculations were as  follows (see detailed definitions in Appendix  A):
Program cost includes program and administration  costs paid by the government
Marginal social costs of public funds represent  the loss incurred by society when raising additional revenues such as taxes to  fund government programs
Employment earnings consist of incremental  impacts on participants’ earnings during and after participation. The  calculation accounts for the participant’s forgone earnings during  participation (in other words, the opportunity cost). Employment earnings were  also increased by 15% to account for fringe benefits such as the employer-paid health,  life insurance and pensions contributions.
Labour market outcomes
The analysis of outcomes provides descriptive statistics on  the labour market experience of participants before, during and after  participation. For example, it shows the average annual earnings of active  claimants before, during and after participation, and presents what changes  were observed from before to after participation. Overall, the analyses were  conducted over a period of 9 to 12 years (five years before participation, one or  two years during participation, and three or five years after participation).
The outcome analyses provide an assessment of how the labour  market situation of participants evolved over time, but does not permit  inference regarding the extent to which those changes were due to EBSM  participation. For example, increases in employment earnings over the period  examined could be partly due to inflation or normal wage increases.
The number of  participants was sufficient in order to produce the labour market outcomes for  active EI claimants who were youth (under 30 years old).
Strengths and limitations of the studies
One of the key strengths from the studies is that all  quantitative analyses were based on administrative data rather than survey  responses. Compared to survey data, administrative data are not subject to recall  errors or response bias.
The propensity score models used to match participants and  non-participants for the incremental impact analyses are judged to be robust in  part because they were based on five years of pre-participation data and on a  vast array of variables including socio-demographic characteristics, location,  skills level related to last occupation and indicators of labour market  attachment. Sensitivity analysis and the use of alternative estimation methods  have increased confidence in the incremental impact estimates. However, one limitation with the propensity score  matching techniques is that no one can be fully sure the impacts were not  influenced by factors not captured in the data.
The cost-benefit analysis accounted for all quantifiable  costs and benefits directly attributable to the EBSMs and could be estimated  with the available administrative data. The analysis did not account for  non-quantifiable benefits such as improvements in participant’s wellbeing or  for the multiplier effect of increased spending on the economy.
It should be noted that it is not possible to produce  incremental impacts for the participation in Training PEI - Apprentices.  Assessing these impacts poses a methodological challenge because program  participants are already employed and are expected to return to their  employment after completing their training. Therefore, expected labour market  impacts cannot be examined using a similar approach as for other EBSMs, which  are expected to help participants return to employment. As well, the data  available does not permit the identification of a proper comparison group since  program participants alternate between work and training and no other potential  counterfactuals have similar employment and training patterns. In this context,  it is possible to provide an analysis of labour market outcomes associated with  program participants but not possible to produce estimates of program  effectiveness. While outcomes can provide some insights about the labour market  experience of participants before and after participation, it is not possible  to attribute the change observed in the outcomes to program participation. For  example, a change in average annual earnings from before to after participation  could be due to program participation or to other factors such as the  maturation effect of youth, the economic cycle, lay off, etc.
When interpreting qualitative findings, readers should keep  in mind that these are based on the perception of a small number of key  informants who are directly involved in the design or delivery of the program.  Their perception may be representative of their own region or community but not  necessarily of the entire province. Since the number of key informants  interviewed in each study is small (that is, ranging between 3 and 5), the  number of informants who reported a specific finding is not indicated in the  report. However, the report notes when there is a clear disagreement between  key informants.
In the case of Prince Edward Island, we were not able to  produce incremental impacts for active claimants who participated in the Self  Employ PEI program because the balancing tests properties were not  satisfied. As well, incremental impacts for former claimants who participated  in the Self Employ PEI program and for active and former claimants who  participated in the Work Experience PEI program were not produced due to the  small number of participants.
However, the report presents the labour market outcomes for  the participation in the Self Employ PEI and Work Experience PEI programs over  a twelve year period (that is, 5 years pre-program, 1 to 2 years in-program and  5 years post-program). Readers should be careful to note, when interpreting  these outcomes, that changes may be due to external factors (for example  inflation, youth maturation process, etc.) and not EBSM participation.
1.3  Overview of the studies summarized in this report
Findings  presented in this report were drawn from six separate studies produced on Prince  Edward Island LMDA interventions and participants. These studies examined issues related to EBSM  effectiveness, efficiency, design/delivery and used a mix of qualitative and  quantitative methods. Each study examined evaluation issues in relation to  active and former EI claimants.
Table H1
Appendix H
2. Evaluation  findings
2.1  Rationale  and Labour Market context
Active labour market  programs are fairly similar across the Organization for Economic Co-operation  and Development countries and consist of skills training in a classroom  setting, work experience with employers (often subsidized) or in the  public/non-profit sector, return-to-employment assistance and self-employment  assistance. In Prince Edward Island, SkillsPEI, a Division within the  Department of Workforce and Advanced Learning, administers a range of labour  market programming. Programs and services offered to active and former EI  claimants are primarily funded under the LMDA. The primary objective of  SkillsPEI is to assist Islanders with programs and services to improve their  labour force participation and to develop or enhance entrepreneurial skills
In the 2016 Speech from the  Throne, the Government of Prince Edward Island committed to place “Particular  emphasis…on building job experience opportunities for young Islanders and new  entrants to the labour market and to “provide active  support for job placement and training, including young, first-time or  returning workers who are seeking to establish themselves on Prince Edward  Island. Additionally, the 2016  provincial budget encouraged Islanders to “achieve success through education,  training and employment.
Overall, incremental impacts  and labour market outcomes reported in the LMDA evaluation and discussed in  this report demonstrated that LMDA funded programs and services delivered in  Prince Edward Island are generally helping participants to improve their labour  market experience after participation and contribute to meeting the commitments  of the Government of Prince Edward Island and SkillsPEI’s primary objective.
2.2 Training PEI
2.2.1 Program description and delivery
Based on a document  review and on information available on the SkillsPEI website 
  Training  PEI provides financial assistance to eligible individuals to help develop the  skills required to obtain long-term meaningful employment. Up to 70% of tuition  and basic living costs can be provided to eligible individuals engaged in  skills-related training. Funding may also be available for travel and childcare  costs. The level of financial support is determined through an assessment of  the participant’s need.
Training  PEI is delivered in partnership with external service providers. Case managers  are responsible for completing a needs assessment to establish the  appropriateness of the intervention. Case managers work with participants to  develop a return to work action plan detailing the participant’s needs,  activities to overcome these needs and the appropriate intervention(s) to  address their employment barriers. The case manager also confirms the  applicant’s eligibility for the program and determines the financial need.
After  completing the program, case managers do follow-up with participants to ensure  that they are successful in completing their action plan and in securing  employment.
2.2.2 Profile  of Training PEI participants
As shown in Table B1 in Appendix B,  active claimants who started their Training PEI intervention in 2002 to 2005 or  2007 to 2008 were mostly male (56% and 55% respectively) with the majority of  participants aged 34 years or younger (55% and 58% respectively). Participants  in both cohorts most frequently held occupations requiring secondary or  occupational training in the year prior to participation (36% for the 2002 to 2005  cohort and 39% for the 2007 to 2008 cohort).
Former claimants who started their Training PEI intervention  in the 2002 to 2005 and 2007 to 2008 periods were predominately female (55% and  53% respectively). Most participants were 34 years of age or younger (60% and  57% respectively). Participants in the 2002 to 2005 cohort most frequently held  positions requiring secondary or occupational training in their last job before  participation (36%) while 2007 to 2008 participants were more equally split  between jobs that required secondary or occupational training (32%), on-the-job  training (32%), or college or apprenticeship training (30%).
2.2.3 Incremental impacts
Active claimants
As shown in Table B2 in Appendix B, active claimants who  started their Training PEI participation between 2002 and 2005 had incremental  gains in earnings and incidence of employment in each of the five years after  participation. As shown in Figure 2, these gains in earnings increased over  time and ranged between $1,110 and $4,042 annually in the five years following  participation. Similarly, increases in incidence of employment ranged between  1.9 and 2.7 percentage points annually over the post-program period.  Participants also decreased their use of EI by $183 in the third year after  participation and reduced their level of dependence on income support between  1.4 and 2 percentage points between the second and fourth years following  participation. Impacts on the use of social assistance were non-statistically  significant.
Figure 2. Increased earnings of active and former Training PEI participants relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure 2
*The estimates are not statistically significant at the 95% confidence level.
Active claimants who started Training  PEI participation in 2007 to 2008 had incremental gains in earnings (cumulative  of $12,273) and incidence of employment (ranging between 1.7 and 3 percentage  points) over the three years post-participation. Participants also decreased  their use of EI by a cumulative of $1,038 and their dependence on government  income support in the first two years following participation (2.3 and 3.3  percentage points respectively).
Overall, active claimants increased  their labour market attachment through increases in earnings and incidence of  employment and decreases in the level of dependence on government income  support.
Youth (under 30 years old) who  started Training PEI participation in the 2002 to 2005 period had incremental  gains in earnings and incidence of employment in all years after participation.  As well, they increased the use of EI by a cumulative of 4.6 weeks and their  dependence on income support in the second and third post-program years. Impacts  on the use of social assistance were not statistically significant.
Former claimants
As shown in Table B3 in Appendix B, former claimants who  started Training PEI participation between 2002 and 2005 increased their incidence  of employment in the first, second and fifth years post-program by 6.9, 7.4 and  6 percentage points respectively. They also had incremental gains in earnings  in the fourth ($2,198) and fifth ($2,159) years after participation (see Figure  2). Incremental impacts for the use of EI, use of social assistance and  dependence on income support were not statistically significant.
Overall, former claimants  improved their labour market attachment through some increases in earnings and  incidence of employment during the post-program period.
2.2.4 Cost-benefit results
As shown in Table B4 in Appendix B, for active claimants, the  benefits of Training PEI for society matched the costs 5.1 years after  participation.  Six years after  participation, the benefits exceeded the costs by $3,348. For former claimants,  the benefits were still $6,465 lower than the costs six years after the end of  participation. As such, the benefits matched the costs 11.5 years after  participation.
2.3  Training  PEI – Apprentices
2.3.1  Program  description and delivery
Based on a document  review and on information available on the SkillsPEI website
SkillsPEI  provides eligible individuals with financial assistance during the in-class  portion of their apprenticeship training. Apprentices only receive benefits  during the in-school training period. Financial support is provided for  tuition, basic living costs and other costs related to the training.
Eligible  applicants must be at least 18 years old within the calendar year of  registering as an apprentice, have a high school completion certificate or  equivalent, and be working at a designated skilled trade with a suitable  employer.
Apprentices  are not required to have a return to work action plan nor are they case managed  because they generally have an employer attachment prior and subsequent to  their training. The apprentice enters into a training agreement with their  employer and SkillsPEI agrees to provide the apprentice with workplace-based  training in a trade, other occupation or skills set which is part of an approved  apprenticeship program.
Training  generally takes place at Holland College although some training may occur  off-island. It typically takes 3 to 4 years to complete a program.
2.3.2 Profile of Training PEI – Apprentices  participants
As shown in Table C1 in Appendix C,  active claimants who started their Training PEI – Apprentices intervention in  2003 to 2005 were mostly male (94%) with the majority of participants aged 25  years or younger (52%). Participants most frequently held positions requiring  college or apprenticeship training in the year prior to participation (70%).
The number of  former claimants’ participants was too small to produce descriptive statistics.
2.3.3 Labour market outcomes
Labour market outcomes for active claimants who started Training PEI – Apprentices participation in the 2003  to 2005 period were produced and are reported in Table  C2 in Appendix C. The analysis was conducted over a period of 12 years  (five years before participation, two years during participation, and five  years after participation).
Labour market outcomes provide  descriptive statistics on the labour market experience (that is, average annual  earnings) of participants before, during and after participation and present  what changes were observed from before to after participation. The outcome  analysis provides an assessment of how the labour market situation of  participants evolved over time, but does not permit inference regarding the  extent to which those changes were due to program participation. For example,  increases in employment earnings over the period examined could be partly due  to inflation or normal wage increases.
As shown in Figure  3 below, active claimants who started their program participation between 2003  and 2005 earned $24,609 more annually (on average) in the five years after  participation compared to the five years before participation.
Figure 3. Average earnings for 2003 to 2005 active claimants in Training PEI – Apprentices
Text description of Figure 3
Notes: Average earnings include participants with zero earnings in a specific year. As well, earnings were not adjusted for inflation.
The  increase in earnings was accompanied by a 4 percentage points (nearly 7  participants) decrease in the proportion of participants employed. At 96%, the  average proportion of active claimants employed is lower in the post-program  period compared to the pre-program period (100%) but still substantial.  Compared to the five years before the program period, the average annual  proportion of participants claiming EI benefits decreased from 50% to 44% and  the average proportion of participants on social assistance remained the same  at 3% in both the pre- and post-program periods. Correspondingly, active  claimants also exhibited a slight reduction in the dependence on income support  in the 7 years observed following their program participation (from 12% to  11%).
2.4  Employ  PEI
2.4.1 Program description
Based on a document  review and 3 key informant interviews completed in summer 2015
Employ  PEI was designed to encourage private sector employers to hire eligible  individuals and provide them with an on-the-job work experience to enhance  their skills and employability. Although the wage subsidy is temporary, it is  expected to lead to a permanent position with the employer.
The  maximum duration of the subsidy is 52 weeks and it covers 50% of the employee’s  wage. The percentage of support granted to the employer is based on a set  level; however, Employ PEI can provide financial supports to cover other costs  related to the employment opportunity in exceptional circumstances. Eligible  employers include registered private sector businesses, organizations,  municipalities, Band/Tribal councils and public health/educational  institutions.
Applications  consist of a completed application form, a detailed job description including  specific duties and a sustainability plan to maintain the new employee  following the subsidy period. Both  the employer and the individual must apply to Employ PEI. As part of developing  the return to work action plan, caseworkers assess the individual’s barriers to  employment, education level, skills level and work experience. As well,  external service providers can recommend an individual to Employ PEI and can  provide the individual with a marketing letter to use when contacting  prospective employers.
Aerospace  (technicians, administration), information technology and construction/trades  are examples of the industrial sectors most frequently covered by the subsidy  in 2014 to 2015.
2.4.2 Program delivery
Based on a document  review and 3 key informant interviews completed in summer 2015
  Employ  PEI is administered by SkillsPEI.   External service providers and SkillsPEI offer case management support  services and work with individuals to develop a return to work action plan.  They also follow up with the client during the intervention and provide support  to the client when necessary. SkillsPEI program officers assess the  application, prepare a recommendation and provide a supporting rationale.  Applications are approved by SkillsPEI  managers.
2.4.3 Profile of Employ PEI participants
As shown in Table D1 in Appendix D, active  claimants who started participation in 2002 to 2005 were nearly equally split  between males (50%) and females (49%), while those who started in 2007 to 2008  were mostly males (59%). Those who participated in 2002 to 2005 were mainly  distributed between the 25 to 34 (29%), 35 to 44 (28%) and 45 to 54 and over  (29%) age groups, while 2007 to 2008 participants were more concentrated in the  35 years and older age group (69%). In their last job before participation, 34%  of the 2002 to 2005 participants most frequently held occupations requiring  secondary or occupational training prior to participation, while the 2007 to 2008  cohort were more likely to have held occupations requiring college or  apprenticeship training (39%).
Former claimants who started their program participation in  2002 to 2005 were more often male (55%) compared to the 2007 to 2008 cohort  which was primarily composed of females (53%). Slightly more than half of  participants in the 2002 to 2005 cohort were 35 years of age and older (57%)  while the majority of 2007 to 2008 participants were aged 25 to 44 (63%).  Participants in both cohorts most frequently held occupations requiring college  or apprenticeship training prior to participation (33% and 35% respectively).
2.4.4 Incremental impacts
Detailed incremental impact results for active and former  claimants in the 2002 to 2005 cohort are presented in Tables D2 and D3 in  Appendix D. Incremental impacts for the 2007 to 2008 cohort were not produced  as the number of participants was too small.
Active claimants
Active claimants who started Employ PEI participation  between 2002 and 2005 had incremental gains in earnings in all years after  participation. Gains in earnings grew from $1,434 in the first year to $4,023  in the fifth year after participation (see Figure 4). Participants also  experienced incremental increases in the incidence of employment ranging  between 3.4 and 6.4 percentage points annually in four of the five years  following participation. Participants reduced their use of EI by a cumulative  of $3,572 or 7.4 weeks following participation. They also reduced their  dependence on government income support in all 5 years following participation  (ranging between 2.2 and 4.6 percentage points), as well as their use of social  assistance in the first year after participation.
Overall, active claimants improved their labour market attachment  through increases in earnings and incidence of employment, as well as  reductions in EI use and dependence on income supports.
Figure 4. Increased earnings of active and former Employ PEI participants relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure 4
*The estimate is not statistically significant at the 95% confidence level.
Former claimants
Employ PEI was also effective at improving the incremental  earnings of former claimants’ participants. As shown in Figure 4, gains in  earnings ranged between $1,845 and $3,645 annually in four of five  post-participation years. They also increased their incidence of employment by  5.6 percentage points in the first year following participation. Their use of  EI increased by $635 in the second year after participation, while their use of  social assistance decreased by a cumulative of $1,163 post-participation.  Results for dependence on income support were non-statistically significant.
The increase in EI in the second year following  participation may indicate the inability of some former claimants to maintain  the employment secured in the short-term. It can also be argued that the  increase in EI use is an indication of an increase in labour market attachment  for this client group since they did experience increases in employment  earnings, as well as a decrease in the use of social assistance. As a reminder,  former claimants are participants for whom the EI benefit period ended up to  three years pre-participation.
2.4.5  Cost-benefit  results
For active claimants, as shown  in Table D4 in Appendix D, the benefits of  Employ PEI from society’s perspective were $7,542 higher than the costs six  years after participation. The benefits matched the costs 3.9 years after  participation. For former claimants, the benefits were $13,229 higher than the  costs six years after the end of participation and the benefits matched the  costs within the first year after participation.
2.4.6 Challenges and lessons learned about Employ PEI  design and delivery
Based on a document  review and 3 key informant interviews completed in summer 2015
Key informants reported  challenges with the design and delivery of Employ PEI which include:
Managing  the employer’s expectations and ensuring that the program is adequately explained  and understood by employers.
Explaining  to employers that well-trained and well-matched participants are more valuable  to them than the subsidy.
Key informants identified  best practices and the lessons they learned in terms of the design and delivery  of the program. These included:
Maintaining  relationships with employers for future funding opportunities.
Following  up with participants and employers by resolving issues as they arise during the  subsidy period.
Ensuring  a proper match between the participant and the employer to increase the  probability of success. 
Learning  how best to help specific participant groups (for example, persons with  disabilities) and having the flexibility to adjust the program to meet their  needs such as adjusting the length of the subsidy and the requirement to work  35 hours per week.  
There  is a need to accommodate seasonal employment in rural areas (on the condition  that the job has a 6 month minimum duration).
2.5  Self  Employ PEI
2.5.1  Program  description and delivery
Based on information  available on the SkillsPEI website
The Self Employ PEI program  assists unemployed individuals create jobs for themselves by starting a new  business. Financial support and business counseling is provided to unemployed  individuals during the business’ first year of operation.
With the assistance of  SkillsPEI staff, applicants complete a Self Employ Suitability Assessment, a  return to work action plan and an Application for Funding. As well, the  applicant must provide a detailed business plan, proof of investment or  financing, a resume and a SkillsPEI consent form. The proposed business cannot  begin operation until approval has been received from SkillsPEI.
Participants in Self Employ  PEI are expected to devote a minimum of 35 hours per week to implement their  business plan. Financial support may include a weekly living allowance or EI  Part 1 benefits or a combination of both.
2.5.2 Profile of Self Employ PEI participants
As shown in Table E1 in Appendix E, active claimants who started participating in  Self Employ PEI in 2002 to 2005 or 2007 to 2008 were primarily male (60% and  59% respectively). The majority of participants in the 2002 to 2005 cohort were  between 25 and 44 years of age (70%) while the largest concentration of 2007 to  2008 participants fell in the 35 years old and over age group (63%).  Prior to participation, both the 2002 to 2005  and 2007 to 2008 participants most frequently held positions requiring college  or apprenticeship training (42% each).
Former claimants who started Self Employ PEI participation  in 2002 to 2005 or 2007 to 2008 were mainly male (53% and 57% respectively) and  few were under the age of 25 for both cohorts (7% and 2% respectively). The  remaining participants were almost evenly distributed across the other age  categories (that is, 25 to 34, 35 to 44, and 45 and over).  Participants in both cohorts most frequently  held occupations requiring college or apprenticeship training prior to  participation (30% and 45% respectively).
2.5.3 Challenges in estimating Self Employ PEI  incremental impacts and reporting on labour market outcomes
Incremental impacts for active claimants who participated in  Self Employ PEI in the 2002 to 2005 period are not available because the  balancing test properties were not satisfied. As well, incremental impacts for former claimants’  participants in 2002 to 2005 and for active and former claimants’ participants  in 2007 to 2008 were not produced given the small number of participants.  Instead, the labour market outcomes for active and former claimants who  participated in Self Employ PEI between 2002 and 2005 were produced and can be  found in Tables E2 and E3 in Appendix E.
The outcomes presented in Appendix E are not discussed in  the report since they may not provide an accurate depiction of the financial  well-being of participants in the post-program period. Specifically, the  earnings and the proportion of participants employed were produced using  individual earnings reported in the T1 and T4 taxation files from Canada  Revenue Agency.
According to a study from Statistics Canada, self-employed  individuals in Canada have a lower average annual income than paid employees  ($46,200 versus $52,400 in 2009), but the average net worth of their households  is 2.7 times greater than that of the paid employee households, which indicates  that some self-employed individuals may leave funds within their business for  reinvestment purposes. Overall, this suggests  that looking at individual earnings alone, without taking the net worth into  consideration, may not provide a fair assessment of how well participants are  doing financially after participation.
As well, little is known  nationally about the design and delivery of this program. In particular, there  is a lack of understanding around the role played by this program in helping  future entrepreneurs to implement viable business plans and to develop their  entrepreneurship skills. Overall, it is not clear whether participants’  success in improving their labour market attachment through self-employment is  more closely associated with their business idea and their entrepreneurship  skills or the assistance provided under the Self Employ PEI.
2.6  Work  Experience PEI
2.6.1 Program description
Based on information  provided by Prince Edward Island and available on the SkillsPEI website
Work Experience PEI is a short-term  employment program providing participants with on-the-job work experience and  the opportunity to develop new skills. The program is administered by  SkillsPEI.  External service providers  and SkillsPEI offer case management support services and work with individuals  to develop a return to work action plan. They also follow up with the client  during the intervention and provide support to the client when necessary.  SkillsPEI program officers assess the application, prepare a recommendation and  provide a supporting rationale.   Applications are approved by SkillsPEI managers.
2.6.2 Profile of Work Experience PEI participants
As shown in Table F1 in Appendix F, active claimants who started participating in  Work Experience PEI in 2002 to 2005 or 2007 to 2008 were mostly male (60% and  63% respectively). Most participants were between the ages of 25 to 44 (58%) in  the 2002 to 2005 cohort while in the more recent cohort, participants were more  evenly distributed (with 27% being under 25 years or age, and 29% being 45 and  over). Prior to participation, active claimants held occupations that required  on-the-job training (34% of participants in each cohort), as well as  occupations requiring secondary or occupational training (27% and 39%  respectively).
Former claimants were more likely to be male (80% of 2002 to  2005 participants and 70% of 2007 to 2008 participants) and older since only  34% of participants in both cohorts were 45 years of age and over. Former  claimants in both cohorts most frequently held occupations requiring on-the-job  training (34% each) prior to participation.
2.6.3 Labour market outcomes
Incremental impacts for active and former claimants who participated  in the program in 2002 to 2005 and 2007 to 2008 were not produced given the  small number of participants. Labour market outcomes for the 2002 to 2005  cohort are reported in Tables F2 and F3 in Appendix F. The analysis was conducted over a period of 12 years (five years  before participation, two years during participation, and five years after  participation).
The outcome analysis provides an  assessment of how the labour market situation of participants evolved over  time, but does not permit inference regarding the extent to which those changes  were due to program participation. For example, increases in employment  earnings over the period examined could be partly due to inflation or normal  wage increases.
Active claimants
As shown in Table  F2 in Appendix F and illustrated in Figure 5 below, active claimants who  started their program participation between 2002 and 2005 earned $8,453 more  annually (on average) in the five years after participation compared to the  five years before participation.
Figure 5. Average earnings for 2002 to 2005 active claimants in Work Experience PEI
Text description of Figure 5
Notes: Average earnings include participants with zero earnings in a specific year. As well, earnings were not adjusted for inflation.
The increase in  earnings was accompanied by a 6 percentage points decrease in the proportion of  participants employed. At 86%, the average proportion of active claimants  employed is somewhat lower in the post-program period compared to the  pre-program period (92%) but still substantial. With a total of 161 program  participants in the 2002 to 2005 period, the 6 percentage-point decrease in the  proportion of participants employed is equivalent to 10 participants. Possible  explanations for the decrease in the proportion of participants employed may  include retirement decisions (with 8% of participants aged 55 and over), and the  fact that some participants may not have benefitted from program participation  while others simply left the labour force for various reasons.
Compared to the  five years before the program period, the average annual proportion of  participants claiming EI benefits decreased from 62% to 55% and the average  proportion of participants on social assistance decreased from 9% to 7% over  the five years post-program. Correspondingly, active claimants also exhibited a  slight reduction in the level of dependence on income support in the 5 years  observed following their program participation (from 25% to 23%).
Former claimants
As shown in Table  F3 in Appendix E and illustrated in Figure 6 below, former claimants who  started Work Experience PEI between 2002 and 2005 earned $4,683 more annually  (on average) in the five years after participation compared to the five years  before participation.
As with active  claimants, there was a 13 percentage points decrease in the proportion of  participants employed between the pre- and post-program periods. At 79%, the  average proportion of former claimants employed is lower in the post-program  period compared to the pre-program period (92%). Again, possible explanations  for the decrease in the proportion of participants employed may include  retirement decisions (with 14% of participants aged 55 and over), and the fact  that some participants may not have benefitted from program participation while  others simply left the labour force for various reasons.
Figure 6. Average earnings for 2002 to 2005 former claimants in Work Experience PEI


Text description of Figure 6


Notes: Average earnings include participants with zero earnings in a specific year. As well, earnings were not adjusted for inflation.
Compared to the  five years before program participation, the average annual proportion of  participants claiming EI benefits decreased by 17 percentage points (from 70%  to 53%) and the average proportion of participants on social assistance  decreased from 16% to 13% over the five years post-program. Correspondingly, former  claimants exhibited a slight reduction in the level of dependence on income  support in the 5 years following program participation (from 33% to 31%).
2.7 Employment Assistance Services
2.7.1 Program description and delivery
Based on a document  review and 5 key informant interviews completed in the summer of 2013
Employment Assistance Services  provide financial support to organizations to help individuals throughout the  province prepare for, obtain and maintain employment. Services are primarily  delivered by third-party service providers and are accessible to all unemployed  persons seeking employment related supports.
Key services and resources include:
Case  management
Needs  Assessment (part of the development of a return to work action plan)
Employment  counseling and career planning (provides advice on career decision making)
Diagnostic  assessment for learning disabilities
Job  search training
Job  coaching, marketing and interview skills
Labour  market information
Workshops  (jobs, interview skills)
Services  to employers (workshops, individual counselling) and support job-loss clients
Job  matching
Employment  workshops for immigrants 
Referrals  to other service organizations
Key  informants confirmed that labour market information products are being used to  support the delivery of Employment Assistance  Services. A vast  amount of labour market information is available to Islanders; however, much of  it lacks the required level of local context due to the relatively small sample  sizes available to measure labour force activity by organizations such as  Statistics Canada.  They noted that  Service Canada no longer provides information on occupations in Prince Edward  Island. Managers also noted that service providers use the Working in Canada  website.
Most  service providers reported that they dedicate time and resources for labour  market information collection; however it can be challenging to find time to  undertake this work.  They encourage  participants to speak with employers directly.
2.7.2 Profile of Employment Assistance Services  participants
The following presents the main socio-demographic  characteristics of active and former claimants who participated exclusively in  Employment Assistance Services without participating in any other Employment  Benefits programs.
As shown in Table G1 in Appendix G, active claimants who participated exclusively  in Employment Assistance Services in 2002 to 2005  were more often female than male (50% and 42% respectively), while the 2007 to 2008  cohort were slightly more likely to be male (54%). Fifty-six percent of 2002 to  2005 participants were between 25 and 44 years of age, while the majority (61%)  of 2007 to 2008 participants were aged 35 and over. Prior to program  participation, equal proportions of participants in both cohorts had positions  that required secondary or occupational training (34%), though the 2002 to 2005  cohort was more likely than the 2007 to 2008 cohort to have had occupations  that required on-the-job training (37% and 28% respectively).
Former claimants were predominately female in both the 2002  to 2005 and 2007 to 2008 periods (49% and 53% respectively). Participants in  the 2002 to 2005 cohort were mainly aged 25 to 44 years old (56%) while most  participants (54%) in the 2007 to 2008 cohort were 35 years old and over. The  2002 to 2005 participants most frequently held occupations requiring on-the-job  training before participation (42%), while the 2007 to 2008 participants were  more likely to have had positions that required secondary or occupational  training (37%).
Labour market barriers faced by Employment Assistance Services participants
Based on a document  review and 5 key informant interviews completed in the summer of 2013
According to key  informants, the main labour market barriers experienced by Employment Assistance Services participants in  Prince Edward Island are:
Low  educational attainment, low literacy and numeracy skills
Lack  of job search skills, work experience, networks and contacts
Lack  of available full time employment
Lack  of public transportation especially in rural areas
Cost  of childcare and transportation
Mismatch  of skills with what is required in the labour market
Learning  disabilities
Addictions,  alcohol abuse and criminal record
Mental  illness
Lack  of housing/homelessness
2.7.3 Incremental impacts
Incremental impacts were only produced for active claimants  since former claimants who participated only in Employment Assistance Services  were used as a comparison group for former claimants who participated in other  EBSMs.
Results presented in Table G2 in Appendix G indicate that active claimants who participated exclusively in Employment Assistance Services between 2002 and 2005  decreased their use of EI by a cumulative of $2,848 or 7.4 weeks after  participation. The incremental impacts on employment earnings, incidence of  employment, use of social assistance and dependence on government income  support were not statistically significant. While we cannot ascertain the  effectiveness of the program, labour market outcomes for participants  demonstrated that 89% of active claimants who participated exclusively in  Employment Assistance Services in 2002 to 2005 were employed annually, on  average, in the five years after program participation (see Table G4).
Active claimants who participated in Employment Assistance Services in 2007 to 2008 had incremental  increases in earnings (cumulative of $2,386) and gains in incidence of  employment in the first and second years (1.7 and 2 percentage points  respectively) following participation. Participants decreased the use of EI by  a cumulative of 3.6 weeks following participation. As well, their dependence on  income support decreased by 1.8 percentage points in the first year  post-program participation.
Overall, active claimants who participated in Employment  Assistance Services in 2007 to 2008 improved their labour market attachment  through gains in earnings and incidence of employment and reduction in the use  of EI compared to similar non-participants. There are also indications that  active claimants who participated in Employment Assistance Services in 2002 to 2005  maintained a high level of employment following participation.
The results varied for the  sub-groups examined:
Youth (under 30 years old) who started an Employment Assistance Services intervention between  2002 and 2005 decreased their use of EI by a cumulative of $2,340 in the five  years after participation. Their use of social assistance increased in all  post-program years (cumulative $969) and dependence on income support also  increased in the fourth and fifth post-program years. 
Incremental impacts for long-tenured workers who participated in Employment Assistance Services in 2007 to 2009 were  not statistically significant.
2.7.4 Cost-benefit results
As shown in Table G3 in Appendix G,  the benefits were $1,946 lower than the program costs six years after  participation from the social perspective. These benefits would have to be  sustained for 8.9 years after participation in order to equal the costs.
2.7.5 Challenges and lessons learned about  Employment Assistance Services design and delivery
Based on a document  review and 5 key informant interviews completed in the summer of 2013
Key informants identified the  following challenges related to Employment Assistance Services’ design and  delivery:
Lack of awareness of existing services
Transportation
Lack of program flexibility to fund short-term  job placements and to provide support for employed individuals working in  low-paying jobs that are well below their skill set
Service providers limit their hours of services  and job coaching based on the amount of funding in the service contract
Employment Assistance Services eligibility is  limited and services cannot be provided to employed people including those in  low-paying jobs that are well below their skill set and knowledge level
Best practices and lessons  learned related to the general design and delivery of the program included:
Developing  a good case management system using a client-centered approach
Creating  long-term action plans for participants
Ensuring  strong partnerships with third-party service providers and employers to be able  to mobilize the service delivery network in cases of emerging labour market  challenges (for example, major lay-offs, downturn, etc.) and organize job fairs  and group workshops
Sensitizing  employers about diversity in the workplace, multiculturalism etc.
Best practices and lessons learned related to participants with multiple  barriers to employment included:
Providing  a client-centered approach as there is no one-size-fits-all approach to  assisting participants with multiple-barriers
Having  the flexibility and budget to shape an adequate action plan with detailed  steps.
Making  good referrals to appropriate services
Having  positive relationships with other community service providers and being  non-competitive is the best outcome for the client
Having  counsellors and career practitioners working together
Attending  job interviews with participants to help establish a good working relationship  with the employer
Volunteer  experience is valuable for new immigrants that need to expand their networks  and be exposed to the work environment. Employers also become more willing to  work with immigrants
3. Comparison of key findings by program type
This section provides an  overview of the key findings from the incremental impact analysis, cost benefit  analysis, and labour market outcomes analysis for Training PEI, Employ PEI,  Work Experience PEI and Employment Assistance Services for both active and  former EI claimant participants who started participation in the 2002 to 2005  period.
Overall, incremental impacts, cost-benefit analysis and  labour market outcomes demonstrate that LMDA programs and services are  generally helping participants to improve their labour market attachment after  participation.
Incremental impacts demonstrate that active and former EI  claimants who participated in Training PEI and Employ PEI had gains in earnings  and incidence of employment when compared to similar non-participants. As well,  active EI claimants who participated in Employ PEI and Employment Assistance  Services had reductions in EI use after program participation. Former claimants  who participated in Employ PEI reduced their use of social assistance. The  social benefits of participation exceeded the cost of the interventions over  time.
Labour market outcomes demonstrate that participants in the  Work Experience PEI program showed higher average earnings and lower average  proportions on EI and social assistance during the five years after program participation when compared to five years prior.
3.1. Incremental impacts and cost-benefit analysis for Training PEI, Employ PEI and  Employment Assistance Services
Participants in Training PEI and Employ PEI have a higher probability  of being employed than comparison group members
As shown in Figure 7, active  EI claimants who participated in Training PEI and Employ PEI had a higher  probability of being employed (that is, they increased their incidence of  employment) compared to similar non-participants. This is also true for active  EI claimants who were youth and who participated in Training PEI. As well,  former EI claimants who participated in Training PEI had a higher probability  of being employed compared to EI claimants who received low intensity  interventions under Employment Assistance Services. Former EI claimants who  participated in Employ EI had short-term increase in the probability of  employment.
Active EI claimants who  participated in Employment Assistance Services in 2002 to 2005 did not  experience an increase probability of being employed compared to similar  non-participants. However, participants in the 2007 to 2008 cohort did  experience increased probability of employment compared to non-participants. It  is noted that Employment Assistance Services are relatively modest activities  such as counselling, job search assistance and case management. By themselves,  they are not expected to lead to substantial effects on labour market  outcomes.
Figure 7. Change in probability of being employed in participants relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure 7
* The estimates are not statistically significant at the 95% confidence level. 
  Note: The estimates in Figure 7 are arithmetic averages.
Increased earnings  for participants in Training PEI and Employ PEI compared to comparison group  members
As shown in Figure 8, active  EI claimants who participated in Training PEI and Employ PEI increased their  employment earnings compared to similar non-participants. This is also true for  active youth EI claimants participating in Training PEI. As well, former EI  claimants who participated in Training PEI and Employ PEI increased their  employment earnings compared to EI claimants who received Employment Assistance  Services exclusively.
Figure 8. Increased cumulative earnings of participants relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure 8
* The estimates are not statistically significant at the 95% confidence level. The estimate for former claimants who participated in Training PEI is statistically significant at the 90% confidence level only. However, these participants did experience statistically significant increases in earnings at the 95% confidence level in year 4 and 5 following participation.
As previously indicated, Employment Assistance Services are  relatively modest activities and, by themselves, are not expected to lead to  substantial effects on labour market outcomes.   In other words, these services aim to support the return to work of  unemployed participants and not necessarily to secure a better paying job than  pre-participation.
The use of EI is  reduced for Active claimants who participated in Employ PEI and Employment  Assistance Services. Former claimants who participated in Employ PEI reduced  their use of social assistance and improved their labour market attachment  through increases in earnings and a short-term increase in the incidence of  employment.
As shown in Figure 9, active EI claimants who participated  in Employ PEI and Employment Assistance Services decreased their use of EI  compared to similar non-participants. All other impacts on EI and social  assistance use for active claimants were not statistically significant.
Figure 9. Change in the cumulative use of Employment Insurance and Social Assistance for active claimants relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure 9
* Estimates are not statistically significant at the 95% confidence level.
As shown in Figure 10, former claimants who participated in  Employ PEI between 2002 and 2005 decreased their use of social assistance  following participation. With decrease in social assistance use, former EI  claimants improved their labour market attachment given the increases in  earnings and the short-term increase in the incidence of employment.
Figure 10. Change in cumulative use of Employment Insurance and Social Assistance former claimants relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure 10
* Estimates are not statistically significant at the 95% confidence level.
Social benefits of  participation exceeded costs of investments for all interventions.
As shown in Table 2, social benefits to participation  exceeded investment costs in a period ranging between the first year after  program participation to just over 11 years after participation.
Table  2 Number of years for the  benefits to exceed program costs
3.2. Labour market outcomes  for participants in Work Experience PEI
Participants have higher average earnings after  Work Experience PEI participation
As shown in Figure 11, active and former EI claimants who participated  in Work Experience PEI showed higher average employment earnings during  the five years after their participation when compared to five years prior.
Figure 11. Change in average earnings of Work Experience PEI participants 5 years pre- and post-participation
Text description of Figure 11
Note: outcomes for former claimants who participated in Work Experience PEI should be interpreted with caution given the small number of participants (n=86).
The average proportion of participants on  Employment Insurance and social assistance is generally lower after Work  Experience PEI participation
As shown in Figure 12, the average proportion of participants who use EI  and social assistance is shown to be lower in the post-participation period for  active and former EI claimants who participated in Work Experience PEI.
Figure 12. Change in average proportion of active and former claimant participants in Work Experience PEI on EI and Social Assistance 5 years pre- and post-participation
Text description of Figure 12
Note: outcomes for former claimants’ participants in Work Experience PEI should be interpreted with caution given the small number of participants (n=86).
The average  proportion of participants employed is lower following program participation
Active claimants who participated in Work Experience PEI  experienced a 6 percentage points decrease in the proportion of participants employed. At 86%, the average  proportion of active claimants employed is somewhat lower in the post-program  period compared to the pre-program period (92%) but still substantial. With a  total of 161 program participants in the 2002 to 2005 period, the 6  percentage-point decrease in the proportion of participants employed is  equivalent to 10 participants. Possible explanations for the decrease in the  proportion of participants employed may include retirement decisions (with 8%  of participants aged 55 and over), and the fact that some participants may not  have benefitted from program participation while others simply left the labour  force for various reasons.
Former claimants  who participated in Work Experience PEI experienced a 13 percentage points  decrease in the proportion of participants employed between the pre- and  post-program periods. At 79%, the average proportion of former claimants  employed is lower in the post-program period compared to the pre-program period  (92%). With a total of 86 program participants in the 2002 to 2005 period, the  13 percentage-point decrease in the proportion of participants employed is  equivalent to 11 participants. Again, possible explanations for the decrease in  the proportion of participants employed may include retirement decisions (with  14% of participants aged 55 and over), and the fact that some participants may  not have benefitted from program participation while others simply left the  labour force for various reasons.
4. Conclusions
Overall,  incremental impacts, cost-benefit analysis and labour market outcomes  demonstrate that LMDA programs and services are generally helping participants  to improve their labour market attachment after participation. As such,  evaluation evidence suggests that LMDA funded programming contributes to  contribute to meeting the commitments of the Government of Prince Edward Island  and SkillsPEI’s primary objective.
Incremental impacts demonstrate that active and former EI  claimants who participated in Training PEI and Employ PEI had gains in earnings  and incidence of employment when compared to similar non-participants. As well,  active EI claimants who participated in Employ PEI and Employment Assistance  Services had reductions in EI use after program participation. Former claimants  who participated in Employ PEI reduced their use of social assistance. The  social benefits of participation exceeded the cost of the interventions over  time.
   
  Labour market outcomes demonstrate that participants in the  Work Experience PEI program showed higher average earnings and lower average  proportions on EI and social assistance during the five years after program  participation when compared to five years prior.
Key informant interviews with service providers and program  managers, as well as the reviewed documents and questionnaires completed by  Prince Edward Island representatives, revealed few challenges about Employ PEI  and Employment Assistance Services design and delivery. Key challenges and  barriers are highlighted below.
Employ PEI
Managing employers’ expectations of the  participants and ensuring that the program is adequately explained and  understood by employers
Explaining  to employers that well-trained and well-matched participants are more valuable  to them than the subsidy
Employment Assistance Services
Key  informants indicated that service providers are expected to use labour market  information to support the programs and services. However, they also mentioned  that available labour market information is limited, difficult to access, lacks  local context, and is time consuming to obtain.
According  to key informants, other challenges with respect to the design and delivery of  Employment Assistance Services included:
    
Lack of awareness about Employment Assistance  Services among potential participants.
Service providers limit their hours of services  and job coaching based on the amount of funding in the service contract.
Transportation is an issue in Prince Edward  Island, especially in rural areas.
Lack of program flexibility to fund short-term  job placements and to provide support for employed individuals working in  low-paying jobs that are well below their skill set.
5. Recommendations
A total of six recommendations emerge from the evaluation findings.  They are as follows:
A study on the timing of participation in Employment  Assistance Services at the national level revealed that receiving assistance  early after starting an EI claim can lead to better labour market impacts. As  well, key informants reported a lack of awareness about Employment Assistance  Services in Prince Edward Island.
Recommendation 1: Consideration should be given to providing Prince Edward Island with timely  access to data on new EI recipients for supporting targeting and increasing  awareness.
According to key informants, the main labour market barriers  experienced by LMDA participants are related to low educational attainment,  skills mismatch, learning disabilities and literacy issues.
Recommendation 2: Literacy/essential skills training and learning disability assessments are  essential steps in supporting individuals facing multiple barriers to prepare  for vocational training and to reintegrate into the labour market. The measures  should be reported separately from other Training PEI interventions given their  unique objectives.
Key informants confirmed the necessity of having labour  market information to support the delivery of Employment Assistance Services.  They, however, pointed to the difficulty of accessing or producing labour  market information at the regional/local level.
Recommendation 3: Consideration should be given to enhance the capacity of service providers to  access or produce, when needed, relevant local labour market information.
The evaluation was not able to produce a conclusive  assessment of Self Employ PEI effectiveness and efficiency since the income tax  records used to assess impacts on earnings may not be the best source of  information available to reflect the financial wellbeing of participants. As  well, it is not clear whether participants’ success in improving their labour  market attachment through self-employment is more closely associated with their  business idea and their entrepreneurship skills or the assistance provided  under Self Employ PEI.
Recommendation 4: Consideration should be given to examine in more detail the design and delivery  of Self Employ PEI and whether the performance indicators for this program are  appropriate.
Labour market outcomes produced for Work Experience PEI  participants showed a general improvement in their labour market attachment in  terms of increased earnings and reduced use of EI and social assistance.  However, the evaluation has not yet examined the design and delivery of the  program. Therefore, a lot remains unknown about how this program operates and  the factors that contribute to its effectiveness.
Recommendation 5: Consideration should be given to examine the design and delivery of the Work  Experience PEI program to better understand how this program operates.
Overall, the LMDA evaluation was able to produce a sound  assessment of EBSM effectiveness and efficiency because the team had access to  rich data on EI claimants, EBSM participation data and Canada Revenue Agency  taxation files. However, some data gaps limited the evaluation’s ability to  assess how EBSMs operate.
Recommendation 6: Improvements in the data collection process are recommended to address key  program and policy questions of interest to the federal and provincial/territorial  governments. Specifically:
Collect  data on whether participants are members of designated groups including  Indigenous peoples, persons with disabilities and recent immigrants.
Collect  data on the type of training funded under Training PEI and the type of  assistance provided under Employment Assistance Services. Prince Edward Island,  ESDC and other P/Ts should work together to define common categories for both  EBSMs.
References
Canada Employment Insurance Commission. Employment Insurance  Monitoring and Assessment Reports. 2003 to 2004 to 2013 to 2014.
Coe, Patrick. “Apprenticeship programme requirements and  apprenticeship completion rates in Canada.” Journal of Vocational Education and  Training. 2013. 65(4):575 to 605
Employment and Social Development Canada. Analysis of  Employment Benefits and Support Measures (EBSM) Profile, Outcomes and  Incremental Impacts for 2007 to 2008 Participants in Prince Edward Island:  Technical Report. Evaluation Directorate. February 18, 2015
Employment and Social Development Canada. Analysis of  Employment Benefits and Support Measures (EBSM) Profile, Outcomes and  Incremental Impacts for the EI Claimant Category “Long-Tenured Workers” in  Prince Edward Island: Technical Report. Evaluation Directorate. March 9, 2016
Employment and Social Development Canada. Cost-Benefit  Analysis of Employment Benefits and Support Measures Delivered in Prince Edward  Island: Technical Report. Evaluation Directorate. December 23, 2015
Employment and Social Development Canada. Profile, Outcomes  and Net Impacts of Employment Benefits and Support Measures (EBSM) Participants  in Prince Edward Island: Technical Report. Evaluation Directorate. March 2014
Employment and Social Development Canada. Study on Employ  PEI: Technical Report. Evaluation Directorate. March 15, 2016
Government of Prince Edward Island. Budget Address. Ministry  of Finance. April 19, 2016
Government of Prince Edward Island. Canada-Prince Edward  Island Labour Market Development Agreement (LMDA) Annual Plan 2014-15.  SkillsPEI. 2014 
Government of Prince Edward Island. Speech from the Throne.  Author: April 5, 2016. 
LaRochelle-Côté, Sébastien and Sharanjit Uppal, "The  Financial Well-Being of the Self-Employed," Perspectives on Labour and  Income, vol. 23, no. 4, Winter 2011.
Red Seal. Apprenticeship Completion, Certification and  Outcomes, Ottawa: Red Seal. 2014.
References
Canada Employment Insurance Commission. Employment Insurance  Monitoring and Assessment Reports. 2003 to 2004 to 2013 to 2014.
Coe, Patrick. “Apprenticeship programme requirements and  apprenticeship completion rates in Canada.” Journal of Vocational Education and  Training. 2013. 65(4):575 to 605
Employment and Social Development Canada. Analysis of  Employment Benefits and Support Measures (EBSM) Profile, Outcomes and  Incremental Impacts for 2007 to 2008 Participants in Prince Edward Island:  Technical Report. Evaluation Directorate. February 18, 2015
Employment and Social Development Canada. Analysis of  Employment Benefits and Support Measures (EBSM) Profile, Outcomes and  Incremental Impacts for the EI Claimant Category “Long-Tenured Workers” in  Prince Edward Island: Technical Report. Evaluation Directorate. March 9, 2016
Employment and Social Development Canada. Cost-Benefit  Analysis of Employment Benefits and Support Measures Delivered in Prince Edward  Island: Technical Report. Evaluation Directorate. December 23, 2015
Employment and Social Development Canada. Profile, Outcomes  and Net Impacts of Employment Benefits and Support Measures (EBSM) Participants  in Prince Edward Island: Technical Report. Evaluation Directorate. March 2014
Employment and Social Development Canada. Study on Employ  PEI: Technical Report. Evaluation Directorate. March 15, 2016
Government of Prince Edward Island. Budget Address. Ministry  of Finance. April 19, 2016
Government of Prince Edward Island. Canada-Prince Edward  Island Labour Market Development Agreement (LMDA) Annual Plan 2014-15.  SkillsPEI. 2014
Government of Prince Edward Island. Speech from the Throne.  Author: April 5, 2016.
LaRochelle-Côté, Sébastien and Sharanjit Uppal, "The  Financial Well-Being of the Self-Employed," Perspectives on Labour and  Income, vol. 23, no. 4, Winter 2011.
Red Seal. Apprenticeship Completion, Certification and  Outcomes, Ottawa: Red Seal. 2014.
Acronyms
EBSM          Employment Benefits and Support  Measures
  EI                  Employment Insurance
  ESDC          Employment and Social Development  Canada
  LMDA          Labour Market Development Agreements
  PEI               Prince Edward Island
  P/Ts             Provinces and Territories
Appendix A - Methodology
Qualitative data
Qualitative data reported in the Employ PEI and Employment  Assistance Services studies were collected from key informant interviews with  managers and service providers and a document/ literature review. As well, a  questionnaire was completed by provincial government representatives for the  Employ PEI study. Table A1 provides the number of key  informants interviewed.
Key informant interviews for the  Employment Assistance Services study were conducted in 2013 while those for the  Employ PEI study were conducted in 2015.
Table A1. Number of key informants interviewed
Quantitative methods
All quantitative analyses were conducted using linked  administrative data from EI Part I (EI claim), EI Part II (EBSM participation  data) and T1 and T4 taxation files on up to 100% of the participants in Prince  Edward Island.
Incremental impacts
The incremental impact analysis compared the labour market  experience of participants before and after their participation with that of a  comparison group. The goal was to determine the direct effect of program  participation on key labour market indicators (see Figure 1 in the introduction section).
For active claimants, incremental impacts were measured  relative to a comparison group of active claimants who could have participated  in the EBSMs but did not. Former  claimants can be underemployed and unable to requalify for EI, out of the  labour force for various reasons or on social assistance. Based on previous  evaluation methodologies, on expert advice and given the difficulty in  generating a suitable comparison for former claimants using administrative data  alone, the comparison group for former claimants was created using individuals  who participated in low-intensity Employment Assistance Services only during  the reference period. This is a conservative approach given the fact that  participation in Employment Assistance Services can lead to some, but limited, effects  on labour market outcomes.
Participants and non-participants were matched based on a  wide array of variables including age, sex, location, skill level required by  the last occupation held prior to participation, reason for separation from  employment, industry in which they were previously employed as well as employment  earnings and use of EI and social assistance for each of the five years before  participation.
All analyses were conducted using a unit of analysis called  the Action Plan Equivalent, which combines all EBSMs given to an individual  within no more than six months of each other. For reporting purposes,  incremental impacts were attributed to the longest intervention of the Action  Plan Equivalent when Training PEI, Employ PEI, Work Experience PEI or Self  Employ PEI was the longest intervention. Impacts for Employment Assistance  Services were calculated for Action Plan Equivalent that contained only  Employment Assistance Service with no employment benefits.
The incremental impact estimates were produced using  non-experimental methods, namely propensity score matching, using the Kernel  Matching method, along with Difference-in-Differences method to estimate  program impacts. Alternative matching techniques (such as the Nearest Neighbour  and the Inverse Propensity Weighting) were also used for validation purposes. 
  Incremental impacts and outcomes were measured for the  following indicators:
Employment/self-employment earnings represent the total earnings an individual had from paid employment  and/or self-employment.  (This  information is available by calendar year and was obtained from T1 and T4 tax  return records.) 
Incidence of employment/self-employment represents the incidence of having earnings from employment and/or  self-employment. 
Amount of  EI benefits received represents the average amount of EI benefits received. 
Weeks in receipt of EI benefits represent the average number of weeks during which EI benefits were  received. 
Social assistance benefits represent  the average amount of social assistance benefits received. (This information is  available by calendar year and was obtained from T1 tax return records.) 
Dependence  on income support represents the ratio of participant’s income that came from  EI and social assistance benefits (that is, EI benefits + social assistance  benefits / (EI benefits + social assistance benefits + earnings from  employment/self/employment)).
Incremental impacts were estimated for different cohorts of  participants:
Active and  former claimants as well as youth (under 30 years old) who started their EBSM  participation between April 1, 2002 and March 31, 2005.
Active and  former claimants who started their EBSM participation between January 1, 2007  and March 31, 2008.
Active and  former claimants who were long-tenured workers and who started their EBSM  participation between January 1, 2007 and December 31, 2009. The  long-tenured workers covered in this study are individuals who have established  an EI regular or fishing benefit claimants and who had paid at least 30% of the  annual maximum employee EI premiums in seven of the ten years preceding their  EI claim and who had collected 35 or fewer weeks of EI regular or fishing  benefits in the five years preceding their claim. This definition is similar to  the EI claimant category long-tenured workers introduced under Connecting  Canadians with Available Jobs.
Cost-benefit analysis
The cost-benefit analysis  compared how much it cost for individuals to participate in the programs and  how much it costs the government to deliver those programs with the benefits  both the participants and the government drew from those programs. The analysis  was carried out from the society perspective which combines the costs and the  benefits for both the participants and the government.
Costs and benefits included in the calculations were as  follows:
Program costs included the administration cost and the  direct cost of the EBSMs. The cost for each EBSM was calculated at the Action  Plan Equivalent level. The costs were determined based on the average  composition of the Action Plan Equivalent. 
The Marginal Social Cost of Public Funds represented the loss incurred by society when  raising additional revenues such as taxes to fund government spending. The value was estimated as 20% of the program cost, sales taxes, income taxes,  impacts on EI and impacts on social assistance paid or collected by the  government.
Employment  earnings consisted of incremental  impacts on participants’ earnings during and after participation. The  calculation accounts for the participant’s forgone earnings during  participation (in other words, the opportunity cost). These are based on incremental  impacts for the 2002 to 2005 participants. 
Fringe benefits included benefits such as employer-paid health  and life insurance as well as pension contributions. The rate used to calculate  the fringe benefits was 15% of the incremental impact on earnings.
The program effects on EI and social assistance  use, and the sale and income tax revenues were not included in the calculations  since these costs and benefits cancel each other out from the social perspective  by definition. For example, while EI and social assistance are benefits  received by participants, they represent a cost for the government. However, as  indicated above, these effects are accounted for in the calculation of the  Marginal Social Cost of Public Funds.
When producing the results, to bring all costs and benefits  to a common base and to account for inflation and interest on foregone government  investment, the estimates for the second year of participation and up to the  sixth year post-program were discounted by 5% per year.  As well, when the benefits were still lower  than the costs six years after program end, the payback period was calculated  by assuming that the average benefit or cost measured over the fifth and six  year post-program would persist over time (discounted at a 5% annual rate).
Labour market  outcomes
The analysis of outcomes provides descriptive statistics on  the labour market experience of participants before, during and after  participation. For example, it shows the average annual earnings of active  claimants before, during and after participation, and presents what changes  were observed from before to after participation. Overall, the analyses were  conducted over a period of 9 to 12 years (five years before participation, one  or two years during participation, and three or five years after participation).
The outcome analyses provide an assessment of how the labour  market situation of participants evolved over time, but does not permit  inference regarding the extent to which those changes were due to EBSM  participation. For example, increases in employment earnings over the period  examined could be partly due to inflation or normal wage increases.
When the number of  participants was sufficient, outcomes were also examined for active EI  claimants who were youth (under 30 years old).
Strengths and limitations from the studies
Overall, the number of key informants interviewed was  relatively small in some studies.  The  key informants’ responses were representative of their own experience and their  own region but it is unclear if they were fully representative of the entire  province.
The matching process led to the creation of comparison  groups closely matched to the LMDA participants in terms of their background  characteristics. Results obtained with Kernel Matching were validated with the  use of two other techniques (that is, Inverse Propensity Weighting and Nearest  Neighbour), increasing the level of confidence in the results. However, readers  should be aware that incremental impacts may be affected by factors not  captured by the matching process. For example, the motivation to seek  employment was not directly measured except to the extent it was captured in  prior income and labour market attachment patterns.
Readers should also keep in mind that it is not possible to  compare the results obtained for each claimant type since the results for  active claimants represent the effects of the EBSMs relative to  non-participation while the results for former claimants represents the  Employment Benefits relative to a limited treatment (that is, Employment  Assistance Services).
The definition of long tenured  workers differs from the definition used in the literature as it does not  consider the number of years the worker remained employed with the same  employer.
The cost-benefit analysis was limited in the sense that it  only took into account the quantifiable benefits and costs that were directly  linked to EBSM delivery and participation and that could be estimated using  available administrative data and the EI Monitoring and Assessment Report. The  analysis did not capture “intangible”, non-pecuniary and indirect benefits. It  did not consider the multiplier effect that improving participant’s income may  have on the economy and did not account for the effect of EI Part II investment  on sustaining a service delivery infrastructure and creating jobs among the  governmental program service providers.   As well, this analysis did not consider the displacement effect where  participants may take away jobs that would otherwise be filled by other  unemployed individuals. Finally, this analysis did not consider the possible  effect of EBSMs on increasing skill prices.
Appendix B - Detailed results Training PEI
Table B1. Socio-demographic and labour market characteristics of Training PEI participants
Table B2. Incremental  impacts for Training PEI – active claimants
Significance  level *** 1%;   ** 5%; * 10%
Table B3. Incremental  impacts for Training PEI – former claimants
Significance  level *** 1%;   ** 5%; * 10%
Table  B4. Cost-benefit results from the social perspective for Training PEI
Appendix C - Detailed results Training PEI – Apprentices
Table C1. Outcomes for active Training PEI –  Apprentices in 2003 to 2005
Table C2. Outcomes for active Training PEI –  Apprentices in 2003 to 2005
Average annual outcome pre-: Represents the average annual  outcomes over the pre-participation periodAverage annual outcome post-: Represents the average annual  outcomes over the post-participation periodChange between pre- and post-: Represents the difference between  the average annual outcome calculated over the pre-participation period and the  average annual outcome calculated over the post-participation period.Earnings outcome for all individuals covered by the study.Earnings outcomes excluding individuals who reported no earnings  in a given year.
  SA: Social Assistance; pp: Percentage  Points.
Appendix D - Detailed results Employ PEI
Table D1. Socio-demographic and labour market characteristics of  Employ PEI participants
Table D2. Incremental  impacts for Employ PEI – active claimants
Table D3. Incremental  impacts for Training PEI – former claimants
Significance  level *** 1%;   ** 5%; * 10%
Table D4. Cost-benefit  results from the social perspective for Employ PEI
Appendix E - Detailed results Self Employ PEI
Table E1.  Socio-demographic and labour market characteristics of Self Employ PEI participants
Table E2. Outcomes  for active claimants in Self Employ PEI in 2002 to 2005
Average annual outcome pre-: Represents the average annual  outcomes over the pre-participation periodAverage annual outcome post-: Represents the average annual  outcomes over the post-participation periodChange between pre- and post-: Represents the difference between  the average annual outcome calculated over the pre-participation period and the  average annual outcome calculated over the post-participation period.Earnings outcome for all individuals covered by the study.Earnings outcomes excluding individuals who reported no earnings  in a given year.
  SA: Social Assistance; pp: Percentage  Points.
Table E3. Outcomes  for former claimants in Self Employ PEI in 2002 to 2005
Average annual outcome pre-: Represents the average annual  outcomes over the pre-participation periodAverage annual outcome post-: Represents the average annual  outcomes over the post-participation periodChange between pre- and post-: Represents the difference between  the average annual outcome calculated over the pre-participation period and the  average annual outcome calculated over the post-participation period.Earnings outcome for all individuals covered by the study.Earnings outcomes excluding individuals who reported no earnings  in a given year.
  SA: Social Assistance; pp: Percentage  Points.
Appendix F - Detailed results Work Experience PEI
Table F1. Socio-demographic and labour  market characteristics of Work Experience PEI participants
Table F2. Outcomes for active claimants in  Work Experience PEI in 2002 to 2005
Average annual outcome pre-: Represents the average annual  outcomes over the pre-participation periodAverage annual outcome post-: Represents the average annual  outcomes over the post-participation periodChange between pre- and post-: Represents the difference between  the average annual outcome calculated over the pre-participation period and the  average annual outcome calculated over the post-participation period.Earnings outcome for all individuals covered by the study.Earnings outcomes excluding individuals who reported no earnings  in a given year.
  SA: Social Assistance; pp: Percentage  Points.
Table F3. Outcomes for former claimants in Work Experience PEI in 2002 to 2005
Average annual outcome pre-: Represents the average annual  outcomes over the pre-participation periodAverage annual outcome post-: Represents the average annual  outcomes over the post-participation periodChange between pre- and post-: Represents the difference between  the average annual outcome calculated over the pre-participation period and the  average annual outcome calculated over the post-participation period.Earnings outcome for all individuals covered by the study.Earnings outcomes excluding individuals who reported no earnings  in a given year.
  SA: Social Assistance; pp: Percentage  Points.
Appendix G - Detailed results Employment Assistance Services
Table G1. Socio-demographic and labour market characteristics of Employment Assistance  Services
Table G2. Incremental  impacts for Employment Assistance Services
Table G3. Cost-benefit  results from the social perspective for Employment Assistance Service
Table G4. Labour market outcomes for Employment Assistance Services – active claimants
Appendix H. List of six studies included in  the Prince Edward Island Synthesis report
Table  H1. Overview of studies included in this summary
