Summary of the Evaluation of the Enabling Accessibility Fund - 2016 to 2021
From:
Employment and Social Development Canada
Alternate formats
Summary of the Evaluation of the Enabling Accessibility Fund - 2016 to 2021
[
PDF
- 277
KB
]
Large print, braille,
MP3
(audio), e-text and
DAISY
formats are available on demand by
ordering online
or calling 1 800 O-Canada (1-800-622-6232). If you use a teletypewriter (
TTY
), call 1-800-926-9105.
Program objectives
The Enabling Accessibility Fund aims to improve accessibility and remove barriers to the built environment and information and communication technologies (ICT). This is to help persons with disabilities fully take part in their communities and workplaces. It provides funding through grants and contributions to help with the costs of construction and renovations.
Key findings
There is an ongoing need and demand for assistance with costs for improving accessibility for persons with disabilities through both the built environment and ICT.
Between 2016 and 2021, the Program awarded
$95.3 million
in grants and contributions. This allowed organizations to carry out
3,422 projects
to improve accessibility to their facilities.
Funded projects contributed to more access to and uptake of programs and services in communities. Key benefits for persons with disabilities include a more inclusive environment and increased independence. This has increased the ability of persons with disabilities to take part in their communities.
Funded projects also contributed to more accessible workplaces, and increased employment and volunteer opportunities for persons with disabilities. However, the amount of uptake of these opportunities by persons with disabilities is less clear.
The new Youth Innovation component helped
212 youth leaders
advocate for persons with disabilities. It supported a culture of change and filled some of the gaps related to the other components of the Program, such as its contribution to innovation.
Recommendations
Continue to improve and strengthen the data collection strategy to support better decision-making
Continue to focus on increasing the uptake of the Program's Workplace Accessibility Stream
Take steps to raise awareness of ICT accessibility barriers, in consultation with the disability community, and educate organizations on the ICT projects that the Program can support
Re-assess specific elements of the Youth component to ensure youth leaders' engagement
The
full report for the evaluation of the Enabling Accessibility Fund - 2016 to 2021
is available online.
Page details
Report a problem on this page
Date modified:
2023-03-07