List of acronyms
CPP:
Canada Pension Plan
EI:
Employment Insurance
ESDC:
Employment and Social Development Canada
OAS:
Old Age Security
PMEC:
Performance Measurement and Evaluation Committee
TBS:
Treasury Board Secretariat
Deputy head Departmental Evaluation Plan confirmation note
I approve the Departmental Evaluation Plan of Employment and Social Development Canada for the fiscal years 2019 to 2020 to 2023 to 2024, which I submit to the Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat as required by the Policy on Results.
I confirm that this five-year rolling Departmental Evaluation Plan:
Plans for evaluation of all ongoing programs of grants and contributions with five-year average actual expenditures of $5 million or greater per year at least once every five years, in fulfillment of the requirements of subsection 42.1 of the Financial Administration Act
Meets the requirements of the Mandatory Procedures for Evaluation
Supports the requirements of the expenditure management system including, as applicable, Memoranda to Cabinet, Treasury Board Submissions, and resource alignment reviews
I will ensure that this plan is updated annually, and I will provide information about its implementation to the Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat, as required.
Graham Flack
		Deputy Minister of Employment and Social Development
Executive summary
Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC) supports Canadians through the delivery of over $125 billion in Government programs and services, which helps Canadians over the course of their lives. The Evaluation  Directorate at ESDC establishes priorities for the upcoming five-year fiscal  period through annual consultations with program officials and Central Agencies.  This ensures the timely provision of evaluation information to management and  program officials, supporting policy and program decision-making. Consultations  conducted in Fall 2018 underscored the strategic importance of collaboration  between the Evaluation Directorate and program officials. They also helped  identify opportunities for innovative ways to measure results and to leverage  thematic and horizontal evaluations. This document outlines ESDC's evaluation  planning up until 2024, and reports on the Evaluation Directorate's major accomplishments  in fiscal year 2018 to 2019.
Key achievements
In fiscal year 2018 to 2019,  as a key element of ESDC's program innovation landscape, the Directorate continued to develop innovative approaches and methodologies in designing and carrying  out its evaluations. The Directorate also helped inform decision making, shared  knowledge with program officials and increased its role as a trusted advisor. Key  achievements realized through the year included:
Purpose of the report
As per the Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat (TBS) Policy on Results, each department must develop and publish an annual five-year, departmental evaluation plan. The main purpose of this plan is to assist the Deputy Head in ensuring that factual, neutral, and timely information on the department’s programs is available to support evidence-based decision making, and inform Canadians on results.
Increased flexibilities provided under the Policy have underscored the necessity for sound planning. The timing of evaluations is determined in consultation with program officials and Central Agencies on the basis of need, risk, and priorities. The Plan also serves to ensure transparency in the decision making process for the evaluation function, highlighting priorities and coverage decisions.
Departmental context
Employment and Social Development Canada's mandate is to build a stronger and more competitive Canada, to support Canadians in helping them live  productive and rewarding lives and to improve Canadians' quality of life. The  Department delivers a range of programs and services that affect Canadians throughout  their lives.
The Department's portfolio includes Employment and Social Development, the Labour Program, and Service Canada.
Employment and Social Development delivers a range of programs and services that assist Canadians throughout their lives, providing seniors with basic income security, supporting unemployed workers, helping  students finance their post-secondary education and assisting parents who are  raising young children.
The Labour Program fosters safe, healthy, fair and inclusive work environments and cooperative workplace relations in the federal jurisdiction. 
Service Canada serves as a single point of access for some of the Government's largest and most well known programs and services, such as Employment Insurance (EI), OAS, CPP, the Social Insurance  Number, and Passports.
The Department spends over $125 billion annually on programs and services, with approximately 94% of this amount directly benefiting Canadians  through statutory transfer payment programs, including EI; CPP, and OAS. In  addition, the Department administers employment benefits and support measures,  which includes transfers totalling $2.2 billion annually to provinces and  territories.
There is a large scale of interactions between the Department and Canadians across the country. The Department's services are delivered through  online service channels, over the telephone, and through a regional network of  over 590 in-person sites.
Operating in this context, Evaluation supports the systematic and neutral collection and analysis of evidence to examine the relevance, effectiveness and efficiency of departmental programs and services to inform Canadians  and support decision making.
Departmental programs touch the lives of Canadians across the country, and must be designed to ensure that these programs and services meet the diverse needs of all Canadians. By incorporating a Gender-Based  Analysis Plus framework to policy, program, and evaluation design, the  Department works to ensure that all populations have equitable access to  programs and services.
Mandate
Evaluation collaborates and shares knowledge with program officials across the Department to support evidence-based decision-making. Evaluation  ensures program officials and senior management are involved in strategic  decisions and are able to provide input into the evaluation process through an  inclusive approach to governance (Annex 1). This approach helps provide relevant  information to program officials in a timely fashion, ensuring Evaluation continues  to be a trusted advisor in the Department.
Evaluation's involvement with program officials occurs at all stages of the program and policy life cycle. At the initial stage, evaluations are able  to inform the design and development of new programs and policies. During  implementation, evaluations can provide recommendations, supported by available  data and information that guide adjustments and program renewal. As a program  or policy matures or winds down, evaluations are able to derive lessons learned  and inform the development of future programs or policies.
Evaluation occasionally advises program officials in developing responses to the recommendations found in final reports, and in developing  action plans for recommendations noted during evaluations. Monitoring progress  on these action plans allows Evaluation to ensure a system of continuous  improvement is realized throughout the evaluation cycle.
Accomplishments in 2018 to 2019
In 2018 to 2019, the Directorate delivered evaluations and advice that focused on key knowledge gaps and the relevance, effectiveness and efficiency of programs, while making concrete recommendations for program improvement.
Supporting evidence-based decision making
Evaluation influenced and supported sound decision making at ESDC by:
completing 17 evaluation reports and 44 technical studies to support program officials, and the EI Monitoring and Assessment Report
advising on 51 Treasury Board Submissions and 15 Memoranda to Cabinet to inform policies and programs
leveraging administrative data through a Labour Market Data Platform to measure impacts and report on the effectiveness of Employment  Benefits and Support Measures over the medium term. The analysis provided reliable,  cost-effective, and timely evidence that contributed to the design and delivery  of labour market programs 
generating technical studies that informed the current Working While on Claim provisions of the EI Program in 2018
demonstrating the potential long-term effectiveness of programs focusing on early interventions to support educational attainment though the Evaluation of  Pathways to Education 
developing preliminary findings to support departmental decisions on labour market programming geared towards improving employment and educational outcomes among  youth, particularly as related to the Youth Employment Strategy
After evaluations are approved by the Deputy Minister, the Evaluation Directorate asks program officials to complete a post-evaluation questionnaire. This survey enables the program to reflect on the entire process of the evaluation and provide insight into their experiences. Of the post-evaluation  questionnaire respondents, 83% reported that the recommendations made by the  Evaluation Directorate were realistic, actionable, and should result in  significant improvements for the program.
In 2018 to 2019, external consultants conducted a Neutral Assessment of ESDC's Evaluation function to determine how it conforms to TBS's expectations. The independent assessment performed by Raymond Chabot Grant Thornton, under the supervision of Internal Audit Services, found that the Department's evaluation function  complies with all TBS requirements found in the Policy and the Directive on  Results. The assessment found that the Department conforms to professional  practice expectations at both the functional and project level. Further, after  reviewing the evidence base provided and engaging in discussions with senior  management, the assessors concluded that the evaluation function is adding  important value to the Department and that results from evaluations are used by  the Department's executives in program decision making.
In terms of areas for improvement, the Neutral Assessment found that evaluation reports "would prove more useful and complete if they indicated to the reader the limitations of the methodologies and the resulting impacts on interpreting the findings and conclusions." To address this recommendation,  Evaluation has started to more clearly address methodological and practical limitations  in measuring program or policy attribution and contribution in final reports. For  further information and detailed findings, visit the Neutral  Assessment Final Report.
Disseminating and engaging
In addition to evaluation reports, Evaluation Directorate generates a number of other products such as technical reports, one-page summaries, lessons learned synthesis, conference presentations, and supplemental studies. In the spirit of Open Government, Evaluation is significantly improving awareness of Directorate products and expanding our audience using traditional and innovative channels of dissemination.
Infographic 2


Text description of Infographic 2

Published reference articles and presentation
Presented evaluation research relating to the Working While on Claim Pilot Projects and the Connecting Canadians with Available Jobs Initiative
Presented seminars on the Directorate's Labour Market Program Data Platform to multiple for a, including the Congrès annuel de la Société Canadienne de science économique, and the International Conference on Big Data Analysis and Data Mining in Rome, Italy

Social Media Engagement

Leveraged multiple social media platforms to share the results of over 20 evaluations

Increased Accessibility

Secured ten year, online retention period for evaluation reports
Made Evaluations website more user-friendly
Advanced Federal Evaluation Function
Led collective staff processes with other departments
Contributed to federal professional development plans
Exchanged best practices in seminars and conferences

Supported Policy Analysis
Shared technical studies and evaluation with policy developers in relation to:

Labour Market Development Agreements
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service
Sectoral Initiatives Program
Federal Workers' Compensation Service Phase I
Evaluation has also identified various opportunities to engage with stakeholders in the coming year, which include: participating on a panel at the Annual Conference of the Canadian Economic Association, presenting at the Canadian Evaluation Society and will participate in the annual American Evaluation Society. ESDC is improving the availability of administrative data for economic research and evaluation purposes.
The trusted advisor role
Evaluation continues to build  on its role as a trusted advisor to program officials and senior management. In  2018 to 2019, the Evaluation Directorate completed the following:
mapped results for more than 30 programs to support the TBS' Horizontal Skills Review. Evaluation provided the review with a robust analysis of departmental labour market training programs
prepared 4 supplemental studies to improve and expand the evidence available to Canadians in the annual EI Monitoring and Assessment Report prepared by the Department on behalf of the Canada EI Commission
continued involvement in the Forum of Labour Market Ministers' Performance Measurement Working Group and provided advice regarding performance measurement strategy and data sharing between the federal, provincial and territorial governments in  support of evaluation activities
supported the Head of Performance Measurement, who leads the ongoing review of the Performance Information Profiles, by advising program officials on the performance measurement of 14 major ESDC programs
In addition to conducting the evaluations listed in coverage tables (Table 1 and Annex 2), Evaluation actively contributes evidence in support of the EI  Monitoring and Assessment Report. The EI program is evaluated more frequently  than others due to the program's scale and the unique objectives of each Employment  Benefit and Support Measure. Evaluation co-develops and advances the analytical  agenda for members of the Monitoring Report Advisory Committee, which includes  the Canada EI Commissioners for Employers and for Workers.
In November 2018, the Head of Evaluation presented evaluation results at the EI Commissioner of Employers' Forum and at the EI Commissioner  of Workers' Forum.
Innovative approaches
As a central component of ESDC's program innovation landscape, Evaluation employs tools and methods to  develop an evidence base for policy and program development. During 2018 to 2019,  the Directorate pursued a multitude of innovative practices to better estimate  the impact of programs, disseminate results to inform decisions, and experiment  with new approaches to yield rapid results. These included the following:
supporting net impact analysis of training programs through the use of the Labour Market Program Data Platform, which uses advanced statistical techniques to estimate  program impacts related to earnings, employment status, and independence from  government assistance
employing machine-learning approaches (in other words data-driven predictive techniques) to better estimate the net impact of the different labour market programs and  to better understand what works for whom
developing Gender Based Analysis Plus analytical capacity to properly assess clients' needs and expectations and understand barriers to access and delivery
publishing reports (for example, the Evaluation of the Federal Labour Standards Program) in a user-friendly slidedoc format, providing  readers with more concise and visual information. Slidedocs also reference other  publications or technical studies, thus providing readers the depth of analysis  found in traditional evaluation reports
increasing the use of visualization techniques and infographics to more effectively convey messages to audiences in a more accessible format
hosting a methodology workshop on the approach to assess the effectiveness of labour market programs and services. The workshop included discussions on: the  measurement of medium-term outcomes; incremental impacts of participation; a  cost-benefit analysis; and the heterogeneity of treatment effect
developing capacity to conduct Rapid Impact Assessments. This line of evidence assesses  qualitative impacts using scenario-based counterfactuals to estimate the impact  of alternate program interventions. Working closely with the ESDC Innovation  Lab to engage stakeholders, a Rapid Impact Assessment is being piloted with the  New Horizons for Seniors Program, as a potential line of evidence
Results
On March 19, 2019, the Government of Canada released Investing in the Middle Class: Budget 2019, outlining changes and  additions to the Department's programs, which included investment in skills of  Canadians, including youth, and a secure retirement for seniors. Evaluations  completed in the 2018 to 2019 fiscal year informed program officials and policy  makers by providing concrete evidence on seniors and youth programming. For example,  the Evaluation of the Old Age Security Program showed that an increased work  earnings exemption on benefits for low-income seniors increased employment  rates and earnings for those who worked. Previous evaluation results on the  Youth Employment Strategy and preliminary analysis in the upcoming evaluation  helped inform a re-assessment and renewed approach to the programs under a  modernized Youth Employment Strategy.
Through 17 evaluations completed in 2018 to 2019, Evaluation provided results across all departmental core responsibilities. A brief sample of results extracted from these  evaluations include:
Supporting persons with disabilities achieve employment
Through the evaluation of the Opportunities Fund for Persons with Disabilities program, which assists persons with disabilities achieve employment, the Directorate found that participation enhanced  clients' attachment to the labour market. The  percentage of participants who were employed, self-employed, or returned to  school within one year of their last program intervention increased from 42% in  2012 to 2013, to 55% in 2016 to 2017. Gaps  were identified in the area of performance measurement, in particular regarding  the progress made through employer awareness activities and the impact program  interventions have on participants' skills, employability and medium to long-term  outcomes on the labour market.
Helping at-risk youth complete schooling
The Directorate's Evaluation of the Pathways to Education program demonstrated the value of early interventions with at-risk youth. The  programming positively affected high school graduation rates, enrollment to  post-secondary education and educational attainment. As well, the long-term net  benefits include greater lifetime earnings for individuals and the program  "breaks even" after 22.5 years from a government perspective and after 20.8  years from a total social net benefit perspective. Challenges reaching underrepresented youth  beyond larger urban areas or in rural, remote and Indigenous communities were  acknowledged by the Department.
Giving parents with critically ill children more time on leave
Evaluation Directorate  evaluated the Parents of Critically Ill Children benefit, recently replaced by the new Family Caregiving Benefit for Children. This benefit provides financial  assistance to caregivers providing care or support to a critically ill or  injured child. The evaluation found that this benefit increased the amount of  time parents could go on leave from work to provide caregiving to their child,  and that this program had a positive impact on parents dealing with difficult  situations. In the early years of implementation, the benefit's uptake was  initially below an anticipated 6,000 applications per year due to low levels of  awareness and difficulties with submitting and/or processing appropriate  medical certificates. As such, one recommendation was put forward to increase  the level of awareness and a second recommendation focused on ways to better  process claims and at the same time, to allow for greater self-service functionality  for applicants.
Improving union-employer relationships
An evaluation of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service program found that between 2013 to 2014 and 2016 to 2017, the dispute prevention services component of the program  contributed to improving communication between parties. As a result, these  activities improved union-employer relationships and facilitated the  negotiations of collective agreements in Canada.
Informing seniors of available income supports
Changes in take-up of the Guaranteed Income Supplement were evaluated in 2019, with an emphasis on better understanding those who were eligible for the Supplement but did not receive  it, and on barriers faced by vulnerable groups of seniors. Evaluation findings  indicate that care should be taken to assess the needs of younger seniors who  may have less knowledge of income supports. In addition, seniors with relatively higher  income levels may not be aware of their possible eligibility for a smaller  amount of the Supplement. Although take-up rates for vulnerable groups,  including Indigenous Peoples, immigrants, and those who live in rural areas  tend to differ little from the general population of eligible seniors, barriers  still exist for immigrants and those who live in rural areas. These barriers  include language and difficulty understanding the application process.
Evaluation coverage
When determining the timing and order of future evaluations, the Directorate uses a risk-based approach that prioritizes mandatory evaluations, as well as those that are most likely  to inform major policy and program decisions.
In 2018 to 2019, the Evaluation Directorate completed all evaluations that were mandatory under the Financial Administration Act and the Policy on Results. With respect to  non-mandatory evaluations, budgetary constraints required the Directorate to  exercise the flexibility granted to it through the Policy on Results to adjust its evaluation schedule in a limited  number of cases. This included reducing the scope of some evaluations (for  example the Evaluation of the Canada Service Corps) and delaying other  evaluations (for example, the Guaranteed Income Supplement Take-Up Initiative  Evaluation Phase II).
In total, the Directorate completed and received Deputy Minister approval for 16 evaluation reports in 2018 to 2019, and an additional report was subsequently approved in April 2019.
Five evaluations originally scheduled for 2018 to 2019 have been carried over to the next fiscal year due to resource and capacity constraints, and they will meet requirements under the Financial Administration Act and Policy on Results.
In addition to undertaking evaluations planned at the outset of each new fiscal year, the Directorate also strives to maintain a degree of flexibility to pursue additional evaluations  should opportunities emerge or circumstances change during the year. In 2018 to  2019, Evaluation completed 4 unplanned evaluations in support of departmental  priorities, including the Evaluation of the Bilateral and Regional Labour  Affairs program, the Evaluation of Multilateral Labour Affairs, the Evaluation  of the Guaranteed Income Supplement (Phase 1) and the Evaluation of the Social  Development Partnerships Program.
In meeting its obligations under the Policy on Results, all of the Department's evaluation reports were transmitted to TBS and released  to the public in a timely manner, thus meeting standards.
In the coming year, the Directorate plans to complete 13 evaluations in total, 8 of which are ongoing and previously scheduled, and 5 that are being carried over  from 2018 to 2019. Working with program officials, Evaluation will also ensure  that 6 new departmental programs continue to receive proper consideration at  the design stage to identify Performance Information Profile indicators.
For 2020 to 2021, Evaluation is currently planning to complete 11 evaluations. These will include evaluations related to: EI Parental and Maternity Benefits; the New Horizons for Seniors Program; the  Student Work-Integrated Learning Program; and the Federal Mediation and  Conciliation Service. While additional evaluations may be identified in the  coming year, constraints will necessitate capacity management, prioritization,  and the adoption of innovative approaches during the next 2 years to meet  demands.
Increased flexibility
Under the Policy on Results, ongoing grants and contributions programs that have a five-year average actual expenditure of less than $5 million per year are not subject to the Financial Administration Act requirement for a review of the relevance and effectiveness of the program. While this exemption is applicable to 2 programs (in other words the Sustainable Development Goals Funding Program, and Canadian Benefit for Parents of Young Victims of Crime), evaluations of the Canadian Benefit for Parents of Young Victims of Crime was approved for strategic policy reasons in 2017 to 2018.
Consultations
In carrying out evaluation planning, the Evaluation Directorate engaged in extensive strategic discussions with corporate, program, and policy officials to ensure that the full range of evidence and operational needs were considered.
Between October and December 2018, the Directorate held consultations with program officials, which strengthened the collaborative environment of the Department, and highlighted the value programs place on evidence-based decision-making. The Directorate worked with program officials to define needs, timing requirements, and the focus of evaluations.
The evaluation planning process also included consultations with TBS, during which advice from Central Agencies was provided on priorities and needs related to the evaluation function. Consultations held in January 2019 identified the need to incorporate evaluation evidence into decision-making documents, including Treasury Board Submissions and Memoranda to Cabinet. This evidence can be a combination of research, technical studies, or evaluation results to inform the development or review of programs.
Reflecting the desire for stronger evidence-based decision-making, program officials continue to improve the quality of the Performance Information Profiles with advice from Evaluation. As well, the Evaluation Directorate continues to work with departmental researchers to coordinate activities and identify opportunities. Finally, Evaluation will continue to develop means through which early knowledge from ongoing evaluations can inform and be integrated into program and policy decision-making, providing input to Treasury Board Submissions and Memoranda to Cabinet.
Risk assessment
When planning discretionary evaluations, Evaluation weighs departmental and program level risks. Integrating  risk analysis into the planning exercise helps to ensure that evaluations  provide value-added benefit to the Department. The risk assessment exercise examines  program-level characteristics that contribute to the overall risk of a program,  departmental risks identified in the Corporate Risk Profile, and risks specific  to the Evaluation Directorate. By incorporating a multi-level approach to the  determination of risk, Evaluation ensures that perspectives of major  stakeholders, as well as risks internal to the organization are considered.
Program characteristics act as a proxy for risk exposure during the evaluation planning exercise. Characteristics  considered in early stages of evaluation planning include:
size of the population affected or targeted by the program
program materiality (for example value)
program complexity
time elapsed since the previous evaluation
magnitude of change to the program since the previous evaluation; and
knowledge gaps with respect to the program
Risks specific to individual evaluations are further considered in Evaluability Assessments to  ensure that risks are identified prior to the commencement of an evaluation. Evaluability  assessments consider limited risks, such as those associated with program  oversight, availability of data, and the application of earlier evaluation  findings.
Key corporate risks for the department are also examined and considered when planning discretionary evaluations, and includes a review  of the risk-based corporate audit plan. In carrying out this work, the  Directorate makes sure to align the audit and evaluation schedules to reduce  duplication or undue burden for programs. Collaboration ensures an overall assessment of the adequacy and  effectiveness of a department's control processes are examined (through  appropriate audit coverage), and that relevance and cost-effectiveness of a  department's overall activities are also assessed (through appropriate evaluation  coverage).
Challenges and opportunities
The evaluation function continues to face 2 key challenges: analytical capacity to meet the workload requirements; and the availability and quality of data and performance measurement information.
Infographic 3


Text description of Infographic 3

Human Resource Capacity

The Directorate is responding by:

Leading efforts to improve promotional material and recruitment for the evaluation function;
Using flexible staffing options (e.g. students, casuals, consultants); 
Maintaining an annual Strategic Human Resource Plan;
Supporting professional development of staff;
Engaging with staff to support a positive and healthy workplace.


Quality of Data and Performance Measure to Support Evaluations

The Directorate is responding by: 

Advising responsible program officials and the Performance Measurement and Evaluation Committee on Performance Information Profiles       and quality of indicators;
* Conducting Evaluability Assessments to support performance measurement;
Launching the Labour market data platform to improve data, analysis, and performance measures for relating programs

83% of Evaluation Directorate employees get a sense of satisfaction from their work.*
82% of Evaluation Directorate employees feel they receive meaningful recognition for work well done.*
* Public Service Employee Survey, 2018
Human resource capacity
The nature of the work undertaken in the Evaluation Directorate requires the continuous recruitment, development and retention of highly skilled employees. It requires specialized skills to analyze, synthesize and communicate complex lines of quantitative and  qualitative evidence in order to provide the quality advice that the Department  relies on to effectively build policy and programs to best serve Canadians.
A number of actions address these requirements. Evaluation is leading efforts to improve promotional material and recruitment for the evaluation function. The Directorate supports collective  staffing processes across government to ensure there is a continuous intake of  new candidates with the right skills through a streamlined hiring process.  Evaluation led a collective, external recruitment of evaluators on behalf of  the Government of Canada, which identified approximately 40 candidates. In  addition, the Evaluation Directorate is supporting the establishment of the  Emerging Evaluators Network, an informal group of evaluators from across  government that meet to discuss issues of importance to the evaluation  community.
To ensure that capacity demands are met in the short term, the Directorate uses flexible staffing tools, including hiring students, casual employees and consultants. As an additional response to capacity concerns, a number of retired public servants were hired  on a temporary basis. Evaluation maintains an annual Strategic Human Resource Plan  to ensure transparency in its staffing actions and as a means of succession  planning. The Strategic Human Resources Plan empowers employees by providing  them with the knowledge they require to help them take charge of their  professional career. In order to provide employees with an opportunity to  participate in and influence the environment in which they work, Evaluation established  a working group to contribute to the update of the Plan. The Directorate's  commitment to using these tools as a means of providing a transparent and  inclusive work environment was recognized in 2018, with the receipt of a Deputy  Minister's award of excellence in leadership and people management.
While the Public Service Employee Survey found 80% of Evaluation employees think they get the training they need, Evaluation is  implementing additional talent management programs, including:
continuing to use Performance Agreements, Learning Plans and Talent Management Plans to support staff development
ensuring that team members understand the competencies required for their current job and  those they may aspire to; and
implementing  strategies to improve second language skills to support bilingual capacity and succession of experienced staff
To further promote the professional development of employees, Evaluation supports employees' accreditation in the  Canadian Evaluation Society. Currently, the Directorate has supported  accreditation for 9 employees. Evaluation further assists in employees'  professional development by holding regular internal training sessions.  Training ensures that team members are ready and equipped to meet the  challenges of an evolving profession and workforce.
While 83% of employees indicated that they get a sense of satisfaction from their work, and 82% of employees feel that they receive meaningful recognition for work well done, the  Public Service Employee Survey noted that capacity and compensation issues were  key sources of stress. In addition to leveraging flexibilities provided by the Policy on Results to address these  concerns, Evaluation will continue to focus on developing a healthy workplace  for its team members by providing training, support and avenues for open  dialogue.
In 2018, management engaged with staff to strengthen and improve the workplace by:
continuing to celebrate and recognize achievements
managing and prioritizing workflows
encouraging staff to expand skills by presenting their work to internal and external stakeholders
bringing observers to senior officials' meetings
ensuring analysts are present when their files are discussed
Further recognizing the strength and contributions of staff, Evaluation has fully embraced the "Take Me With You" campaign, which encourages evaluators to attend meetings with senior management.  Observers, including junior evaluators, attend PMEC, and participate in evaluation  management committee meetings, and other management meetings held throughout  the year.
The actions and initiatives of management help contribute to a safe and healthy workplace. Evaluation fully supports workplace mental health and contributed significantly to develop the mental health  framework for the department. This work has been identified as an  interdepartmental best practice, and other countries such as the United Kingdom  have consulted Evaluation on this work. A continued focus on  the mental health of employees is central to not only encouraging open  discussion about issues that affect the team on a daily basis, but also  ensuring that management is aware of emerging issues and is able to support  employees in an effective manner.
Data and performance measurement
Evaluations undertaken by the Directorate are highly dependent on the availability of quality data. Performance measurement information that program officials use to make decisions is also used  by evaluators to determine relevance and value for money. This information is  sometimes used to summarize and assess the way a program is being implemented. It  is important that the evidence-base that performance data provides is accurate,  timely and measures the right elements of programs. Barriers in accessing,  and/or the lack of data can jeopardize Evaluation's ability to deliver high  quality and timely evaluations and result in inadequate support for policy and  program development.
In support of the Department's performance measurement regime, and consistent with the Policy on Results, Evaluation advises PMEC and responsible program  officials on the availability, quality, validity, and reliability of indicators  in the Departmental Results Framework, and in each program Performance  Information Profile. The Directorate also assesses indicators for their ability  to support evaluations in the context of Evaluability Assessments, and provides  support to the Head of Performance Measurement through various channels,  including involvement in the Director General Performance Measurement  Committee. Program officials across the Department develop, update and  implement Performance Information Profiles for all existing and new programs in  the Department's program inventory.
The Chief Results and Delivery Officer is the key contact for the Results and Delivery Unit of the Privy Council Office, and identifies top departmental priorities in support of the  results agenda. This role acts as the primary change agent for the Department  and ensures that a delivery plan, measurement strategy and reporting structures  are in place to support the delivery of these priorities. The Head of  Performance Measurement supports the Chief Results and Delivery Officer by  supporting performance measurement and reporting by establishing, implementing  and maintaining the Departmental Results Framework and overseeing Performance  Information Profiles. The Chief Results and Delivery Officer is also supported  by the Director General, Strategic Horizontal Policy, with an emphasis on  measuring and reporting on government activities and their impact on Canadians.  This Director General leads on elements of horizontal priorities for the  government and the tracking of mandate letter commitments, including their  progress, challenges and barriers to completion. The key responsibilities of  the Head of Evaluation are to assess departmental evaluation needs; to  undertake departmental evaluation planning, directing and reporting; to support  the use of performance information; and to advise the Deputy Head on evaluation  findings and issues. ESDC's Chief Data Officer leads the implementation of the  Department's enterprise Data Strategy, including the development of data foundations,  such as data governance and stewardship. These foundations are essential to  ensuring that data users have the knowledge and support needed to identify,  locate, and fully leverage data in their daily work, and in developing  indicators to support performance measurement, including reports of the Chief  Results and Delivery Officer. All of these positions are located in the  Strategic and Service Policy Branch of ESDC.
During 2018 to 2019, some of the Evaluability Assessments presented to PMEC indicated insufficient performance measurement information and indicators to support evaluation  questions, desired lines of evidence, or the measurement of program outcomes. This,  in turn, necessitates investments in data, surveys and interviews. Several  evaluations with rich administrative data enable robust attribution of program  impacts. Evaluation is working with partners to support the continued  development of data and maturity of the performance measurement regime. Most  evaluations have provided evidence of a contribution of program activities to  outcomes. This is an improvement from the past when many ESDC evaluations were  limited to documenting inputs and some outputs.
Evaluation has significantly improved data and analysis for labour market programs, enabling the attribution of outcomes to program activities. The Labor Market Program Data Platform supported  more than 17 evaluation studies related to the Labour Market Development  Agreements. These studies addressed program and policy questions important to  ESDC and the provinces and territories who are responsible for delivering these  interventions under the Agreements. The Data Platform is generating increased  demand to access the rich administrative data to support program and policy  analysis, accompanied by demand for technical knowledge transfer from program  officials. In 2019 to 2020, Evaluation will continue to leverage the Data Platform,  expanding net incremental analysis to youth and Indigenous labour market  programming.
As the Department's use of data and performance measures to inform decision-making continues to expand, Evaluation will support program officials with sound advice on the use of  available data and performance measures to improve Performance Information  Profiles and support evaluations.
Resource allocation
Several factors affect Evaluation's budget year-to-year; some reduce the need for funding, while others increase resource needs. Resourcing  requirements for the 2019 to 2020 fiscal year have increased as a result of new  demands, including those from program officials for evidence to support the  Department's results agenda, the introduction of new departmental programs  which will be reflected in future plans, and PMEC decisions on the scope and  depth of evaluations. To ensure program officials continue to benefit from  timely evaluations, the plan prioritizes requirements under the Financial Administration Act and the Policy on Results, and commitments made by  PMEC.
Over the medium-term, human and financial resource pressures are expected from increasing demands for: thematic and horizontal evaluations; experimentation  and development of innovative methodologies and tools to better measure the  impacts of programs; and, collaboration with programs to improve the quality of  performance measurement across the Department. Evaluation streamlined and  reduced capacity requirements for privacy approvals and is employing the  slidedocs format for reporting efficiency and will continue to meet medium-term  pressures through additional enhancements in human resource management.
To optimize capacity over the last 5 years, Evaluation has reshaped the composition of its workforce. An increased complement of junior staff replaced  vacated senior positions, providing additional capacity and new skill sets to  meet expanding priorities. The shift towards more junior positions is enabling  the completion of work previously undertaken by external consultants and  leverages emerging skills. While this shift has contributed to optimizing human  resources, the results agenda's focus on outcomes measurement requires  Evaluation to compensate for administrative data gaps through external contracts,  including surveys, thereby increasing the need for operations and maintenance  funding. In addition, 5 evaluations carried over into 2019 to 2020 due to  capacity constraints experienced in the previous year, contributed to an  increase in operations and maintenance spending from $0.8M in 2018 to 2019 to  $1.79M in 2019 to 2020. Through the course of fiscal year 2019 to 2020,  adjustments may be made to activities, potentially carrying forward some  activities to the following year and Plan.
The Evaluation Directorate now has 66 full time equivalent employees. While Evaluation forecasted increases in spending are largely dependent on the number  of full time equivalents within the Directorate, required operations and  maintenance expenses contribute to the anticipated increase in expenditures in  the 2019 to 2020 fiscal year, as demonstrated in Table 2 below.
* Budget for 2019 to 2020 is still to be confirmed.
Notes: Actual salary spending includes all employees except students. Forecast spending includes further human resources staffing actions planned for 2019 to 2020. Operations and Maintenance expenses includes students, training, travel, printing, utilities, material and supplies, special services, construction/acquisition, machinery and equipment, other business services and tenant services.
Going forward
In the coming years, priority evaluations will assess labour market, learning and income security programs. The incremental impacts of participation in labour market programs and the  attribution of these programs will be evaluated using net impact analysis and  machine learning techniques.
Evaluation reports on the Canada Student Loans Program, Canada Education Savings Program and Canada Learning Bond will examine the programs’ effect on savings and access to education,  including the extent to which different segments of the population benefit.
Income security programs including Old Age Security and Canada Pension Plan will be examined through  reports aimed at assessing various aspects of program efficiency, efficacy and  relevance. Separate evaluations of the service aspects of these income security  programs will assess their service improvement strategies. Service delivery  evaluations will focus on contributions to program delivery outcomes, such as  ease-of-access, meeting clients’ service needs and expectations, and helping to  ensure eligible seniors receive payments.
The Directorate will build on its foundations to strengthen the evaluation function at ESDC by investing in innovation and learning, and effectively sharing and disseminating evaluation  findings. Evaluation will continue to incorporate innovative methods and  approaches into its operations and the services it provides the Department and  other stakeholders. Going forward, consideration will be given to the use of additional  horizontal or thematic evaluations, allowing for an investigation of themes  common to multiple programs or priorities, or linked to client groups that the  Department serves.
The Directorate will continue to engage experts in the academic community on optimal approaches to conducting evaluations. This will ensure that best  practices are continually adopted across the evaluation function and lessons  learned from other jurisdictions, departments and disciplines are leveraged to  achieve results for Canadians. Engagement with researchers will also increase  the use of data assets to provide insights into departmental programs that may  contribute to greater social and economic outcomes for Canada. Furthermore,  Evaluation will continue to engage with federal counterparts to ensure the  ongoing strengthening of the evaluation function across government.
The Evaluation Directorate plays a key role in supporting informed decision-making, providing trusted advice to officials on program effectiveness, as well as adopting innovative  approaches to better measure the impacts of our programs. As indicated in the  2018 Neutral Assessment of the Evaluation Function, the Directorate’s work in  these areas is valuable in supporting the mission of ESDC and reporting on  results. The Evaluation Directorate will continue to build on the priorities  established in this plan, to deliver on results for Canadians.
The coverage table resulting from the development of this plan is provided in the attached annex (Annex 2 – Planned Annual Coverage Table). Evaluations are organized under their  respective Core Responsibility and Program, as outlined in the Departmental  Results Framework. The table demonstrates that in addition to completing  discretionary evaluations deemed as priorities, the Directorate will meet all  coverage requirements mandated by the Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat, the Policy on Results, and the Financial Administration Act.
Annex 1 – evaluation governance
Infographic 4: Annex A – Evaluation Governance Infographic


Text description of Infographic 4

Performance Measurement and Evaluation Committee
Composed of stakeholders from senior ranks of ESDC, including the Head of Evaluation

Approves the Departmental Evaluation Plan.
Reviews evaluation reports, including management responses
Approves Evaluability Assessments.
Discusses follow-up on action plans.



Evaluation Advisory Committee
Compose of Stakeholders from across ESDC, TBS, Program Sector and Finance Canada (Director General level and below)

Identifies options for evaluation scope.
Discusses preliminary findings.
Provides input for final report.



Evaluation Working Group
Composed of Stakeholders from across ESDC (Director level and below)

Focuses on technical aspects.
Performs data collection and analysis.
Provides input for preliminary report.
Annex 2
