Summary of the evaluation of the Job Match service connecting job seekers to Canadian employers
From:
Employment and Social Development Canada
On this  page
About the Job  Match service
Key findings
Recommendation
Alternate formats
Summary of the evaluation of the Job Match service connecting job seekers to Canadian employers
[
PDF
- 173
KB
]
Large print, braille,
MP3
(audio), e-text and
DAISY
formats are available on demand by
ordering online
or calling 1 800 O-Canada (1-800-622-6232). If you use a teletypewriter (
TTY
), call 1-800-926-9105.
About the Job Match Service
Job Bank is Canada’s national  employment service, available as a website and mobile app. Since April 2015, the  Job Bank online platform provides for new advanced job search features,  including the Job Match service.
Job Match Service connects job  seekers with job opportunities based on their education, experiences, skill  levels and other criteria. For each match, an algorithm assigns a matching  score on the quality of the fit. Upon receiving a match:
job seekers may view the job posting and apply  for it, while
employers can follow-up with candidates and  invite them to apply
Key findings
Job  seekers have positive views on the value-added of the Job Match service with  60% of users recommending it to others. On the other hand, employers and  partners views were more critical
The  effectiveness of the Job Match service is dependent on the completeness of  information provided by job seekers. In addition, Job Match is limited by its  heavy reliance on the National Occupational Classification system, which was  not designed to support sophisticated matching algorithms
Job  Match users are more likely to view a job posting when the matching score is  high. However, other factors besides the match score influence employers  following up with job seekers
Employment  Insurance claimants who used Job Match and had higher than average job matching  scores were more likely to return to work rapidly. However, there is  insufficient evidence to attribute this outcome to the Job match service  alone
Recommendations
Explore  approaches to ensure job seekers provide more complete profile information to  allow for the opportunity of better job matches with potential employers
Develop  and pilot a promotional strategy for employers to improve the level of  awareness of the Job Match service
Conduct  needs assessment with selected employers to develop, pilot and implement  features that enhance the Job Match experience for employers
Page details
Report a problem on this page
Date modified:
2022-04-21