Evaluation of the Canada – British Columbia Labour Market Development Agreement
From:
Employment  and Social Development Canada
On this  page
Executive summary
Management response
1. Introduction
1.1 Labour Market Development Agreement  background
1.2 Methodology
1.3 Overview of the studies summarized in this  report
2. Evaluation findings
2.1 Rationale and Labour Market context
2.2 Training Services
2.3 Apprentices Program
2.4 Wage Subsidy Work Experience Placement
2.5 Self-Employment
2.6 Job Creation Partnerships
2.7 Employment Assistance Services
3. Comparison of key findings by program type
4. Conclusion
5. Recommendations
References
Acronyms
Appendix A - Methodology
Appendix B - Detailed results Training Services
Appendix C - Detailed results Apprentices
Appendix D - Detailed results Wage Subsidy Work  Experience Placement
Appendix E - Detailed results Self-Employment
Appendix F - Detailed results Job Creation  Partnerships
Appendix G - Detailed results Employment  Assistance Services
Appendix H- List of nine studies included in the  synthesis report
Alternate formats
Evaluation of the Canada – British Columbia Labour Market Development Agreement
[
PDF
- 1.15
MB
]
Request other formats online
or call
1 800 O-Canada
(1-800-622-6232)
. If you use a teletypewriter (TTY), call 1-800-926-9105.
  Large print, braille, audio cassette, audio CD, e-text diskette, e-text CD and DAISY are available on demand.
Executive summary
Introduction
Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC) worked  jointly with British Columbia and 11 other Provinces and Territories (P/Ts) to  undertake the 2012-2017 second cycle of the Labour Market Development Agreement  (LMDA) evaluation. The  first cycle of LMDA evaluation was carried out between 1998 and 2012 and  involved the conduct of bilateral formative and summative evaluations in all  P/Ts. Under the second cycle, the evaluation work consisted of  conducting two to three studies per year on the Employment Benefits and Support  Measures (EBSMs) similar programming delivered under these agreements. The  studies generated evaluation evidence on the effectiveness, efficiency and  design/delivery of EBSMs for Canada overall, for British Columbia and for the  11 other P/Ts that opted for a joint evaluation process with Canada.
Under LMDAs, Canada transfers $2.14B in Employment Insurance  (EI) Part II funds to P/Ts for the design and delivery of programs and services  to help unemployed individuals (mainly those eligible under EI) to find and  maintain employment.
Programs and services delivered by British Columbia  correspond to the EBSM categories defined under the EI Act. The following is a  short description of the five categories of programs and services examined in  the evaluation:
Skills  Development (Training Services, including Apprenticeship)
helps participants obtain employment skills by  giving them financial assistance in order to attend classroom training.
Targeted  Wage Subsidies (Wage Subsidy Work Experience Placement)
help participants obtain on-the-job work experience by providing employers  with a wage subsidy.
Self-Employment
provides financial assistance  and business planning advice to participants to help them start their own  business.
Job  Creation Partnerships
provide  participants with opportunities to gain work experience that will lead to  ongoing employment. Employment opportunities are provided by projects that  contribute to developing the community and the local economy.
Employment  Assistance Services
such as  counselling, job search skills, job placement services, provision of labour  market information and case management.
Three additional programs and services are available under  the LMDAs: Labour Market Partnerships, Research and Innovation and Targeted  Earnings Supplements. They were not evaluated as part of this evaluation. The  Targeted Earnings Supplements program is not used in British Columbia, and  Labour Market Partnerships and Research and Innovation will be evaluated at a later  stage.
Table i provides an overview of the share of funding  allocated to the five EBSMs examined under the second cycle for LMDA evaluation  and the average cost per intervention.
Sources: EI  Monitoring and Assessment Reports 2002 to 2003 to 2014 to 2015.
*Note: Labour Market Partnerships and  Research and Innovation (not covered by the evaluation) represented about 7% of  Employment Benefits and Support Measures expenditures in 2014 to 2015.
This report presents a summary of the findings from nine  studies produced on British Columbia LMDA interventions and participants.  Results are presented for active and former EI claimants as well as for  long-tenured workers
, youth (under 30 years  old) and older workers (55 years old and over) when the number of participants  was sufficient to conduct quantitative analyses. Active EI claimants are  classified as those who were receiving EI benefits at the time of their EBSM  participation. Former EI claimants received EI up to three years before  starting their EBSM participation.
Key findings
Effectiveness and  efficiency of EBSMs
Incremental impacts and cost-benefit analyses  addressed EBSM effectiveness and efficiency.
Overall,  incremental impacts demonstrate that LMDA programs and services are improving  the labour market attachment of active and former EI claimant participants,  including youth and older worker who were active claimant participants. As  well, social benefits of participation exceeded the cost of investments for all  examined interventions over time. Finally, providing Employment Assistance  Services interventions earlier during an EI claim (first four weeks) produced  larger impacts on earnings and employment and facilitated earlier return to  work. This demonstrates the importance of targeting early participation of EI  active claimants.
Figure  i presents the incremental impacts on the incidence of employment for active  and former claimants by type of program. The estimates can be interpreted as a  change in the probability of being employed following participation. For  example, participation in Training Services increases the probability of being  employed by 4.8 percentage points for active EI claimants relative to  unemployed non-participants.
Figure i. Change in probability of being employed in participants relative to non-participants
non-participants
Text description of Figure i
* The estimates in Figure i are arithmetic averages. The  estimates for active and former claimants who participated in Job Creation  Partnerships are based on five estimates with different statistical  significance levels. For active claimants, one estimate is statistically  significant at the 95% confidence level, three estimates are statistically  significant at the 90% confidence level and one estimate is non-statistically  significant. For former claimants, one estimate is statistically significant at  the 90% level and four estimates are non-statistically significant.
Figure ii presents the  cumulative increase in employment earnings for active and former claimants over  the 5 years post-participation. It is noted that Employment Assistance Services  are relatively modest activities and, by themselves, are not expected to lead  to substantial effects on labour market outcomes.  In other words, these services aim to support  the return to work of unemployed participants and not necessarily to secure a  better paying job than pre-participation. However, as demonstrated later in the  report, providing Employment Assistance Services earlier during the EI claim  (first 4 weeks) produced larger impacts on earnings and employment and facilitated  earlier returns to work.
Figure ii. Increased cumulative earnings of participants relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure ii
* The estimates are not statistically significant at the 95%  confidence level.
Table ii presents the number of years required for the social  benefits to exceed program cost. Social benefits to participation exceeded  investment in a period ranging from less than a year after program  participation to about 10 years after participation. This excludes active and  former claimants who participated in Job Creation Partnerships, for whom the  investment costs are not likely to be recouped before 23.6 years for active  claimants, and may never be recouped for former claimants. However, this group  represented only 0.2% of new EBSM interventions in 2014 to 2015.
Main challenges about program design and delivery
Key informant interviews with service providers and program  managers, as well as the documents reviewed and the questionnaires filled by  British Columbia representatives, revealed few challenges about program design  and delivery:
Training Services
According to service providers and managers interviewed as  part of the evaluation, the main challenges and lessons learned about Training  Services design and delivery included:
There  is an uneven level of experience among caseworkers which require more time and expertise  to understand the nuances of the program
The  remoteness and more-limited availability of training institutions in rural and  remote areas poses challenges to caseworkers
The  limits on the financial supports are perceived as being too low
The  paperwork associated with the program’s application process can be overwhelming  for some participants
It  is important to have relevant and adequate labour market information on  occupations in-demand in the labour market
Apprentices
Existing literature showed that there is a fairly high  non-completion rate among apprentices in Canada (40-50%)
.  Furthermore, literature revealed that despite the growth in apprenticeship  registrations in Canada, there has not been a corresponding increase in  completions
.  While program data does not provide reliable information on completion and  non-completion rates of participants, key informants interviewed in the  evaluation noted a high non-completion rate among apprentices in British  Columbia and identified reasons that could lead them to drop out of the  apprenticeship process. These included:
EI benefits payments may not be sufficient for  apprentices while in training
Apprentices and employers do not know what  supports are available or where they must go to apply for the program
Apprentices may not have the necessary essential  skills to perform the required work. They may require greater supports and  resources as trades are becoming more complex and sophisticated
It can be difficult for apprentices to find the  time to return to school to complete their training
Some training requires the apprentice to  relocate to another community and this may be challenging for them
Tuition is not an eligible cost and this is a  challenge for many apprentices
Due to changes in the economy, some apprentices  may switch jobs temporarily. This may impact their ability to complete their  apprenticeship. As well, some apprentices are taking other employment opportunities  outside of their trade
Because of the strict apprentice-journeyman  ratios, there are not enough journeymen to supervise the apprentices
Wage Subsidy Work Experience Placement
While evaluation results have demonstrated the effectiveness  of the Wage Subsidy Work Experience Placement program, its use has been falling  in recent years. According to the EI Monitoring and Assessment Reports, the  number of new program interventions decreased from 3,541 to 1,295 between 2003 to 2004 and 2014 to 2015.  Key informants identified the following possible factors influencing this  decline:
Inexperienced  service providers
Administrative/reporting  burdens on the employers
Lack  of awareness about the program
Employment Assistance Services
Key informants indicated that service providers are expected  to use labour market information to support program delivery. However,  they also mentioned that available labour market information is  limited. They explained that information  on government websites can sometimes be outdated. As well, labour market  information is not  available at the rural level and is limited at the local level.
According to key informants, other challenges with respect  to the delivery and targeting of Employment Assistance Services included:
Lack of awareness of the program among EI and  income support claimants
Administrative  burden associated with the new data collection system and bi-weekly follow-up  with participants
Available  funding does not allow for the provision of one-on-one support in the  self-service area. As well, not all service providers can afford a specialist  for the specialized groups they are mandated to serve
Eligibility  requirements are seen as being strict
Some  service providers cover a large rural area and this poses some challenges.  In some cases, staff need to drive for two  hours in order to meet with participants
Participants with multiple barriers to  employment often require multiple referrals.   Service providers are generally unable to track participants through  multiple referrals and lose touch with these individuals
Recommendations
A total of six recommendations  emerge from the evaluation findings. They are as follows:
The study on the timing of Employment Assistance Services  participation showed that receiving assistance early after starting an  Employment Insurance claim can lead to better labour market impacts. However,  key informants reported a lack of awareness about the program.
Recommendation 1
:  Consideration should be given to providing British Columbia with timely access  to data on new EI recipients for supporting targeting and increasing awareness.
Incremental impact results showed improvements in  participants’ earnings and employment for the Wage Subsidy Work Experience  Placement program although its use has been declining in recent years. According to key  informants, the decline may be related to factors such as a lack of awareness  about the program and the administrative burden on employers.
Recommendation 2:
British Columbia should explore ways of removing barriers to employer  participation in the Wage Subsidy Work Experience Placement program.
Key informants interviewed in the evaluation confirmed the  necessity of having labour market information to support the delivery of  Employment Assistance Services. They, however, pointed to the difficulty of  accessing and using labour market information, especially at the local level.
Recommendation 3:
Consideration should be given to enhancing the capacity of service providers to  access and produce, when needed, relevant labour market information.
The evaluation was not able to produce a conclusive  assessment of Self-Employment effectiveness and efficiency since the data used  to assess impacts on earnings may not be the best source of information  available to reflect the financial wellbeing of the participants. As  well, it is not clear whether participants’ success in improving their labour  market attachment through self-employment is more closely associated with their  business idea and their entrepreneurship skills or the assistance provided  under Self-Employment.
Recommendation 4:
Consideration should be given to examining in more detail the design and  delivery of Self-Employment and whether the performance indicators for this  program are appropriate.
Job Creation Partnerships is provided to a small number of  participants and was found to be effective at improving the earnings of active  claimants but it increased their use of EI. The program was not effective for  former claimants. However, the evaluation has not yet examined the design and  delivery of this program. Therefore, a lot remains unknown about how this  program operates and the factors that contribute to its effectiveness.
Recommendation 5:
Consideration should be given to examine the design and delivery of Job  Creation Partnerships in order to better understand how this program operates.
Overall, the LMDA evaluation was able to produce a sound  assessment of EBSM effectiveness and efficiency because the team had access to  rich data on EI claimants, EBSM participation data and Canada Revenue Agency  taxation files. However, some data gaps limited the evaluation’s ability to  assess how EBSMs operate.
Recommendation 6:
Improvements in the data collection process are recommended to address key  program and policy questions of interest to the federal and  provincial/territorial governments. Specifically:
Collect data on whether participants are members of  designated groups including Indigenous peoples, persons with disabilities and  recent immigrants.
Collect data on the type of training funded under Training  Services and the type of assistance provided under Employment Assistance  Services. British Columbia, ESDC and other P/Ts should work together to define  common categories for both EBSMs.
Management response
Introduction
The Synthesis Report and its  recommendations have been reviewed and approved by the Ministry of Social  Development and Poverty Reduction (the Ministry). The findings and recommendations  were well received as the Ministry actively supports an evidence-based approach  to program development and improvements.
Significant enhancements  have been implemented with the rollout of the Employment Program of British  Columbia in 2012, the Ministry’s commissioning of an external review titled  “Evaluation of the Employment Program of British Columbia” in 2016 and by the  subsequent improvements made in response to the review’s recommendations
. The findings from the  external review are in line with those of the Synthesis Report in that the  external review recognized program features introduced with the launch of the  Employment Program of British Columbia in 2012. The Ministry continues to  refine its approach over the life of the program and since the external review.
Some of the actions that  British Columbia has taken related to recommendations in the Evaluation of the  Canada-British Columbia LMDA as prepared by the Evaluation Directorate,  Strategic and Service Policy Branch of ESDC are detailed below. These examples  are intended to demonstrate British Columbia’s shared priorities with ESDC  (relative to the state of the program before 2012, as the Synthesis Report  addresses), the actions taken to address these priorities and a willingness to continue  to focus on program improvement.
Six recommendations for British Columbia:
Consideration should be given to providing
British Columbia
with timely access to data on new EI  recipients for supporting targeting and increasing awareness.
British Columbia acknowledges the importance  of early intervention and together with the federal government has been working  to channel EI recipients to the Employment Program of British Columbia sooner  through the Targeting, Referral and Feedback initiative. The initiative was  launched in the fall of 2016 and 95% of WorkBC Employment Services Centre locations  are participating. The process is that ESDC sends referrals to WorkBC Employment  Services Centre service providers, who in turn reach out to referred EI  clients and provide them with information on Employment Program of British Columbia  services. Of the approximately 1,200 clients that have completed Employment Program  of British Columbia services through the initiative, 72% have attained  employment.
In the fall of 2017 the Forum of Labour Market  Ministers Secretariat and ESDC hosted an information session with all the  Provinces and Territories of Canada. British Columbia shared its experience on  the Targeting, Referral and Feedback implementation process, as other provinces  and territories are now looking to implement their own Targeting, Referral and  Feedback initiatives.
British Columbia should explore ways of  removing barriers to employer participation in the Wage Subsidy Work Experience  Placement program.
British Columbia agrees with the importance  of providing wage subsidy supports. This is evidenced by the extensive  collaboration that has been undertaken with WorkBC service providers to  identify, reduce and remove barriers to providing wage subsidy and work  experience supports, including streamlining application processes and reducing  administrative burden.
Between  2012 and 2013 (the launch year of Employment Program of British Columbia) and  2016 to 2017, the number of clients per year participating in wage subsidy  placements grew by approximately 70%.
Consideration should be given to enhancing  the capacity of service providers to access and produce, when needed, relevant  labour market information.
British Columbia is fully supportive of this  notion. Steps taken to address the need for labour market information include:
Production  of an internal Monthly Management Report, which provides timely Employment Program  of British Columbia data as well as an overview on the provincial labour  market.
The  WorkBC website provides dynamic information on employment services, training,  the British  Columbia economy, the labour market outlook, jobs in demand, industry  and regional level information and more
.
Local WorkBC Employment Services  Centre service providers are uniquely  positioned to obtain community-specific information. As such, they are required  to develop and share with the Ministry,  an Annual Community and Employer Partnership Plan that details local  community labour market needs, responses to labour market changes, community  and employer activities to address labour market needs, and strategies employed  to meet the needs of designated groups in the community.
The  Ministry presents labour market and program information at the Corporate  Program Advisory Committee meeting that includes representation from all  service providers and ministry staff.
Consideration should be given to examine in  more detail the design and delivery of Self-Employment and whether the  performance indicators for this program are appropriate.
British Columbia continues to monitor the  self-employment program. British Columbia’s experience has been that the program can be  administratively complex and requires significant expertise by service providers.
The uptake for self-employment services has  increased marginally due to efforts undertaken by the Ministry and service  providers to build the knowledge needed to effectively deliver complex  self-employment services and appropriately measure performance. On average,  uptake of the service has grown approximately 6% annually over the last three  fiscal years. While self-employment clients nevertheless remain a relatively  small contingent of Employment Program of British Columbia, the impact of self-employment  and drivers of its success continue to be evaluated.
Consideration should be given to examine  the design and delivery of Job Creation Partnerships in order to better  understand how this program operates.
Since the launch of Employment Program of British Columbia  in 2012, the Province has entered into 209 Job Creation Partnership agreements  with almost 1,000 individuals participating. A process was undertaken to  identify efficiencies in the delivery of this program and was able to reduce  application processing times by more than half, thus increasing the overall  number of projects being approved.  The  Ministry will continue to assess the Job Creation Partnerships program and its  efficacy.
Improvements in data collection are  recommended to address key program and policy questions of interest to the  federal and provincial/territorial governments. Specifically:
Collect  data on whether participants are members of designated groups including  Indigenous peoples, persons with disabilities and recent immigrants.
Collect  data on the type of training funded under Training Services and the type of  assistance provided under Employment Assistance Services. British Columbia,  ESDC and other provinces and territories should work together to define common  categories for both EBSMs.
In principle, British Columbia has agreed to  endorse the Performance Measurement Strategy that will be associated with the  renewed labour market transfer agreements. With the implementation of the new  Performance Measurement Strategy, detailed performance indicator information  identifies data collection methodologies, frequency of reporting, data sources  and data elements for all programs and services as well as participant and  employer indicators under the amended LMDA.
1.   Introduction
Employment  and Social Development Canada (ESDC) worked jointly with British Columbia and  11 other Provinces and Territories (P/Ts) to undertake the 2012 to 2017 second  cycle for the Labour Market Development Agreement (LMDA) evaluations. The first  cycle of LMDA evaluation was carried out between 1998 and 2012 and involved the  conduct of bilateral formative and summative evaluations in all P/Ts. Under the  second cycle, the evaluation work consisted of conducting two to three studies  per year on the Employment Benefits and Support Measures (EBSMs) similar  programming delivered under these agreements. The studies generated evaluation  evidence on the effectiveness, efficiency and design/delivery of EBSMs for  Canada, British Columbia and for the 11 other P/Ts that opted for a joint  evaluation process with the Government of Canada.
This report presents a summary  of the findings from the studies conducted for British Columbia and it is  organised as follows:
Introduction with an overview of the studies  summarized in this report including their scope and methodology, and contextual  information on the LMDAs
Finding section with a discussion around the  rationale for investing in labour market programming and a summary of evaluation  evidence
Comparison of key findings by program type
Conclusions and lessons learned
Recommendations that emerge from the evaluation  findings and areas for future investigation
1.1 Labour Market  Development Agreement background
LMDAs are bilateral agreements between Canada and each P/T  and were established under Part II of the 1996 Employment Insurance (EI) Act.  As part of these agreements, Canada transfers $2.14B annually in EI Part II  funding to P/Ts in order to design and deliver programs and services to assist  individuals to prepare for, obtain and maintain employment. Specifically,  British Columbia receives approximately $280M in EBSM funding each year.
The Canada-British Columbia LMDA was signed on February 9,  2009. The agreement transferred responsibility for the design and delivery of  programs and services to British Columbia. Programs and services are classified  under two categories: 1) Employment Benefits and 2) Support Measures.
Employment Benefits
Employment Benefits funded  under the LMDA are offered to unemployed individuals who 1) are actively on EI  (in other words, active claimants); 2) ended their benefit period within three  years before participating (in other words, former claimants); or 3)  established a claim for maternity or parental benefits within the past five  years and are returning to the labour force for the first time (in other words,  former claimants)
.  Employment Benefits include the following  categories:
Skills  Development (Training Services, including apprenticeship)
helps  participants obtain employment skills by giving them financial assistance that  enables them to select, arrange and pay for classroom training.
Targeted  Wage Subsidies (Wage Subsidy Work Experience Placement)
helps participants obtain  on-the-job work experience by providing employers with financial assistance to  help with the wages of participants.
Self-Employment
provides  financial assistance and business planning advice to EI-eligible participants  to help them start their own business. This financial assistance is intended to  cover personal living expenses and other expenses during the initial stages of  the business.
Job Creation Partnerships
provides  participants with opportunities to gain work experience that will lead to  ongoing employment. Employment opportunities are provided by projects that  contribute to developing the community and the local economy.
Targeted Earnings Supplements
encourages  unemployed persons to accept employment by offering them financial incentives.  This program was not offered in British Columbia and therefore not covered by  the evaluation.
Support measures
Support Measures are  available to all unemployed individuals including those not eligible to receive  EI and include:
Employment Assistance  Services
such  as individual counselling, action planning, help with job search skills,  job-finding clubs, job placement services, the provision of labour market  information, case management and follow-up.
Labour Market Partnerships
provides  funding to help employers, employee and employer associations, and communities  improve their capacity to deal with human resource requirements and implement  labour force adjustments. These partnerships involve developing plans and  strategies, and implementing labour force adjustment measures. This support  measure was not covered by the evaluation.
Research and Innovation
supports activities that  identify better ways of helping people prepare for or keep employment and be  productive participants in the labour force. Funds are provided to eligible  recipients to enable them to carry out demonstration projects and research for  this purpose. This support measure was not covered by the evaluation.
In British  Columbia, EBSM-similar programming funded under the LMDA as well as all other  employment and labour market services funded under other federal or provincial  initiatives were amalgamated in April 2012 and are now delivered through one  program called the Employment Program of British Columbia.
Table 1 provides an overview of the share of funding  allocated to the five programs and services examined under the second cycle for  LMDA evaluation and the average cost per intervention. It is noted that the  average cost per intervention was calculated based on the 2002 to 2005 data from  the EI Monitoring and Assessment Reports. The 2002 to 2005 period corresponds to  the cohort of participants selected for incremental impacts and cost-benefit  analysis in the LMDA evaluation.
Sources: EI  Monitoring and Assessment Reports 2002 to 2003 to 2014 to 2015.
* Note: Labour Market Partnerships and  Research and Innovation (not covered by the evaluation) represented about 7% of  Employment Benefits and Support Measures expenditures in 2014 to 2015.
1.2  Methodology
This  section presents key aspects of the quantitative analyses carried out as part  of the LMDA studies, while a more detailed description of the methodology is  provided in
Appendix A
.
All  quantitative analyses were based on administrative data from the EI Part I (EI  claim data) and Part II (EBSM participation data collected by British Columbia  and transferred to ESDC) databanks, linked to T1 and T4 taxation files from the  Canada Revenue Agency. Incremental impact analyses and the cost-benefit  analyses were based on up to 100% of participants in the reference period  selected.
Incremental impacts  analysis
Four  studies assessed program effectiveness by estimating incremental impacts from  EBSM participation on participants’ labour market experience (such as
earnings from employment/self-employment
,
incidence of employment
,
use of EI
or
social  assistance
and
dependence  on income support
) after participation. The role of the incremental  impact analysis is to isolate the effects of participation from other factors  such as the economic cycle. In order to achieve this, the incremental impact  analyses compared the labour market experience of participants before and after  their participation with that of non-participants (see the example of  incremental impact calculation in Figure 1).
The matching of participants  and comparison group members used up to 75 socio-demographic and labour market  variables observed over five years before participation. Two different comparison groups were used to  measure impacts for active and former EI claimants. For active claimants, the  incremental impacts were measured relative to a comparison group of active claimants  who were eligible to participate in EBSMs but did not during the reference  period.
Former  claimants can be underemployed and unable to requalify for EI, out of the  labour force for various reasons or on social assistance. Based on previous  evaluation methodologies, on expert advice and given the difficulty in  generating a suitable comparison for former claimants using administrative data  alone, the comparison group for former claimants was created using individuals  who participated in Employment Assistance Services only during the reference  period. This is a conservative approach given the fact that participation in  Employment Assistance Services can lead to limited effects on labour  market outcomes. In other words, the  experience of former claimants who received Employment Benefits (Training  Services, Wage Subsidy Work Experience Placement, Self-Employment or Job  Creation Partnerships) was compared to the experience of former claimants who  received low intensity employment services (Employment Assistance Services  only). Due to this difference in measurement, incremental impacts estimated for  active claimant participants should not be directly compared to those of former  claimant participants
.
Figure 1. Example of incremental impact calculation Factors accounted for in the cost-benefit analysis
Text description of Figure 1
Program efficiency was assessed through a cost-benefit  analysis which compared the cost of participating in the program for the  participants and the cost of delivering the program for the government to the  benefits generated by the program. Overall, these analyses provided insight on  the extent to which the program is efficient for society (that is, for both the  participants and the government). The costs and benefits accounted for in the  calculations were as follows (see detailed definitions in
Appendix A
):
Program cost: includes program and administration  costs paid by the government
Marginal social costs of public funds: represent  the loss incurred by society when raising additional revenues such as taxes to  fund government programs
Employment earnings: consist of incremental  impacts on participants’ earnings during and after participation. The  calculation accounts for the participant’s foregone earnings during  participation (in other words, opportunity cost). Employment earnings were also  increased by 15% to account for fringe benefits such as employer-paid health,  life insurance and pension contributions
Factors accounted for in the cost-benefit analysis
One of the key strengths of the studies is that all  quantitative analyses were based on administrative data rather than survey  responses. Compared to survey data, administrative data are not subject to recall  errors or response bias.
The propensity score models used to match participants and  non-participants for the incremental impact analyses are judged to be robust in  part because they were based on five years of pre-participation data and on a  vast array of variables including socio-demographic characteristics, location,  skills level related to last occupation and indicators of labour market  attachment. Sensitivity analysis and the use of alternative estimation methods  have increased confidence in the incremental impact estimates. However, one limitation with the propensity score  matching technique is that one cannot be fully certain that the impacts were  not influenced by factors not captured in the data.
The cost-benefit analysis accounted for all quantifiable  costs and benefits that are directly attributable to the EBSMs and that could  be estimated with the available administrative data. The analyses did not  account for non-quantifiable benefits such as improvements in participant’s  wellbeing or for the multiplier effect of increased spending on the economy.
It should be noted that it is not possible to produce an  analysis of the incremental impacts of Apprentices program participation.  Assessing these impacts poses a methodological challenge because program  participants are already employed and are expected to return to their  employment after completing their training. Therefore, expected labour market  impacts cannot be examined using a similar approach as for other EBSMs, which  are expected to help participants return to employment. As well, the data  available does not permit the identification of a proper comparison group since  program participants alternate between work and training and no other potential  counterfactuals have similar employment and training patterns. In this context,  it is possible to provide an analysis of labour market outcomes associated with  program participants but not possible to produce estimates of program  effectiveness. While outcomes can provide some insights about the labour market  experience of participants before and after participation, it is not possible  to attribute the change observed in the outcomes to program participation. For  example, a change in average annual earnings from before to after participation  could be due to program participation or to other factors such as the maturation  effect of youth, the economic cycle, lay off, etc.
When interpreting qualitative findings, readers should keep  in mind that these are based on the perception of a small number of key  informants who are directly involved in the design or delivery of the program.  Their perception may be representative of their own region or community but not  necessarily of the entire province. Since the number of key informants  interviewed in each study is small (ranging between 8 and 11), the number of  informants who reported a specific finding is not indicated in the report.  However, the report notes when there was a clear disagreement between key  informants.
1.3  Overview of the studies summarized in this  report
Findings  presented in this report were drawn from nine separate studies produced  on British Columbia LMDA interventions and participants. These studies examined issues related to program  effectiveness, efficiency, design/delivery and used a mix of qualitative and  quantitative methods. Each study examined evaluation issues in relation to  active and former EI claimants.
Table H1
in
Appendix H
presents an overview of these studies, including the type  of evidence generated, the methods used, the reference period and the length of  the post-program period over which program effects were observed.
2. Evaluation findings
2.1  Rationale  and labour market context
Active  labour market programs aim to help unemployed or underemployed individuals find  and maintain employment. These programs are fairly similar across Organization  for Economic Co-operation and Development countries and consist of skills  training in a classroom setting, work experience with employers (often  subsidized) or in the public/non-profit sector, return-to-employment assistance  and self-employment assistance. EBSM programs and services that are  offered to active and former EI claimants are considered active labour market  programs and are primarily funded under the LMDA.
In British Columbia, the Ministry of Social Development and  Social Innovation is responsible for the design and delivery of the employment  programs and services designed to assist British Columbia residents to achieve  employment as quickly as possible, and to become more independent. As of April  2, 2012, all employment and labour market services were amalgamated and  delivered through one Program called the Employment Program of British  Columbia.
The labour market outlook for the province  forecasts 934,000 job openings by the year 2025
. Most of these jobs will  require high levels of education and occupational skill – over one-third will  require some level of university degree, and even more positions (42%) will  require diploma certificates or trades apprenticeship training. Along with this  skill-biased technological change, British Columbia also faces an aging  workforce that will leave a gap of experience and skills in the labour market  in the coming decades. Of the nearly one million forecasted job openings over  the next ten years, the replacement of retired workers (and deaths) counts for  over two-thirds. Clearly, increasingly higher levels of educational attainment  and occupational skill are becoming imperative to meaningful participation in  the current and future labour market.
The Ministry of Social Development and Social Innovation  identifies four key labour market priorities which support the government’s  commitment to strengthening British Columbia’s labour market by “delivering  responsive programs and services [that] better align skills training with local  labour market needs and priorities.”
The priorities for 2015 to 2016  included:
Investing in training to better align British  Columbians with sustainable job opportunities and to meet employer demands
Continual development of strategies to engage  all British Columbians, including underrepresented groups
Continue partnering with local communities and  organizations to further develop and increase community-based partnerships  across the province
Continue enhancing Employment Program of British  Columbia’s services and supports through improvement of research and  innovation, measurement, and reporting capabilities
The incremental impacts  reported in the LMDA evaluation and discussed in this report demonstrate that,  in general, LMDA-funded programs and services delivered in British Columbia are  improving participants’ labour market experience following participation and  contributing to meet the key labour market priorities of the Ministry of Social  Development and Social Innovation.
2.2 Training  Services
2.2.1 Program  description
Based on a document  review and 11 key informant interviews completed in summer 2015
In  British Columbia, Training Services provide services and supports to assist  eligible participants to access a range of different types of training. The specific training must have a strong likelihood of supporting the  participant to achieve sustainable employment. Supports provided under the  program cover the following expenses:
Living supports
Tuition
Transportation/commuting
Books and supplies
Dependent/childcare
Living away from home allowance
Employment-related disability  supports
Other incidental training-related  costs and fees
The duration of these supports is for a maximum of 3  years. However, the  average duration of the training is generally 2 years. The financial supports  are available only during the training program.
Training  supported under the program includes Basic and Essential Training (including  English as a Second Language and Academic Upgrading) and Occupational Skills  Training (demand-driven training leading to certification).
All  training supported under the program must be part of a defined curriculum and:
Lead  to a certificate, diploma or degree. Participation in a degree-granting program  is only permitted in exceptional circumstances.
Be  delivered by either a public training institute or a private training institute  that meets requirements of the Private Career Training Institutions Act (or is  exempt from meeting these requirements).
2.2.2 Program delivery
Based on a document  review and 11 key informant interviews completed in summer 2015
To begin the Training  Services application process, caseworkers meet with unemployed individuals  seeking assistance and explain what programs and services are available to  assist the individual. The individual may also apply online and access program  supports and services without being case-managed.
Case-managed  individuals and their caseworkers develop a return-to-work-action-plan with  goals that match the individual’s interest and the needs of employers.  The return-to-work-action-plan may include a  recommendation to attend training if there is a gap between existing skills and  the needs of the labour market.
The  caseworker examines the individual’s skills level and work experience by  conducting various assessments such as a needs assessment, employment-readiness  and career-planning assessment and a psychological-educational assessment. The  caseworker provides labour market information and support for the labour market  research component of the application process.   For example, the case worker provides information on training  institutions, employers, and occupations as well as student loans. The  caseworker measures eligibility based on a participant’s need and suitability,  labour market and occupation research, financial feasibility, training course,  institution suitability and other program requirements.
The  prospective participant conducts research to ensure that the training will meet  their employment needs and objectives, help achieve labour market  self-sufficiency and better prepare them for labour market participation. The  prospective participant is normally responsible for identifying their own  training needs and developing skills for the labour market themselves.
The  caseworker confirms the participant’s EI eligibility through the British  Columbia Ministry of Social Development and Social Innovation and conducts a  financial assessment to determine the various types and levels of supports  available to the participant. The caseworker and the participant negotiate the  amount of financial support and develop an agreement outlining the exact amount  of financial support, each party’s responsibilities and monitoring  requirements.
2.2.3 Targeting to labour market demand
Based on a document  review and 11 key informant interviews completed in summer 2015
Program  participants conduct labour market research as part of the application process to ensure a direct link between their requested training and  in-demand occupations.  The caseworker  assesses the individual’s skill levels and work experience, as well as the  local labour market demand, as part of the case management process.
2.2.4  Profile  of Training Services participants
Socio-demographic characteristics
As shown in
Table B1
in
Appendix B
, active claimants who started their  Training Services intervention between 2002 to 2005 or 2007 to 2008 were mainly  female (53% and 62% respectively), with the majority of participants between 25  and 44 years old (60% and 58% respectively). Participants in both cohorts most  frequently occupied jobs requiring secondary school or occupational training in  the year before starting participation (41% and 40% respectively).
Former claimants who started program participation either  between 2002 to 2005 or 2007 to 2008 were also mainly female (55% and 66%  respectively) and most participants were aged 25 to 44 years old (65% and 64%  respectively).  Participants most  frequently occupied jobs in the year before participation that required  secondary school or occupational training (42% and 40% respectively).
Barriers faced by participants
Based on a document  review and 11 key informant interviews completed in summer 2015
Key informants were asked to identify the main barriers to employment or  to accessing and completing training faced by Training Services participants.  The most commonly-identified barriers were:
Funding for tuition is capped at $7,500, which can be a barrier when the  overall cost of the tuition is more expensive or when the participant has  family responsibilities
Lack of training opportunities in local communities
Individuals with poor financial planning skills may face financial  challenges while in training.
Long-tenured workers often lack the formal certification required by  employers
Having a disability and being unable to perform work duties
2.2.5 Incremental impacts
Active claimants
As shown in
Table B2
in Appendix B, active claimants who started their  Training Services participation between 2002 and 2005 had incremental gains in  earnings and incidence of employment in each of the five years after  participation. As shown in Figure 2, these gains in earnings increased  continuously over time and ranged from $1,042 in the first year after  participation to $5,213 in the fifth year. Similarly, increases in annual  incidence of employment ranged between 4.0 and 5.5 percentage points over the  five years after participation.
Gains in employment earnings and incidence of employment were accompanied  by decreases in the use of EI (cumulative of $921) and social assistance  (cumulative of $234), and in the level of dependence on government income  support over the five years following participation.
Active claimants who started their Training Services intervention between  2007 and 2008 also had incremental gains in earnings and incidence of  employment in each of the three years after participation. Participants also  decreased their use of EI and social assistance, as well as their dependence on  income support, in each of the three post-program years.
Overall, active claimants  increased their labour market attachment through increases in earnings,  incidence of employment and decreases in the level of dependence on government  income support (use of EI and social assistance).
Figure 2. Increased earnings of active and former Training Services participants relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure 2
Results for  sub-groups of active claimants were as follows:
Youth (Under 30 years old) who started their  Training Services participation in the 2002 to 2005 period had incremental  gains in earnings and incidence of employment, as well as decreased social  assistance use and overall dependence on income support, in all five years  after participation. EI use also decreased in the short-term (first and second  years post-program) for these participants.
Older workers (55 years old and over) who began  their intervention in the 2002 to 2005 period also had incremental gains in  earnings and incidence of employment in all post-program years. The amount of  EI benefits claimed by these participants increased over the latter  post-program years (third, fourth, and fifth year). Most results for social  assistance use and dependence on income support were non-statistically  significant.
Long-tenured workers who started program  participation between 2007 and 2009 had incremental gains in earnings in the  second and third years after participation, as well as gains in incidence of  employment in all years post-program. They also reduced their annual number of  weeks spent on EI and their overall level of dependence on income support in  the first two years after participation.
Former claimants
Former claimants  who started participation in Training Services between 2002 and 2005 had  incremental gains in earnings and incidence of employment in all five years  after participation Gains in earnings ranged between $2,052 in the first year  after participation to $5,229 in the fifth year (Figure 2). As well,  participants had gains in their incidence of employment that ranged between 3.5  and 4.7 percentage points over the five year post-program period (see
Table B3
in
Appendix B
). Former claimants also  decreased their use of social assistance in all years post-program by a  cumulative $923, as well as reduced their dependence on income support over  most years following program participation.
While EI use by  these former claimants decreased in the first year after participation, it then  increased over the remaining post-program years (by annual averages ranging  from $175 to $249), indicating the inability by some to maintain the employment  that they secured in the short term. It can also be argued that an increase  in EI use is an indication of increased labour market attachment for this  client group since they did experience increases in employment earnings and  incidence of employment as well as a decrease in the use of social assistance.  As a reminder, former claimants are participants for whom the EI benefit period  ended up to three years pre-participation.
Former claimants  who started their training services intervention in 2007 or 2008 followed  similar trends with respect to gains in earnings and incidence of employment  and decreases in social assistance use and dependence on income support over  all post-program years. Like the 2002 to 2005 participants, these former  claimants had short-term decreases in EI use.
Results for  sub-groups of former claimants were as follows:
Youth who started their Training Services  participation between 2002 and 2005 had gains in earnings in all five years  post-program, as well as gains in incidence of employment over most of the  post-program period. They also decreased their use of social assistance in all  post-program years and their dependence on income support over most  post-program years. Results for EI use were mixed with increases, decreases and  non-statistically-significant estimates.
Incremental impacts for long-tenured workers who  started their program participation in the 2007 to 2009 period were  non-statistically significant for the entire three years post-participation.
Incremental impacts for older workers were not produced as the number of  participants was too small.
2.2.6 Cost-benefit results
From the social perspective, the benefits of Training  Services for active claimants would need to be maintained over 6.7 years after  participation in order to match the costs of the program (see
Table  B4
in Appendix B).
For former claimants, the benefits of Training Services  recovered the costs of the program 4.8 years after participation. Six years  after participation, the benefits exceeded the costs by $5,230.
2.2.7  Challenges  and lessons learned about Training Services design and delivery
Based on a document  review and 11 key informant interviews completed in summer 2015
Key  informant interviews with managers and caseworkers identified the following  challenges related to the design and delivery of Training Services:
There  is an uneven level of experience among caseworkers. Some are less familiar with  the program and require more time and expertise to understand the nuances of  the program. The Ministry has been conducting meetings, conferences and training  to support caseworkers
Geographic  location, remoteness and the availability of training institutions have direct  impacts on service delivery in rural and remote areas and pose challenges to  caseworkers
The  limits on the financial supports are perceived to be too low
Some  participants may be overwhelmed by the paperwork associated with the  application process. As well, the monitoring requirements may be cumbersome for  some participants
Key  informants also identified a number of lessons learned:
It  is important to have adequate labour market information about occupations in  demand in the labour market
Ensure  caseworkers are familiar with the program, aware of current labour market  information, and are fully engaged to support participants
Develop  and maintain a close relationship between caseworkers and financial support  contacts to facilitate adjustments to the level of the financial assistance  needed by participants if their situation changes
Have  a well-structured yet simple and flexible application process with specific  forms and steps to ensure participants’ commitment to the program
Provide  career planning as part of the Training Services application process to avoid  having the participant lose interest after beginning their training. Offering financial  planning during the application process is helpful as well
Minimize  the frequency of changes made to the program (for example, monitoring  requirements, data collection, administrative procedures, etc.)
Promote  successes from the program as part of an outreach strategy
Provide  flexibility regarding the type of training institutions (public, private,  accredited and non-accredited) that can be supported in rural and remote areas  where access to training and training options are limited
Key informants provided a variety of suggestions that could  help program participants to access or complete their training. The suggestions  included:
Increasing  the level of various financial supports (for example, transportation, tuition,  etc.) and extend the duration of living expenses to cover the job search period  following completion of training
Providing  caseworkers with the flexibility to adjust the level of support based on the participants’  needs
Providing  online courses and ensuring adequate access to the internet in rural  communities.
Supporting  relocation costs to increase access to training for individuals living in rural  and remote areas
2.3 Apprentices Program
2.3.1 Program  description
Based on a document review and 10 key informant  interviews completed in summer 2015
In British Columbia, the Apprentices program is a form of  post-secondary education that combines paid work-based training with technical  training in a classroom setting (that is, block release training). If eligible,  apprentices may apply for financial supports during their block release  training.
The objective of the Apprentices program is to assist  eligible individuals to complete the classroom/technical component of their  apprenticeship trade to achieve journeyman status. These services are also  intended to assist individuals who do not have a sponsor (or may have lost  their employer sponsorship due to lay-off) to access case management services  to help them establish an employer relationship. This service supports  individuals in improving their employment readiness by developing skills for  occupations that provide sustainable employment.
To be eligible to receive  Apprentices program support, individuals must meet all of the following  criteria:
Active or former EI claimants
Registered with the Industry Training Authority
Approved for block training
Sponsored by an employer, trade association or a  training provider
The program provides financial  assistance to apprentices to help them offset the costs they incur while they  are released from employment to attend in-class technical training. The level  of financial support is determined according to provincial guidelines. It  covers the following expenses:
Transportation/travel
Childcare and/or dependent care
Living-away-from-home allowance
Living allowance, which can be used to top-up  benefits for active EI claimants or to replace EI benefits once they are  exhausted (also provided to former claimants)
Disability-related costs
2.3.2 Program delivery
Based on a document  review and 10 key informant interviews completed in summer 2015
The responsibilities for the delivery of the Apprentices  program are divided between different entities:
Financial assistance for apprentices during  their block training is administered through the British Columbia Ministry of  Jobs, Tourism and Skills Training. The Ministry verifies EI eligibility and  approves applications for apprenticeship training.
The Industry Training Authority provides  services to apprentices such as registration, exam coordination, assessment and  certification. It also ensures the application process is streamlined and  supports are available while apprentices are in training. The Industry Training  Authority issues credentials and sets program standards for apprenticeships in  British Columbia.
Service providers offer information to  apprentices at local training facilities in the community regarding available  program supports.
Apprentices can be either case managed or non-case managed.  The delivery process is different for each group.
Case managed  apprentices
: Case managed apprentices are generally unemployed. Service  providers work with the individuals to assess their needs to ensure that  apprentice training is appropriate. Case managed apprentices conduct labour  market research, informational interviews, prepare justifications and consider  the likelihood of obtaining employment at the end of the training. Service  providers also process the apprenticeship application for case managed  apprentices. These applicants do not apply through the online portal. According  to key informants, the number of case managed apprentices is very small.
Non-case managed  apprentices
: These apprentices are employed and they apply for apprentice  training and supports online. The applicants who have been approved to receive  EI Part I benefits by Service Canada must apply for apprentice supports online  at least 4 weeks prior to the course start date.
2.3.3 Profile of Apprentices participants
Socio-demographic  characteristics
As shown in
Table C1
in
Appendix C
, the vast majority of active claimants who  started their Apprentices program participation in 2003 to 2005 or 2013 to 2014  were male (96% and 92% respectively). Those who started the program between  2003 and 2005 were younger on average, with 50% of participants under 25 years  old compared to 18% of the 2013 to 2014 cohort. Over half (58%) of 2013 to 2014  participants were between 25 and 34 years of age, compared to 37% for the 2003  to 2005 participants. Before participation in the Apprentices program, most  participants in both cohorts (86% and 89% respectively) had occupations that  required college or apprenticeship training.
The vast majority of former claimants who started  Apprentices program participation either in 2003 to 2005 or 2013 to 2014 were  male (92% and 90% respectively). Those who started between 2003 and 2005 were  slightly younger than the 2013 to 2014 cohort, with 81% of 2003 to 2005  participants aged 34 or younger compared to 73% of 2013 to 2014 participants.  Before starting the program, former claimants in both cohorts most frequently  had a job requiring college or apprenticeship training, though the proportion  was much higher for 2013 to 2014 participants (64%) than 2003 to 2005  participants (39%). In contrast, 33% of the 2003 to 2005 cohort had an  occupation with secondary or occupational training as the highest level of  required skill compared to 14% of 2013 to 2014 participants.
2.3.4 Labour market outcomes
Tables
C2
and
C3
in
Appendix C
present the labour market outcomes  for active and former EI claimants who started their Apprentices participation  during the 2003 to 2005 period.
Active claimants
As shown in Figure 3, average annual earnings of active  claimant program participants increased steadily from $15,006 in the fifth year  pre-program to $54,823 in the seventh year after the program start year. While  the proportion of participants employed declined in the years following program  participation, it remained above 90% in all seven years after the program start  year. The average proportion of participants on EI steadily decreased in the  years after program participation to 20% by the seventh year after  the program start year. The proportion of participants reporting  self-employment activities increased during the post-program period, while the  proportions depending on social assistance and income supports overall was  lower on average during the post-program period.
Figure 3. Average earnings for active claimant participants in Apprentices (in current dollars)
Text description of Figure 3
Former claimants
Average annual earnings for former claimant program  participants (shown in Figure 4) increased from $17,115 in the fifth year  pre-program to $44,771 in the seventh year after the program start year. As  with active claimants, the proportion of employed former claimant participants  declined in the seven years after program participation but remained above 90%.  The proportion of participants in receipt of EI benefits increased over the  first two years after the program start year (from 44% to 65%) but then declined  to 36% by the seventh year after participation. The proportion of former  claimant participants reporting self-employment activities was also higher  during the post-program period, and the proportion on social assistance lower.  The level of dependence on income support for former claimants was similar  before participation (ranging between 8% and 13%) and after participation  (ranging between 7% and 13%).
Figure 4. Average earnings for former claimant participants in Apprentices (in current dollars)
Text description of Figure 4
2.3.5 Challenges and lessons learned about  Apprentices design and delivery
Based on a document  review and 10 key informant interviews completed in summer 2015
Existing literature has shown that there is a fairly high  non-completion rate among apprentices in Canada (40 to 50%)
. Furthermore, literature  revealed that despite the growth in apprenticeship registrations in Canada,  there has not been a corresponding increase in completions
. While program data do not  provide reliable information on completion and non-completion rates of  participants, most key informants interviewed in the evaluation noted a  high non-completion rate among apprentices in British Columbia and identified  reasons that could lead them to drop-out from the apprenticeship process. These  responses included (each mentioned by 8 key informants or less):
EI rates may not be sufficient for apprentices  during training. Apprentices may experience a substantial drop in wages which  is exacerbated when EI cheques are delayed
There is lack of awareness and confusion  regarding the program.  Apprentices and  employers do not know what supports are available or where they must go to  apply for the program
Apprentices may not have the necessary essential  skills to perform the required work. They may require greater supports and  resources as trades are becoming more complex and sophisticated with computers,  and therefore a higher level of skills is needed now as compared to in the past
Apprentices experience difficulty finding the  time to return to school to complete their training.
Some training requires the apprentice to  relocate to another community and this may be challenging for them (especially  for those from rural locations)
Tuition is not an eligible cost and this is a  challenge for many apprentices
Due to changes in the economy, some apprentices  may switch jobs temporarily and this may impact their ability to complete their  apprenticeship. As well, some apprentices are taking other employment opportunities  outside of their trade
Because of the strict apprentice-journeyman  ratios, there are not enough journeymen to supervise the apprentices
Key informants also identified challenges with the design  and delivery of the Apprentices program. They spoke about a lack of open  communication between the training institutions and Industry Training Authority  about apprenticeships and their block training sessions. They also pointed to a  lack of assistance for staff required to assist non-case managed apprentices  and to provide applicants with information regarding the types of available  supports on a regular basis.
The following lessons learned  and good practices were reported by key informants that may help British  Columbia apprentices complete their training and obtain their certification:
Having service providers engaged with training  institutions helps to increase awareness of up-coming training sessions and the  availability of seats
Expanding the program application tool to mobile  phones and providing additional assistance when required to complete the application
Conducting information sessions at the beginning  of the application process. This can help to lower the number of inquiries  received from non-case managed apprentices and to reduce the burden on case  managers
Encouraging case managed apprentices to conduct  informational interviews with employers to determine the best trade to meet  their needs
2.4 Wage Subsidy Work Experience Placement
2.4.1 Program  description
Based on a document  review and 8 key informant interviews completed in summer 2015
The Wage Subsidy Work Experience Placement program provides  a wage subsidy to eligible employers as an incentive for them to hire and  provide work experience and skills enhancement to EI-eligible participants  identified as needing work experience.
The duration of the wage subsidy ranges from 12 to 24 weeks,  with the average level of subsidy generally covering 50% of the employee’s  wage. For a person with disabilities or facing multiple barriers to employment,  the duration can be up to a maximum of 78 weeks. In addition to the wage  subsidy, additional employment-related costs can be funded. These costs  included transportation/travel, dependent care, work clothing and/or supplies,  and employment-related disability costs. The rate or amount of the subsidy is  negotiated on a case-by-case basis.
All  key informants interviewed indicated that employers are generally hiring  individuals that they would not have otherwise hired without the help of the  program. According to three key informants, 75% of participants or higher  remain employed with their wage subsidized employer after participation.
2.4.2 Program delivery
Based on a document  review and 8 key informant interviews completed in summer 2015
In British Columbia, the Wage  Subsidy Work Experience Placement program is delivered through service  providers. Case managers meet directly with the active or former EI claimant  and the employer to assess eligibility. As explained by key informants, the  application process is driven relatively equally by participants and employers:
The  employer-driven application process occurs when an employer contacts a  caseworker about the wage subsidy program. Employers apply and submit  descriptions of the positions they need to fill in their organization.  The employers have to confirm that the  position would lead to permanent employment, and that they would not hire  anyone for these positions without the subsidy.   Employers are provided a letter confirming that they can refer employees  to the service provider for assessment. Potential candidates meet with the  service provider for an assessment to determine eligibility and fit.
Conversely,  the participant-driven application process is initiated by an active or former  EI claimant.  The individual contacts a  case manager and undergoes a needs assessment. The assessment identifies  barriers that the participant may have and determines whether the program is a  good fit for them. If it is found to be a good fit, the participant is provided  with a self-marketing letter to encourage employers to hire them.
Some service providers also deliver a short course about the  program and provide strategies to the participant for discussing the program  with employers. Once the participant finds a suitable employer, the case  manager conducts an eligibility assessment for the employer to ensure that the  position will likely lead to a permanent job. Also, the employer completes an  application form which includes a job description, orientation and training  plan suitable for the participant’s needs and circumstances.
Regardless of who initiate the process, a training plan is  developed for the participant. A wage subsidy agreement is then implemented.  The service providers have final approval of the wage subsidy  applications.  According to key  informants, on average, the application process can be completed in one week  depending on how quickly the employers and participants assemble the required  information.
2.4.3 Profile  of Wage Subsidy Work Experience Placement participants
Socio-demographic characteristics
As shown in
Table D1
in
Appendix D
, active claimants who started program  participation between 2002 and 2005 were more often male (54%) while more  females participated during the 2007 to 2008 period (56%). The majority of  participants in the 2002 to 2005 cohort were between 25 and 44 years old (58%),  while the 2007 to 2008 participants were more evenly distributed between the  25-34 (26%), 35-44 (26%) and 45-54 (27%) age groups. Participants in both cohorts  most frequently held occupations that required secondary or occupational  training prior to their program participation (39% and 40% respectively).
Former claimants who participated in the program between  2002 and 2005 were again more often male (56%), while those who started in 2007  to 2008 were more often female (59%). The majority of both cohorts was composed  of individuals aged 25 to 44 (62% and 59% respectively). Participants in both  groups most frequently held jobs that required secondary or occupational  training prior to program participation (39% and 38% respectively).
2.4.4 Incremental impacts
Detailed incremental impact results for active and former  claimants are presented in Tables
D2
and
D3
in Appendix D.
Active claimants
Active claimants who started participation in the Wage  Subsidy Work Experience Placement program between 2002 and 2005 had incremental  gains in earnings and incidence of employment in each of the five years after participation.  Annual gains in earnings ranged between $2,233 and $4,320 (see Figure 5), while  gains in incidence of employment ranged from 5.1 to 6.3 percentage points  annually. Participants decreased the use of EI and social assistance by a  cumulative of $465 and $ 441 respectively. Most results for the impact on the  level of dependence on income support were non-statistically significant,  except for an increase of 1.3 percentage points in the fifth year post-program.
Figure 5. Increased earnings of active and former Wage Subsidy Work Experience Placement participants relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure 5
Active claimants who started program participation in 2007  or 2008 experienced similar gains in earnings and incidence of employment over  all post-program years. Results pertaining to EI and social assistance use and  the level of dependence on income support were non-statistically significant.
Overall, active  claimants improved their labour market attachment through increases in earnings  and incidence of employment, and decreases in the use of EI and social  assistance.
Results for sub-groups showed  the following:
Youth (under 30 years old) who started  participation in the program between 2002 and 2005 had incremental gains in  earnings in all five years after participation. As well, their incidence of  employment increased in the first two post-program years. Results for other  indicators were non-statistically significant
Older workers (55 years old and over) who  participated in 2002 and 2005 had incremental gains in earnings and incidence of  employment in all post-program years. All other results were non-statistically  significant
Long-tenured workers who started participation  between 2007 and 2009 experienced gains in earnings and incidence of employment  in each of the three years after participation. Like other sub-groups, most  other incremental impacts were non-statistically significant
Former claimants
As shown in Figure 5, former claimants who started program  participation between 2002 and 2005 had incremental gains in annual earnings  (ranging between $2,482 and $2,799) and incremental gains in annual incidence  of employment (ranging between 4.3 and 5.9 percentage points) over the five  years after participation. These participants reduced their use of social assistance  in all post-program years, while results for the dependence on income support  were generally non-statistically significant. Former claimants had incremental  increases in EI use in the first three years following participation (ranging  between $163 and $371 annually), which may reflect an inability by some to  maintain the employment secured during or after the subsidy. When interpreting these results, readers should  keep in mind that participants collect insurable hours under EI while working  in the subsidized job. This may allow them to start claiming EI if they are not  able to maintain their subsidized job.
Former claimants who started their wage subsidy intervention  in 2007 or 2008 also had incremental gains in their earnings and incidence of  employment over the three post-program years. Like 2002 to 2005 participants,  these former claimants increased their EI use and decreased their social  assistance use over most of the post-program period. Results for dependence on  income support were non-statistically significant.
Overall, former claimants increased their use of EI  following participation. This indicates the inability of some former claimants  to maintain the employment secured in the short-term. It can also be argued  that the increase in EI use is an indication of increase labour market  attachment for this client group since they did experience increases in  employment earnings and incidence of employment as well as a decrease in the  use of social assistance. As a reminder, former claimants are participants for  whom the EI benefit period ended up to three years pre-participation.
Results for sub-groups of former  claimants were as follows:
Youth who started program participation in the  2002 to 2005 period had incremental gains in earnings in the first, fourth, and  fifth years after participation. In the first year after participation, they  also had a gain in incidence of employment, increased EI use, and decreased  social assistance use (in the first and second year). The remainder of the  results were non-statistically significant.
Long-tenured workers who started participation  between 2007 and 2009 had incremental gains in earnings in all post-program  years as well as a gain in the incidence of employment in the first year after  participation. These participants also had increased EI use and dependence on  income support in the first year post-program. Results for other years, and  social assistance use, were non-statistically significant.
Impacts for older workers were not produced as the  number of participants was too small.
2.4.5 Cost-benefit  results
From the social perspective, the benefits of Wage Subsidy  Work Experience Placement for active claimants matched the costs of the program  3.2 years after participation (see
Table D4
). Six years  after participation, the benefits exceeded the costs by $10,802.
The benefits of Wage Subsidy Work Experience Placement for  former claimants matched the costs within the first year after participation.  By six years post-program, the benefits exceeded the cost by $14,891.
2.4.6 Challenges  and lessons learned about Wage Subsidy Work Experience Placement design and  delivery
Based on a document  review and 8 key informant interviews completed in summer 2015
Despite being effective at  improving the labour market experience of participants, there has been a steady  decline in the use of  the Wage Subsidy Work Experience Placement program in recent years. In British  Columbia, the number of new interventions decreased from 3,541 in 2003 to 2004  to 1,295 in 2014 to 2015.
Key informants identified the  following potential factors influencing the decline in use of the program:
Inexperienced  service providers
Administrative  burdens on the employers
Lack  of awareness about the program
Key  informants further reiterated that these factors pose challenges with respect  to program design and delivery. They also highlighted a number of lessons  learned related to the design and delivery of the Wage Subsidy Work Experience  Placement program:
Engaging  with the community and employers through outreach efforts helps market the  program
Matching  participants’ skills and employers’ needs enhances the retention of  participants with employers
Ensuring  clear and comprehensive communications with employers regarding administrative  requirements at the beginning of the process is helpful
2.5 Self-Employment
2.5.1 Program description and delivery
Self-Employment  helps individuals create jobs for themselves by starting a business or  otherwise becoming self-employed. It provides financial assistance and business  planning advice to EI eligible participants to help them start their own  business. This financial assistance is intended to cover personal living  expenses and other expenses during the initial stages of the business.
2.5.2 Profile  of Self-Employment participants
Socio-demographic characteristics
As shown in
Table E1
in
Appendix E
, active claimants who started  participation in the Self-Employment program  were nearly evenly split between males and females in the 2002 to 2005 cohort  (51% and 48% respectively) and more likely to be female (60%) in the 2007 to 2008  cohort. Participants in the 2002 to 2005 cohort were relatively concentrated  within the 35 to 44 age group (35%), while 2007 to 2008 participants were more  evenly distributed between the 25 to 34 (30%), 35 to 44 (28%), and 45 to 54 (27%) age groups. Participants in both cohorts  most frequently had occupations that required college or apprenticeship  training prior to participation (36% and 39% respectively), though a notable  proportion of participants held a job that required either secondary or  occupational training as well (30% and 28% respectively).
Former claimants who participated in Self-Employment in  either 2002 to 2005 or 2007 to 2008 were more often female (56% and 69%  respectively). Participants in the 2002 to 2005 cohort were relatively  concentrated within the 35 to 44 age group (35%), while 33% of the 2007 to 2008  participants were between 25 and 34 years old. Prior to participation, former  claimants in both the 2002 to 2005 and 2007 to 2008 cohorts most frequently  held jobs that required either secondary or occupational training (33% and 34%)  or college or apprenticeship training (30% and 31%).
2.5.3 Challenges  in measuring Self-Employment incremental impacts
Like other EBSMs, incremental impacts were estimated for  active and former claimants who participated in Self-Employment in the  2002 to 2005 and 2007 to 2008 periods. Results showed large decreases in  employment/self-employment earnings and decreases in the incidence of  employment. As well, compared to similar non-participants, program participants  decreased their use of EI and social assistance and reduced their dependence on  government income support.
Detailed estimates are presented in Tables
E2
and
E3
in Appendix E. However, they are not discussed in  the report since they may not  provide an accurate depiction of the financial well-being of participants in  the post-program period. Impacts were examined using individual earnings  reported in the T1 and T4 taxation files from the Canada Revenue Agency, and  measured relative to active claimants who did not participate and may have been  in any employment or unemployment situation following participation (for  example, unemployed, paid employee or self-employed).
According to a  study from Statistics Canada, self-employed individuals in Canada have a lower  average annual income than paid employees ($46,200 versus $52,400 in 2009), but  the average net worth of their households is 2.7 times greater than that of the  paid employee households, which indicates that some self-employed individuals  may leave funds within their business for reinvestment purposes.
Overall, this suggests that looking at individual earnings alone, without  taking the net worth into consideration, may not provide a fair assessment of  how well Self-Employment participants are doing financially after  participation.
As well, little is known about the design  and delivery of this program. In particular, there is a lack of understanding  around the role played by this program in helping future entrepreneurs  implement viable business plans and develop their entrepreneurship skills.  Overall, it is not clear whether a participant’s success in  improving their labour market attachment through self-employment is more  closely associated with their business idea and their entrepreneurship skills  or the assistance provided under the Self-Employment program.
2.6 Job  Creation Partnerships
2.6.1 Program description
Based on information  from British Columbia’s Ministry of Social Development and Social Innovation  “Work BC” website
Job Creation Partnerships provides funding to organizations  to assist with local projects (that would normally not take place without  project funding) that provide meaningful work experience and skill enhancement  opportunities to unemployed EI-eligible clients to help them obtain sustainable  employment. By providing a work experience opportunity, Job Creation  Partnership projects will maintain or enhance the participant’s employability  skills – particularly if the job seeker has been unemployed for a long period  of time. This work experience, coupled with the networking opportunity that  exists while on such a project, increases the participant’s chances of  successfully finding sustainable employment.
While projects should benefit the job seeker, community and  the local economy, the emphasis of any project must be on a quality work  experience for the participant. Program funding cannot be used to supplement an  organization’s core funding (or create a funding dependency) or replace an  organization’s staff and/or volunteers, nor can it result in an unfair  competitive advantage for a for-profit employer. The project activities must be  finite, incremental and distinct (not part of day-to-day operations), and they  must be not-for-profit.
2.6.2  Program delivery
Based on information  from British Columbia’s Ministry of Social Development and Social Innovation  “Work BC” website
Job Creation Partnership projects  may last up to one year, the duration of which is negotiated between the  organization and the Ministry. Organizations may be reimbursed for  project-specific overhead costs that were incurred, including (but not limited  to): materials and supplies, rental of equipment, orientation costs,  administrative wages and capital costs, and other eligible expenses negotiated  with program officials. Partnership funding from the applicant organization is  required, and it is expected that the applicant or other partners will  substantially contribute to project costs.
The following organizations are  eligible to apply for program funding:
Businesses  (meeting specific criteria)
Non-Profit  Organizations
Crown  Corporations
Municipalities,  Agencies, or Territorial Governments
Band/Tribal  Councils
Public  Health and Educational Institutions
Stakeholder partnerships are a  necessary component of a successful project. As such, Job Creation Partnerships  projects require support from the community and evidence of community  consultation must be provided as part of the assessment process.
Eligible participants will be  referred to a project by their local WorkBC Employment Services Centre and  receive eligible financial (that is, living) supports from that service  provider. These centres are responsible for screening and referring clients, as  well as case management of clients.
2.6.3 Profile of Job Creation Partnerships  participants
Socio-demographic characteristics
As shown in
Table F1
in
Appendix F
, active claimants who participated in Job  Creation Partnerships between 2002 and 2005 were closely split between males  and females (46% and 53% respectively) while those who started in 2007 or 2008  were mainly female (66%). The majority of participants in the 2002-2005 cohort  were between 25 and 44 years old (58%), while 2007 to 2008 participants were  more evenly distributed between the 25 to 34 (26%), 35 to 44 (27%) and 45 to 54  (27%) age groups. Participants in both cohorts most frequently held jobs that  required either secondary or occupational training (35% and 32% respectively)  or college or apprenticeship training (29% and 33% respectively) prior to  participation.
Former claimants who started program participation in  2002 and 2005 were mainly male (60%) while those in the 2007 to 2008 cohort were  more closely split between males and females (52% and 48% respectively). The  2007 to 2008 participants were generally older, with the majority (57%) falling  into the 35 to 44 age group compared to the 2002 to 2005 cohort were 59% of  participants were between 25 and 34 years old. Before participation, former  claimants in both the 2002 to 2005 and 2007 to 2008 cohorts most frequently had  an occupation that required secondary school or occupational training (33% and  35% respectively).
2.6.4 Incremental impacts
Active claimants
Shown in
Table F2
in Appendix F, active claimants who  participated in the Job Creation Partnerships program between 2002 and 2005 had  incremental gains in earnings in the third ($2,715), fourth ($2,983) and fifth  year ($2,639) post-program (see Figure 6). They also experienced an increase in  incidence of employment in the first year after participation (5.3 percentage  points), while estimates for the remaining years were non-statistically  significant at the 95% level or above. These increases in earnings and  incidence of employment were accompanied by increased EI use over most of the  post-program period by amounts ranging between $354 and $652 annually. This  indicates the inability of some active claimants to maintain the employment  secured in the short-term following program participation. All results for  social assistance use and most results for dependence on income support were  non-statistically significant.
Figure 6. Increased earnings of active and former Job Creation Partnerships participants relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure 6
* The estimates are not statistically significant at the 95%  confidence level.
Active claimants who started Job Creation Partnerships  interventions in 2007 or 2008, as well as sub-groups of active claimants, could  not be examined since the number of participants was too small to produce  reliable estimates.
Former claimants
Most incremental impact results for former claimants who  started Job Creation Partnerships participation between 2002 and 2005 were  non-statistically significant. Additionally, results could not be produced for  those who started participation in 2007 or 2008, nor for sub-groups of former  claimants, because the number of participants was too small to permit reliable  statistical analysis. In this context, it is not possible to draw any  conclusion about the effectiveness of Job Creation Partnerships for former  claimants during these two periods.
2.6.5 Cost-benefit results
From the social perspective, the benefits of Job Creation  Partnerships for active claimants would need to persist for 23.6 years after  participation in order to match the costs. For former claimants, the benefits  may never recover the costs. When interpreting these results, however, readers  should acknowledge that program funding helps develop the community and the local economy and that none of  these benefits are accounted for in the calculations since they are difficult  to quantify.
2.7 Employment  Assistances Services
2.7.1 Program  description
Based on a document  review and 10 key informant interviews completed in summer 2013
Employment Assistance Services programing includes  self-serve and case management services.
Self-Serve  Services include:
Awareness and  navigation support to clients on available employment resources, supports and  services
Financial support for  eligible non-case managed individuals
Staffed self-serve  resource areas, including employment resource materials and assistance in job  search
Information on job  opportunities and vacancies
Directory of community  based services
Labour market  information to job seekers and employers
Self-serve assessment  tools (career planning and employability assessments)
Job search and  employment focussed workshops (including topics such as jobs search techniques,  cover letters, resume writing, self-marketing, networking, interview  techniques)
Service providers are required to help the individual  understand how to access the self-serve services as independently as possible.
Case Management involves the services required to assess individual needs,  determine employment objectives, and provide employment supports and services  towards outcomes. The service providers offer case management for eligible,  unemployed individuals when it is determined that he/she is unlikely to achieve  employment independently using self-serve services.
Case management activities  include:
Awareness and  navigation support such as completing applications, identifying funding and  training options, and confirming eligibility for supports, and navigation to  other community services or programs
Formal Needs  Assessment to determine the individual’s employment readiness and other unique  characteristics, situational factors or practical considerations that may  impact employability
Multi-dimensional  needs assessment as a first step in the Formal Needs Assessment and other  assessments as required
Determine individual  need and eligibility for financial supports to support participation
Develop and revise a  mutually agreed to return-to-work action plan
Support the  participant in accessing services identified as needed in the return-to-work  action plan
Manage the  participant’s file, provide support and monitor/track progress
Follow-up service  after the individual has achieved labour market attachment to determine need  for additional services and supports
Specialized assessments are also provided to: help clarify  the individual’s employment-related capabilities, strengths, and needs;  identify supports and goals; and identify considerations that may affect career  choice, skills development methods, and employability. All specialized  assessments provide employment-related information that supports an informed  understanding of the individual employment readiness and employment service  needs.
Service providers offer specialized assessments to  individuals only where it is identified as necessary through the Formal Needs  Assessment. They may provide specialized assessments directly (when the service  provider has a qualified assessor) or they may purchase a specialized  assessment from another service provider. Some examples of specialized  assessments include neurological psychological vocational assessment, vocational  psychological assessment, functional capacity assessment, learning disability  assessment and ergonomic assessment.
2.7.2 Program delivery
Based on a document  review and 10 key informant interviews completed in summer 2013
The Employment Assistance Services program  delivers an integrated system of employment services and supports by:
Building a network of 85 Employment Services  Centres operated by 73 service providers.
Providing services to all eligible participants,  including Specialized Populations
through every Employment  Services Centre across the province.
Providing an information management and  technology system that supports integrated service delivery.
Service providers deliver the program through an Employment  Services Centre within their catchment area. All catchments have at least one  storefront location that is accessible to the public. Where there is sufficient  demand, there may be more than one storefront per catchment area.
Service providers provide  alternative means to access the Employment Services Centre for Specialized  Populations as appropriate for that catchment area. This may include any  combination of the following channels:
Satellite offices
: a physical office that is  separate from the Storefront and offers a sub-set of the services delivered in  the Storefront
Itinerant (mobile) services
: delivery of services on a  regularly scheduled basis at a community location with ease of access for the  individuals (for example, community centre)
Outreach services
: bringing services to individuals  at a location other than the Employment Services Centre location
Remote access services
: delivery of services  remotely through online, telephone channels, or other innovative means
2.7.3 Profile of Employment Assistance Services  participants
Socio-demographic characteristics
The following profile presents the main socio-demographic  characteristics of active and former claimants who participated exclusively in  Employment Assistance Services without participating in any other Employment  Benefits programs.
As shown in
Table G1
in
Appendix G
, active claimants who participated  exclusively in Employment Assistance Services between 2002 and 2005 were almost  evenly split between male and female (50% and 49% respectively) while those who  started in the 2007 to 2008 period were mainly female (61%). The majority of  participants who started their intervention between 2002 and 2005 were between  25 and 44 years old (56%), while the 2007 to 2008 participants were slightly more  distributed between the 25 to 34 (24%), 35 to 44 (26%), and 45 to 54 (26%) age  groups. Before participation, active claimants in both cohorts most frequently  had an occupation that required secondary school or occupational training (40%  and 39% respectively).
Former claimants who participated only in Employment Assistance  Services during the 2002 to 2005 period were also closely split between male  (52%) and female (47%) participants, while a greater proportion of the 2007 to 2008  participants were female (58%). While the majority of participants in both the  2002 to 2005 and 2007 to 2008 cohorts were between 25 and 44 years old (59% and  54% respectively), the more recent cohort was slightly older on average with  35% of participants aged 45 and over (compared to 30% of the 2002 to 2005  cohort). Participants in both cohorts most frequently had jobs that required  secondary school or occupational training before participation (40% each).
Labour market barriers faced by Employment Assistance Services participants
Based on a document  review and 10 key informant interviews completed in summer 2013
According to key  informants, the main labour market barriers experienced by individuals who  access Employment Assistance Services in British Columbia are:
Low  skills levels (literacy and essential skills)
Lack  of transferable skills/outdated skills (particularly for long-tenured workers)
Lack  of job searching skills and poor interviewing skills
Lack  of job maintenance skills
Lack  of work experience
Lack  of employment opportunities in general, especially in rural areas
Competitive  labour market or lower and non-competitive wages in some areas
Seasonal  employment
Criminal  records and addictions
Mental  health issues and having a disability
Transportation
Childcare
Lack  of self-confidence, poor personal management skills and poor communication  skills
Immigrants face challenges with the recognition for their  credentials and previous work experience. They often take a ‘survival’ job that  does not match their credentials
2.7.4 Incremental impacts
Incremental impacts were produced only for active claimants,  since former claimants who participated only in Employment Assistance Services  were used as a comparison group for former claimants who participated in other  EBSMs.
Results presented in
Table G2
indicate  that active claimants who participated exclusively in Employment  Assistance Services  between 2002 and  2005 had incremental gains in incidence of employment over all five years after  program participation, ranging between 1.3 and 2.5 percentage points annually  (see Figure 7). Participants also reduced their use of EI in all post-program  years by a cumulative of $1,284 or 3.8 weeks. Use of social assistance  increased slightly in all post-program years (ranging between $37 and $78 per  year) while overall dependence on income support decreased in all years after  participation (ranging between 0.1 and 1.2 percentage points annually).
Figure 7. Incidence of employment for active claimant participants in Employment Assistance Services
Text description of Figure 7
Participants had an incremental reduction in their  employment earnings in the first year after participation (-$1,176), though  this was followed by incremental gains in the fourth ($643) and fifth years  ($927) post-program. To contextualise these results, it should be noted that Employment Assistance Services are  short-term, low intensity measures that are not focused on human capital  development. It mostly includes services such as counselling, help with job  search, development of return-to-work action plans and (in some cases) very  short training such as First Aid. In this context, it may not be reasonable to  expect that participating only in Employment. Assistance  Services would result in improved participant earnings. Rather, the results for  incidence of employment and EI use suggest that active claimants are returning  into employment after participation.
Active claimants  who participated exclusively in Employment Assistance Services in 2007 or 2008  followed similar trends with respect to incremental gains in incidence of  employment and decreases in EI use and dependence on income supports, as well  as slightly increased social assistance use. Like the 2002 to 2005 cohort,  these active claimants also had an incremental decrease in earnings in the  first post-program year but increases in the following (second and third)  post-program years.
Results for  sub-groups of active claimants who participated exclusively in Employment  Assistance Services were as follows:
Youth (under 30 years old) who  participated between 2002 and 2005 had incremental gains in their incidence of  employment in all years after participation, as well as incremental gains in  earnings in most post-program years. They also reduced their use of EI and  dependence on income support in the short-term (first three years) following  program participation.
Older workers (55 years old and over) who  participated in Employment Assistance Services between 2002 and 2005 also had  incremental gains in earnings starting in the second post-program year  (following a first-year decrease) and gains in their incidence of employment in  all years after program participation. Their use of EI decreased in the  short-term (first and second years) and increased in the fifth year following  participation, while their dependence on income support showed a decrease in  the second year, but then increased in the following three years post-program.
Long-tenured workers who participated  between 2007 and 2009 had gains in incidence of employment and reductions in EI  use in all post-program years. They also had an incremental decrease in  earnings in the first year after participation but an increase in the third  year. As well, their dependence on income support decreased in every  post-program year.
Earlier  participation in Employment Assistance Services improves participants’ labour  market outcomes
The  study on the effects related to the timing of participation showed that the  incremental impacts of program participation on earnings and employment were  larger for individuals who participated in Employment Assistance Services early  during their EI claim compared to non-participants and to individuals who  remained on EI for longer periods before receiving these services (see Figure 8  below and
Table  G3
in  Appendix G). Specifically, individuals who started their participation within  four weeks following the start of their EI benefit period had a cumulative gain  in earnings of $11,993 over the five post-program years. These early starters  also experienced annual gains in their incidence of employment that ranged between 1.2  and 2.1 percentage points over the first four years after participation.
Participants  who received Employment Assistance Services between 5 to 8 and 9 to 12 weeks  after the start of their EI claim also had gains in earnings totalling $7,596  and $5,145 respectively over the post-program period.   Participants who started Employment  Assistance Services interventions in the 2nd, 3rd and 4th  quarters of their EI benefit period had non-statistically significant  cumulative increases/decreases in their employment earnings.
Figure 8. Cumulative incremental impacts on earnings related to the timing of participation in Employment Assistance Services
Text description of Figure 8
* The  estimates are not statistically significant at the 95% confidence level.
The  study also looked at the difference between the number of EI weeks unused by  participants and their comparison group to determine the effect of the timing  of participation in Employment Assistance Services on the return to employment.  It was found that those who received assistance within the first four weeks of  their claim returned to employment earlier than the comparison group –  specifically, 3.5 weeks earlier (see
Table G4
in Appendix G). Participants  who started Employment Assistance Services between 5 and 8 weeks from the start  of their EI benefit period returned to employment 0.2 week sooner than the  comparison group.  Participants who  started receiving assistance in the 9th week or after returned to  employment later than the comparison group.
Among  all participants in the 2002 to 2005 period, 13,380 received assistance within  the first 4 weeks of establishing an EI claim. With an average weekly EI  benefit of $317 during this period, the 13,380 participants did not use $14,845,110  in EI benefits (13,380 * $317 * 3.5 weeks). The average cost of delivering  Employment Assistance Services during the 2002-2005 period was $841. This  represents a cost of $11,252,580 (13,380* $841) for a net savings of $3,592,530  in EI benefits.
2.7.5 Cost-benefit  results
From the social perspective, the benefits of Employment  Assistance Services for active claimants would need to persist over 9.4 years  in order to recover the costs of the program (as shown in
Table  G5
in Appendix G). This result is partly due to the decreases in earnings  experienced by active claimants during and immediately after participation. The  main expected benefit from Employment Assistance Services is the return to  employment by itself and not necessarily improvements in earnings that may  follow, as Employment Assistance Services alone do not focus on skills  acquisition.
Incremental impact analyses showed that Employment  Assistance Services are achieving this objective since it increased participants’  incidence of employment and decreased their EI use after participation. The  value of the return to employment was not accounted for in this analysis since  it is difficult to attribute a dollar figure to this impact. The decrease in EI  use was also not considered from the social perspective because it represents a  benefit for the government and a cost to the individual – they cancel each  other out
2.7.6 Challenges  and lessons learned about Employment Assistance Services design and delivery
Based on a document  review and 10 key informant interviews completed in summer 2013
Key informants  indicated that service providers are expected to use labour market information  to support program delivery. In particular, they are expected to:
Have  labour market information products available in the staffed self-serve resource  area
Be  aware of labour market conditions and trends within the local community, and  throughout the provincial and national labour markets
Be  responsible for ensuring that participants understand how to find and use  labour market information for job searching, as well as in employment, training  and career decision making
Provide  access to labour market information to employers in order to assist them in  hiring, training and retraining workers, and in developing human resource  strategies
While the expectation on service providers is  that their provision of labour market information be detailed and  comprehensive, they mentioned that available information is limited. In  particular, they explained that information on government websites can sometime be outdated.  As well, labour market information is not available at the rural level and is  limited at the local level.
Service  providers interviewed also identified a number of challenges with respect to  the delivery and targeting of Employment Assistance Services:
There is a need to raise awareness of the program  among EI and income support claimants
There  is an administrative burden associated with the new data collection system. As  well, the requirement for bi-weekly follow-up with participants is seen as a  burden
Available  funding does not allow for the provision of one-on-one support in the  self-service area. As well, not all service providers can afford a specialist  for the specialized groups that they are mandated to serve
Eligibility  requirements are seen as being strict
Some  service providers cover a large rural area and this poses some challenges, such  as having to drive long distances in order to meet with participants
There  are regions with no cell phone and internet services
Participants with multiple barriers to  employment often require multiple referrals. Service providers are generally  unable to track participants through multiple referrals and lose touch with  these individuals
Key informants also identified the following best practices and  lessons learned in relation to the design and delivery of the program:
The importance for service providers to be  engaged at the community level and to have strong employer connections
Build  cooperation between case managers across the province, including the creation  of working groups composed of service providers and provincial staff to discuss  ongoing issues
Have  flexibility in program guidelines in order to accommodate the needs of participants  in rural area.
Conduct appropriate needs assessment and provide  career orientation
Group  workshops work well. Organizations are able to reach more people and establish  first connection
Provide more flexibility in financial support,  particularly when a job is found by/for a participant
The importance of providing one point of service  when possible in order to minimize the referral process from one organization  to another
Provide free job posting for employers on the service  providers’ internet site
The  importance of networking with community organizations including other service  providers and particularly those dealing with persons with disabilities and  mental health issues
Adopt a cooperative approach for service delivery  by working closely with other service providers
Have  adequate staff capable of providing the various required services
Additional lessons learned and best practices with respect to helping participants with multiple barriers to employment  were identified by key informants, including:
Provide participants with a comfortable  environment and focus on building their self-esteem
Provide one-on-one support with a holistic and  flexible service approach
Provide participants with employability skills,  life skills and help with how to deal with change
Provide specialized workshops and unpaid work  experience
Conduct appropriate needs assessment and provide  career orientation
Help participants in dealing with addictions
Develop an action plan with a long-term  perspective
Have contracts in place for specialized  participant groups in British Columbia, considering the fact that they are  generally faced with unique challenges.   It is important to provide one point of service and to minimize the  referral process of participants from one organization to another.  As well, making appropriate referrals for  participants is critical
Have dedicated team members for assisting  participants with multiple barriers to employment that are capable of building  a relationship of trust with these participants
3. Comparison  of key findings by program type
This section provides an  overview of the key findings from the incremental impact analysis for Training  Services, Wage Subsidy Work Experience Placement, Job Creation Partnerships and  Employment Assistance Services for both active and former EI claimant  participants who started participation in the 2002 to 2005 period.
Overall, incremental impacts demonstrate that LMDA programs  and services are improving the labour market attachment of participants,  including youth and older workers. As well, social benefits of participation  exceeded the cost of investments for most interventions over time. Finally,  providing Employment Assistance Services interventions earlier during an EI  claim (first four weeks) produced larger impacts on earnings and employment and  facilitated earlier return to work. This demonstrates the importance of  targeting early participation of EI active claimants.
Program participants have a higher probability of being employed than  comparison group members
As shown in Figure 9, active  EI claimants who participated in Training Services, Wage Subsidy Work  Experience Placement, Job Creation Partnerships and Employment Assistance  Services had higher probability of being employed (that is, increased their  incidence of employment) compared to similar non-participants. As well, former  EI claimants who participated in Training Services and Wage Subsidy Work  Experience Placement had a higher probability of being employed compared to  former EI claimants who received low intensity interventions under Employment  Assistance Services.
Figure 9. Change in probability of being employed in participants relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure 9
* The estimates in Figure 9 are arithmetic averages. The  estimates for active and former claimants who participated in Job Creation  Partnerships are based on five estimates with different statistical  significance levels. For active claimants, one estimate is statistically  significant at the 95% confidence level, three estimates are statistically  significant at the 90% confidence level and one estimate is non-statistically  significant. For former claimants, one estimate is statistically significant at  the 90% level and four estimates are non-statistically significant.
Increased earnings  for participants compared to comparison group members
As shown in Figure 10, active EI claimants who participated  in Training Services, Wage Subsidy Work Experience Placement and Job Creation  Partnerships increased their employment earnings compared to similar  non-participants. Former EI claimants who participated in Training Services,  Wage Subsidy Work Experience Placement and Job Creation Partnerships also  increased their employment earnings compared to former EI claimants who  received Employment Assistance Services exclusively.
Employment Assistance Services are relatively modest  activities and, by themselves, are not expected to lead to substantial effects  on labour market outcomes.  In other  words, these services aim to support the return to work of unemployed  participants and not necessarily to secure a better paying job than  pre-participation. However, as demonstrated in the report, providing Employment  Assistance Services earlier during the EI claim (first 4 weeks) generates  significantly greater returns (see
Figure 8
in
sub-section 2.7.4
).
Figure 10. Increased cumulative earnings of participants relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure 10
* The estimates are not statistically significant at the 95%  confidence level.
LMDA are also improving the probability of  employment and the earnings of youth and active claimant older worker  participants
Incremental impacts demonstrate that active EI claimants who  were youth and older workers, and who participated in Training Services, Wage  Subsidy Work Experience Placement and Employment Assistance Services increased  the probability of being employed compared to comparison group members. Youth  who participated in Wage Subsidy Work Experience program experienced gains in  incidence of employment in the first two years post-program. Older worker  participants who were active claimants experienced consistently higher impact  on the incidence of employment than active claimant youth participants.
As depicted in Figures 11 and 12, incremental impacts also  demonstrate that active claimant youth and older workers who participated in  Training Services, Wage Subsidy Work Experience Placement and Employment  Assistance Services increased their employment earnings compared to comparison  group members. In particular, participation  in Training Services and Wage Subsidy Work Experience Placement each yielded  strong earnings gains for both youth and older worker active claimant  participants.
Former claimants who were youth and who participated in  Training Services and Wage Subsidy Work Experience Placement also had increased  earnings (see Figure 11).
Figure 11. Cumulative increase in employment earnings for youth participants relative to non-participants youth
Text description of Figure 11
Figure 12. Cumulative increase in employment earnings for older workers participants relative to non-participants older workers
Text description of Figure 12
The use of EI is  reduced for most active claimants. While EI use increased for former claimants,  it can be argued that this reflects an increase in labour market attachment  since the incremental impacts on employment earnings and incidence of  employment are positive and given the decrease in the use of social assistance  for most former claimants.
As shown in Figure 13, active EI  claimants who participated in Training Services, Wage Subsidy Work Experience  Placement and Employment Assistance Services decreased their use of EI compared  to similar non-participants. Active claimants who participated in Job Creation  Partnerships increased EI use but they represent nearly 1% of total active claimants’  participants in 2002 to 2005. Active claimants decreased their use of social  assistance benefits with the exception of participants in Job Creation  Partnerships (non-statistically significant) and Employment Assistance Services  (who experienced an increase in social assistance use after participation). As  previously stated, the relatively modest activities provided under Employment  Assistance Services are not expected to lead to substantial effects on  participants’ labour market outcomes.
Figure 13. Change in the cumulative use of Employment Insurance and social assistance for active claimants relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure 13
* The estimate is not statistically significant at the 95%  confidence level.
As shown in Figure 14, former  claimants who participated in Training Services and Wage Subsidy Work  Experience Placement between 2002 and 2005 increased their use of EI following  program participation. This indicates the inability of some former claimants to  maintain the employment secured in the short-term. Again, it can also be argued  that the increase in EI use is an indication of increase labour market  attachment for this client group since they did experience increases in  employment earnings and incidence of employment as well as a decrease in the  use of social assistance. As a reminder, former claimants are participants for  whom the EI benefit period ended up to three years pre-participation.
Figure 14. Change in the cumulative use of Employment Insurance and social assistance for former claimants relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure 14
* The estimates are not statistically significant at the 95%  confidence level.
Social benefits of  participation exceeded costs of investments for most interventions.
As shown in Table 2, social benefits to participation  exceeded investment costs in a period ranging from less than a year after  program participation to about 10 years after participation for most  interventions. This excludes those active and former claimants who participated  in Job Creation Partnerships, for whom the investment costs are not likely to  be recouped before 23.6 years for active claimants, and may never be recouped  for former claimants. However, this group represented only 0.2% of new EBSM  interventions in 2014 to 2015. As well, when interpreting these results the reader  should acknowledge that program funding helps develop the community and the  local economy, and that none of these benefits are accounted for in the  calculations since they are difficult to quantify.
4. Conclusion
The evaluation evidence presented  and discussed in this report demonstrates that programs and services designed  and delivered by British Columbia under the LMDA are generally helping participants  to improve their labour market experience after participation. As such,  evaluation evidence suggests that LMDA-funded programming contributes to  achieving British Columbia’s strategic priorities.
Overall,  incremental impacts demonstrate that LMDA programs and services are improving  the labour market attachment of active and former EI claimant participants,  including youth and older workers who were active claimant participants. As  well, social benefits of participation exceeded the cost of investments for all  examined interventions over time. Finally, providing Employment Assistance  Services interventions earlier during an EI claim (first four weeks) produced  larger impacts on earnings and employment and facilitated earlier return to  work. This demonstrates the importance of targeting early participation of EI  active claimants.
Key  informants interviews with service providers and program managers, as well as  the documents reviewed and the questionnaires filled by British Columbia  representatives, also revealed specific challenges and lessons learned about  program design and delivery. Key challenges are highlighted below.
Training Services
Key informants confirmed that Training Services participants  are conducting labour market research as part of the application process to  ensure a direct link between their requested training and in-demand  occupations. This may contribute to program effectiveness.
According to service providers and managers interviewed as  part of the evaluation, the main challenges and lessons learned about Training  Services design and delivery included:
An uneven level of experience among caseworkers  requiring more time and expertise to understand the nuances of the program
The remoteness and more-limited availability of  training institutions in rural and remote areas poses challenges to caseworkers
The limits on the financial supports are  perceived as being too low
The paperwork associated with the program’s  application process can be overwhelming for some participants
Apprentices
Existing literature showed that there is a fairly high  non-completion rate among apprentices in Canada (40-50%)
.  Furthermore, literature revealed that despite the growth in apprenticeship  registrations in Canada, there has not been a corresponding increase in  completions
.  While program data does not provide reliable information on completion and  non-completion rates of participants, key informants interviewed in the  evaluation noted a high non-completion rate among apprentices in British  Columbia and identified reasons that could lead them to drop out of the  apprenticeship process. These included:
EI benefits payments may not be sufficient for  apprentices while in training
Apprentices and employers do not know what  supports are available or where they must go to apply for the program
Apprentices may not have the necessary essential  skills to perform the required work. They may require greater supports and  resources as trades are becoming more complex and sophisticated
It can be difficult for apprentices to find the  time to return to school to complete their training
Some training requires the apprentice to  relocate to another community and this may be challenging for them
Tuition is not an eligible cost and this is a  challenge for many apprentices
Due to changes in the economy, some apprentices  may switch jobs temporarily. This may impact their ability to complete their  apprenticeship. As well, some apprentices are taking other employment opportunities  outside of their trade
Because of the strict apprentice-journeyman  ratios, there are not enough journeymen to supervise the apprentices
Wage Subsidy Work Experience Placement
Key informants confirmed that participation in the Wage  Subsidy program can be driven by either unemployed individuals or employers  looking to fill a new position, and that the subsidized employers are generally  hiring those they would not have otherwise hired without the help of the  program.
While evaluation results have demonstrated the effectiveness  of the Wage Subsidy Work Experience Placement program, its use has been falling  in recent years. According to the EI Monitoring and Assessment Reports, the  number of new program interventions decreased from 3,541 to 1,295 between 2003  to 2004 and 2014 to 2015. Key informants identified the following possible  factors influencing this decline:
Inexperienced service providers
Administrative/reporting burdens on the  employers
Lack of awareness about the program
Employment Assistance Services
Key informants indicated that service providers are expected  to use labour market information to support program delivery. However,  they also mentioned that available labour market information is  limited. They explained that information  on government websites can sometimes be outdated. As well, labour market  information is not  available at the rural level and is limited at the local level.
According to key informants, other challenges with respect  to the delivery and targeting of Employment Assistance Services included:
Lack of awareness of the program among EI and  income support claimants
Administrative burden associated with the new  data collection system and bi-weekly follow-up with participants
Available funding does not allow for the  provision of one-on-one support in the self-service area. As well, not all  service providers can afford a specialist for the specialized groups they are  mandated to serve
Eligibility requirements are seen as being  strict
Some service providers cover a large rural area  and this poses some challenges.  In some  cases, staff need to drive for two hours in order to meet with participants
Participants with multiple barriers to  employment often require multiple referrals.   Service providers are generally unable to track participants through  multiple referrals and lose touch with these individuals
5. Recommendations
A total of six recommendations emerged from the evaluation findings.  They are as follows:
The study on the timing of Employment Assistance Services  participation showed that receiving assistance early after starting an  Employment Insurance claim can lead to better labour market impacts. However,  key informants reported a lack of awareness about the program.
Recommendation 1:
Consideration should be given to providing British Columbia with timely access  to data on new EI recipients for supporting targeting and increasing awareness.
Incremental impact results showed improvements in  participants’ earnings and employment for the Wage Subsidy Work Experience  Placement program although its use has been declining in recent years. According to key  informants, the decline may be related to factors such as a lack of awareness  about the program and the administrative burden on employers.
Recommendation 2:
British Columbia should explore ways of removing barriers to employer  participation in the Wage Subsidy Work Experience Placement program.
Key informants interviewed in the evaluation confirmed the  necessity of having labour market information to support the delivery of  Employment Assistance Services. They, however, pointed to the difficulty of  accessing and using labour market information, especially at the local level.
Recommendation 3:
Consideration should be given to enhancing the capacity of service providers to  access and produce, when needed, relevant labour market information.
The evaluation was not able to produce a conclusive  assessment of Self-Employment effectiveness and efficiency since the data used  to assess impacts on earnings may not be the best source of information  available to reflect the financial wellbeing of the participants. As  well, it is not clear whether participants’ success in improving their labour  market attachment through self-employment is more closely associated with their  business idea and their entrepreneurship skills or the assistance provided  under Self-Employment.
Recommendation 4:
Consideration should be given to examining in more detail the design and  delivery of Self-Employment and whether the performance indicators for this  program are appropriate.
Job Creation Partnerships is provided to a small number of  participants and was found to be effective at improving the earnings of active  claimants but it increased their use of EI. The program was not effective for  former claimants. However, the evaluation has not yet examined the design and  delivery of this program. Therefore, a lot remains unknown about how this  program operates and the factors that contribute to its effectiveness.
Recommendation 5:
Consideration should be given to examine the design and delivery of Job  Creation Partnerships in order to better understand how this program operates.
Overall, the LMDA evaluation was able to produce a sound  assessment of EBSM effectiveness and efficiency because the team had access to  rich data on EI claimants, EBSM participation data and Canada Revenue Agency  taxation files. However, some data gaps limited the evaluation’s ability to  assess how EBSMs operate.
Recommendation 6:
Improvements in the data collection process are recommended to address key  program and policy questions of interest to the federal and  provincial/territorial governments. Specifically:
Collect data on whether participants are members  of designated groups including Indigenous peoples, persons with disabilities  and recent immigrants.
Collect data on the type of training funded  under Training Services and the type of assistance provided under Employment  Assistance Services. British Columbia, ESDC and other P/Ts should work together  to define common categories for both EBSMs.
References
Canada Employment Insurance Commission.  Employment Insurance Monitoring and Assessment Reports. 2003 to 2004 to 2013 to  2014.
Coe, Patrick. “Apprenticeship programme  requirements and apprenticeship completion rates in Canada.” Journal of  Vocational Education and Training. 2013. 65(4): 575 to 605
Employment and Social Development Canada.  Study of Apprentices in British Columbia: Technical Report. Evaluation  Directorate. May 19, 2016.
Employment and Social Development Canada.  Cost-Benefit Analysis of Employment Benefits and Support Measures in British  Columbia: Technical Report. Evaluation Directorate. May 20, 2016.
Employment and Social Development Canada.  Study of the Employment Program of
British Columbia (EPBC) Training Services.  Evaluation Directorate. May 6, 2016
Employment and Social Development Canada.  Analysis of Employment Benefits and Support Measures (EBSM) Profile, Outcomes  and Incremental Impacts for the EI Claimant Category: Long-Tenured Workers” in  British Columbia: Technical Report. Evaluation Directorate. March 1, 2016
Employment and Social Development Canada.  Study on Wage Subsidy Work
Experience Placement (WS) in British  Columbia. January 25, 2016.
Employment and Social Development Canada.  Analysis of Employment Benefits and Support Measures (EBSM) Profile, Outcomes  and Incremental Impacts for 2007 to 2008 Participants in British Columbia:  Technical Report. Evaluation Directorate. January 28, 2015
Employment and Social Development Canada.  Analysis of Employment Benefits and Support Measures (EBSM) Profile, Outcomes  and Medium-Term Incremental Impacts for 2002-2005 Participants in British  Columbia: Technical Report. Evaluation Directorate. May, 2014
Employment and Social Development Canada.  Study on Employment Assistance Services: Technical Report for British Columbia.  Evaluation Directorate. November 14, 2014
Employment and Social Development Canada.  Effects of the Timing of Participation in Employment Assistance Services in  British Columbia: Technical Report. Evaluation Directorate. December 5, 2014
Government of British Columbia. 2015 to  2016 Annual Plan for the
Labour Market Development Agreement (LMDA)
Government of British Columbia. Work BC.
British Columbia 2025 Labour Market Outlook
.
Government of British Columbia.
WorkBC webpage
.  February 6, 2017.
Government of Canada.
2016 Speech from the Throne
.
LaRochelle-Côté, Sébastien and Sharanjit  Uppal, "The Financial Well-Being of the Self-Employed,"
Perspectives on Labour and Income, vol. 23,  no. 4, Winter 2011
Red Seal. Apprenticeship Completion,  Certification and Outcomes. Ottawa: Red Seal, 2014.
Acronyms
Appendix A - Methodology
Qualitative data
Qualitative  data reported in the Training Services, Apprentices, Wage Subsidy Work  Experience Placement and Employment Assistance Services studies were collected  from key informant interviews with managers and service providers and a  document/ literature review. As well, questionnaires were completed by  provincial government representatives for the Training Services, Apprentices  and Wage Subsidy Work Experience Placement studies. Table A1 provides the  number of key informants interviewed.
Key  informant interviews for the Employment Assistance Services study were  conducted in 2013 while those for the Training Services, Apprentices and Wage  Subsidy Work Experience Placement studies were conducted in 2015.
Quantitative methods
All  quantitative analyses were conducted using linked administrative data from EI  Part I (EI claim), EI Part II (EBSM participation data) and T1 and T4 taxation  files on up to 100% of participants in British Columbia.
Incremental impacts
The  incremental impact analysis compared the labour market experience of  participants before and after their participation with that of a comparison  group. The goal was to determine the direct effect of program participation on  key labour market indicators (see
Figure 1
in the introduction section).
For active  claimants, incremental impacts were measured relative to a comparison group of  active claimants who could have participated in the EBSMs but did not. Former claimants can be underemployed and  unable to requalify for EI, out of the labour force for various reasons or on  social assistance. Based on previous evaluation methodologies, on expert advice  and given the difficulty in generating a suitable comparison for former  claimants using administrative data alone, the comparison group for former claimants  was created using individuals who participated in low-intensity Employment  Assistance Services only during the reference period. This is a conservative  approach given the fact that participation in Employment Assistance Services  can lead to limited effects on labour market outcomes.
Participants  and non-participants were matched based on a wide array of variables including age, sex, location, skill level required  by the last occupation held prior to participation, reason for separation from  employment, industry in which they were previously employed as well as  employment earnings and use of EI and social assistance for each of the five  years before participation.
All  analyses were conducted using a unit of analysis called the Action Plan  Equivalent, which combines all EBSMs given to an individual within no more than  six months of each other. For reporting purposes, incremental impacts were  attributed to the longest intervention of the Action Plan Equivalent when  Training Services, Wage Subsidy Work Experience Placement, Job Creation  Partnerships or Self-Employment was the longest intervention. Impacts for  Employment Assistance Services were calculated for Action Plan Equivalents that  contained only Employment Assistance Services with no other Employment  Benefits.
The incremental impact estimates were produced using non-experimental methods - namely  propensity score matching using the Kernel Matching method, along with Difference-in-Differences  method to estimate program impacts. Alternative matching techniques  (specifically, Nearest Neighbour and Inverse Propensity Weighting) were also  used for validation purposes.
Incremental impacts were  measured for the following indicators:
Employment/self-employment earnings:
represent the total earnings an individual  had from paid employment and/or self-employment (this information is available  by calendar year and is obtained from T1 and T4 tax return records).
Incidence of employment/self-employment:
represents the incidence of having earnings  from employment and/or self-employment.
Amount  of EI benefits:
represents  the average amount of EI benefits received.
Weeks in receipt of EI benefits:
represents the average number of weeks during  which EI benefits were received.
Social assistance benefits:
represents the average amount of social  assistance benefits received (this information is available by calendar year  and is obtained from T1 tax return records).
Dependence  on income support:
represents the ratio of participants’ income  that came from EI and social assistance benefits (that is, EI benefits + social  assistance benefits / (EI benefits + social assistance benefits + earnings from  employment/self/employment)).
Incremental impacts  were estimated for different cohorts of participants:
All active and all former claimants, as well as  youth (under 30 years old) and older workers (55 years old and over) who  started their EBSM participation between April 1, 2002 and March 31, 2005.
All active and all former claimants who stated  their EBSM participation between January 1, 2007 and March 31, 2008.
Active and former claimants who were  long-tenured workers and who started their EBSM participation between January  1, 2007 and December 31, 2009. The long-tenured workers covered in this  study are individuals who have established an EI regular or fishing benefit  claim, had paid at least 30% of the annual maximum employee EI premiums in  seven of the ten years preceding their EI claim, and who had collected 35 or  fewer weeks of EI regular or fishing benefits in the five years preceding their  claim. This definition is similar to the EI claimant category “long-tenured  workers” introduced under Connecting Canadians with Available Jobs.
Cost-benefit analysis
The cost-benefit analysis compared how much it  cost for individuals to participate in the programs and how much it costs the  government to deliver those programs with the benefits both the participants  and the government drew from those programs. The analysis was carried out from  the societal perspective, which combines the costs and the benefits for both  the participants and government.
Costs and benefits included in the calculations  were as follows:
Program  costs
included the  administration cost and the direct cost of the EBSMs. The cost for each EBSM  was calculated at the Action Plan Equivalent level. The costs were determined  based on the average composition of the Action Plan Equivalent.
The
Marginal  Social Cost of Public Funds
represented the loss incurred by society when raising additional  revenues such as taxes to fund government spending. The  value was estimated as 20%  of the program cost, sales taxes, income taxes, impacts on EI and  impacts on social assistance paid or collected by the government.
Employment earnings
consisted of incremental impacts on  participants’ earnings during and after participation. The calculation accounts  for the participant’s foregone earnings during participation (in other words,  opportunity cost). These are based on incremental impacts for the 2002 to 2005  participants.
Fringe benefits
included benefits such as employer-paid health  and life insurance as well as pension contributions. The rate used to calculate  the fringe benefits was 15% of the incremental impact on earnings.
The  program effects on EI and social assistance use, and the sale and income tax  revenues were not included in the calculations since these costs and benefits  cancel each other out from the social perspective by definition. For example,  while EI and social assistance are benefits received by participants, they  represent a cost for the government. However, as indicated above, these effects  are accounted for in the calculation of the Marginal Social Cost of Public  Funds.
When  producing the results, to bring all costs and benefits to a common base and to  account for inflation and interest on foregone government investment,  the estimates for the second year of participation and up to the sixth year  post-program were discounted by 5% per year.   As well, when the benefits were still lower than the costs six  years after program end, the payback period was calculated by assuming that the  average benefit or cost measured over the fifth and six year post-program would  persist over time (discounted at a 5% annual rate).
Strengths and limitations  from the studies
Overall,  the number of key informants interviewed was relatively small in some  studies.  The key informants’ responses  were representative of their own experience and their own region but it is  unclear if they were fully representative of the entire province.
The matching process led to the creation of comparison  groups closely matched to the LMDA participants in terms of their background  characteristics. Results obtained with Kernel Matching were validated with the  use of two other techniques (specifically, Inverse Propensity Weighting and  Nearest Neighbour), increasing the level of confidence in the results. However,  readers should be aware that incremental impacts may be affected by factors not  captured by the matching process. For example, the
motivation to seek  employment was not directly measured except to the extent it was captured in  prior income and labour market attachment patterns.
Readers should also keep in mind that it is not possible to  compare the results obtained for each claimant type since the results for  active claimants represent the effects of the EBSMs relative to  non-participation while the results for former claimants represents the impact  of Employment Benefits relative to a limited treatment (in other words, those  who participated exclusively in Employment Assistance Services).
The definition of long-tenured  workers used in this report differs from the definition used in the literature  as it does not consider the number  of years the worker remained employed with the same employer.
The cost-benefit analysis was limited in the sense that it  only took into account the quantifiable benefits and costs that were directly  linked to EBSM delivery and participation and that could be estimated using  available administrative data and the EI Monitoring and Assessment Report. The analysis did not capture  “intangible”, non-pecuniary and indirect benefits. It did not consider  the multiplier effect that improving participants’ income may have on the  economy and did not account for the effect of EI Part II investment on  sustaining a service delivery infrastructure and creating jobs among the  governmental program service providers.   As well, this analysis did not consider the displacement effects where participants may take away jobs that  would otherwise be filled by other unemployed individuals. Finally, this  analysis did not consider the possible effect of EBSMs on increasing skill  prices.
Appendix B - Detailed results Training Services
Proportions may not add up to    100% due to rounding.
*Status self-reported by    participant.
Skill level    corresponds to the type and/or amount of training or education typically    required to work in the last occupation participants had before opening the    last EI claim they had before participating in EBSMs:
- Managerial: Management occupations.
- University: Occupations usually requiring    university education (that is, University degree at the bachelor's, master's    or doctorate level).
- College or apprenticeship training: Occupations usually requiring    college or vocational education or apprenticeship training such as 2 to 3    years of post-secondary education at a community college, institute of    technology or CEGEP or 2 to 5    years of apprenticeship training or    3 to 4 years of secondary school and more than 2 years of on-the-job    training, specialized training courses or specific work experience and/or    occupations with supervisory responsibilities and occupations with    significant health and safety responsibilities, such as firefighters, police    officers and registered nursing assistants.
- Secondary or occupational training: Occupations usually requiring    secondary school and/or occupation-specific training such as one to four    years of secondary school education or    up to 2 years of on-the-job training specialized training courses or    specific work experience.
- On-the-job training: On-the-job training is usually provided for    occupations (i.e. short work demonstration or on-the-job training or no formal educational requirements).
Average earnings for all individuals included in the    studies. The average was calculated including participants who reported $0    earnings during that year.
Earnings for    2007 to 2008 participants have been adjusted by the Consumer Price    Index published by Statistics Canada, using 2002 as the base year.
Significance  level *** 1%;   ** 5%; * 10%
Significance  level *** 1%;   ** 5%; * 10%
Appendix C – Detailed results Apprentices
Proportions may not add up to    100% due to rounding.
*Status self-reported by    participant.
Skill level    corresponds to the type and/or amount of training or education typically    required to work in the last occupation participants had before opening the    last EI claim they had before participating in EBSMs:
- Managerial: Management occupations.
- University: Occupations usually requiring    university education (that is, University degree at the bachelor's, master's    or doctorate level).
- College or apprenticeship training: Occupations usually requiring    college or vocational education or apprenticeship training such as 2 to 3    years of post-secondary education at a community college, institute of    technology or CEGEP or 2 to 5    years of apprenticeship training or    3 to 4 years of secondary school and more than 2 years of on-the-job    training, specialized training courses or specific work experience and/or    occupations with supervisory responsibilities and occupations with    significant health and safety responsibilities, such as firefighters, police    officers and registered nursing assistants.
- Secondary or occupational training: Occupations usually requiring    secondary school and/or occupation-specific training such as one to four    years of secondary school education or    up to 2 years of on-the-job training specialized training courses or    specific work experience.
- On-the-job training: On-the-job training is usually provided for    occupations (i.e. short work demonstration or on-the-job training or no formal educational requirements).
Average earnings for all individuals included in the    studies. The average was calculated including participants who reported $0    earnings during that year.
Earnings for    2007 to 2008 participants have been adjusted by the Consumer Price    Index published by Statistics Canada, using 2002 as the base year.
N= 3,920. Data excludes individuals with  no Canada Revenue Agency data for the 5 years before participation.
Earnings outcomes for all individuals covered by the study.
Earnings outcomes excluding individuals who reported no earnings  in a given year.
N= 3,920. Data excludes individuals with  no Canada Revenue Agency data for the 5 years before participation.
Earnings outcomes for all individuals covered by the study.
Earnings outcomes excluding individuals who reported no earnings  in a given year.
Appendix D – Detailed results Wage Subsidy Work Experience Placement
Proportions may not add up to    100% due to rounding.
*Status self-reported by    participant.
Skill level    corresponds to the type and/or amount of training or education typically    required to work in the last occupation participants had before opening the    last EI claim they had before participating in EBSMs:
- Managerial: Management occupations.
- University: Occupations usually requiring    university education (that is, University degree at the bachelor's, master's    or doctorate level).
- College or apprenticeship training: Occupations usually requiring    college or vocational education or apprenticeship training such as 2 to 3    years of post-secondary education at a community college, institute of    technology or CEGEP or 2 to 5    years of apprenticeship training or    3 to 4 years of secondary school and more than 2 years of on-the-job    training, specialized training courses or specific work experience and/or    occupations with supervisory responsibilities and occupations with    significant health and safety responsibilities, such as firefighters, police    officers and registered nursing assistants.
- Secondary or occupational training: Occupations usually requiring    secondary school and/or occupation-specific training such as one to four    years of secondary school education or    up to 2 years of on-the-job training specialized training courses or    specific work experience.
- On-the-job training: On-the-job training is usually provided for    occupations (i.e. short work demonstration or on-the-job training or no formal educational requirements).
Average earnings for all individuals included in the    studies. The average was calculated including participants who reported $0    earnings during that year.
Earnings for    2007 to 2008 participants have been adjusted by the Consumer Price    Index published by Statistics Canada, using 2002 as the base year.
Significance  level *** 1%;   ** 5%; * 10%
Significance  level *** 1%;   ** 5%; * 10%
Appendix E – Detailed results Self-Employment
Proportions may not add up to    100% due to rounding.
*Status self-reported by    participant.
Skill level    corresponds to the type and/or amount of training or education typically    required to work in the last occupation participants had before opening the    last EI claim they had before participating in EBSMs:
- Managerial: Management occupations.
- University: Occupations usually requiring    university education (that is, University degree at the bachelor's, master's    or doctorate level).
- College or apprenticeship training: Occupations usually requiring    college or vocational education or apprenticeship training such as 2 to 3    years of post-secondary education at a community college, institute of    technology or CEGEP or 2 to 5    years of apprenticeship training or    3 to 4 years of secondary school and more than 2 years of on-the-job    training, specialized training courses or specific work experience and/or    occupations with supervisory responsibilities and occupations with    significant health and safety responsibilities, such as firefighters, police    officers and registered nursing assistants.
- Secondary or occupational training: Occupations usually requiring    secondary school and/or occupation-specific training such as one to four    years of secondary school education or    up to 2 years of on-the-job training specialized training courses or    specific work experience.
- On-the-job training: On-the-job training is usually provided for    occupations (i.e. short work demonstration or on-the-job training or no formal educational requirements).
Average earnings for all individuals included in the    studies. The average was calculated including participants who reported $0    earnings during that year.
Earnings for    2007 to 2008 participants have been adjusted by the Consumer Price    Index published by Statistics Canada, using 2002 as the base year.
Significance  level *** 1%;   ** 5%; * 10%
Significance  level *** 1%;   ** 5%; * 10%
Appendix F – Detailed results Job Creation  Partnerships
Proportions may not add up to    100% due to rounding.
*Status self-reported by    participant.
Skill level    corresponds to the type and/or amount of training or education typically    required to work in the last occupation participants had before opening the    last EI claim they had before participating in EBSMs:
- Managerial: Management occupations.
- University: Occupations usually requiring    university education (that is, University degree at the bachelor's, master's    or doctorate level).
- College or apprenticeship training: Occupations usually requiring    college or vocational education or apprenticeship training such as 2 to 3    years of post-secondary education at a community college, institute of    technology or CEGEP or 2 to 5    years of apprenticeship training or    3 to 4 years of secondary school and more than 2 years of on-the-job    training, specialized training courses or specific work experience and/or    occupations with supervisory responsibilities and occupations with    significant health and safety responsibilities, such as firefighters, police    officers and registered nursing assistants.
- Secondary or occupational training: Occupations usually requiring    secondary school and/or occupation-specific training such as one to four    years of secondary school education or    up to 2 years of on-the-job training specialized training courses or    specific work experience.
- On-the-job training: On-the-job training is usually provided for    occupations (i.e. short work demonstration or on-the-job training or no formal educational requirements).
Average earnings for all individuals included in the    studies. The average was calculated including participants who reported $0    earnings during that year.
Earnings for    2007 to 2008 participants have been adjusted by the Consumer Price    Index published by Statistics Canada, using 2002 as the base year.
Significance  level *** 1%;   ** 5%; * 10%
Significance  level *** 1%;   ** 5%; * 10%
Appendix G – Detailed results Employment Assistance  Services
Proportions may not add up to    100% due to rounding.
*Status self-reported by    participant.
Skill level    corresponds to the type and/or amount of training or education typically    required to work in the last occupation participants had before opening the    last EI claim they had before participating in EBSMs:
- Managerial: Management occupations.
- University: Occupations usually requiring    university education (that is, University degree at the bachelor's, master's    or doctorate level).
- College or apprenticeship training: Occupations usually requiring    college or vocational education or apprenticeship training such as 2 to 3    years of post-secondary education at a community college, institute of    technology or CEGEP or 2 to 5    years of apprenticeship training or    3 to 4 years of secondary school and more than 2 years of on-the-job    training, specialized training courses or specific work experience and/or    occupations with supervisory responsibilities and occupations with    significant health and safety responsibilities, such as firefighters, police    officers and registered nursing assistants.
- Secondary or occupational training: Occupations usually requiring    secondary school and/or occupation-specific training such as one to four    years of secondary school education or    up to 2 years of on-the-job training specialized training courses or    specific work experience.
- On-the-job training: On-the-job training is usually provided for    occupations (i.e. short work demonstration or on-the-job training or no formal educational requirements).
Average earnings for all individuals included in the    studies. The average was calculated including participants who reported $0    earnings during that year.
Earnings for    2007 to 2008 participants have been adjusted by the Consumer Price    Index published by Statistics Canada, using 2002 as the base year.
Significance  level *** 1%;   ** 5%; * 10%
* Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;    *** significant at 1%
* Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;    *** significant at 1%
1 Random sample of  approximately 60% of participants
Appendix H – List of nine studies included  in the Synthesis Report
Page details
Report a problem on this page
Date modified:
2021-05-26