Key Findings
The objectives and activities of the contribution agreement signatories continue to be aligned with Enabling Fund objectives and eligible activities
Organizations implemented planned activities
The activities carried out by the organisations: 
	
build partnerships
leverage additional resources
contribute to enhancing the community economic development of official language minority communities
contribute to the growth and development of human resources in official language minority communities 
Organizations took advantage of emerging opportunities to develop and implement additional activities
Evaluation objectives
The objectives of this evaluation are to:
confirm whether the objectives and activities carried out by the contribution agreement signatories continue to be aligned with program objectives and eligible activities
determine to what extent planned activities were implemented
assess whether these contribute to enhancing the development and vitality of official language minority communities and identify examples of such contributions 
gain insight about the pandemic’s impact on contribution agreement signatories to inform the description of the current program context
The Enabling Fund investment
The Enabling Fund represents a total investment of $80.4 million over 5 years. An annual budget of $13 million is allocated through contribution agreements to 14 non-profit organizations. These organizations include 1 national organization and 1 organization in each province and territory.
Evaluation methodology
Key informant interviews with 17 leaders and staff members of the 5 organizations
A review of 80 documents provided by 5 organizations between April 2018 and March 2020
Recommendation
The program is encouraged to explore approaches to improve the program’s ability to consistently capture results from funded projects
Management response and action plan
Overall management response
Employment and Social Development Canada’s Skills and Employment Branch and Service Canada’s Program Operations Branch would like to thank the individuals who contributed to the evaluation of the Enabling Fund for Official Language Minority Communities (Enabling Fund), particularly the members of the Evaluation Directorate, as well as all interview participants who provided their insights as part of this evaluation.
The results of the evaluation were largely positive and accentuated the importance of the program in supporting official language minority communities. The evaluation reflects the success of the program in enhancing the development and vitality of official language minority communities.
With the support of the Enabling Fund, recipients undertook a variety of activities that contributed to enhancing their capacity in the areas of human resources and economic development.  Recipients demonstrated their capacity to build partnerships and leverage resources for concerted action that have positive impacts on Canada’s official language minority communities.
In the spirit of continuous improvement and ESDC’s effort to strengthen reporting and limit administrative burden on recipients, the Evaluation recommended that the Department explore approaches to improve the Program’s ability to consistently capture results.
Recommendation #1
The program is encouraged to explore approaches to improve the program’s ability to consistently capture results from funded projects.
Response
ESDC agrees with the evaluation’s recommendation and recognizes the importance of being able to effectively measure the results of funded projects and demonstrate how they contribute to meeting the program’s objectives.
ESDC will work collaboratively with partners to explore approaches to enable both the Program and its funding recipients to clearly define success and capture the necessary results to demonstrate impact.
This would include examining improvements to the program’s performance measurement framework and its implementation such as:
how the department defines and communicates success and desired results
what frameworks or tools can be used to support demonstration of results 
how to better leverage data to inform Program objectives and departmental processes, and
the sufficiency and clarity of reporting requirements
ESDC is already addressing aspects of the evaluation recommendation through close collaboration with the Program’s funding recipients to revise and clarify the Annual Results Reports template to improve consistency of reporting.
In the context of the forthcoming modernization of the Official Languages Act and the development of a new Action Plan for Official Languages, the upcoming Call for Proposals for the Enabling Fund presents a valuable opportunity to begin to advance improvements and develop the necessary frameworks and tools to build capacity within recipient organizations.
Management action plan
The Skills and Employment Branch, with the support from the heads of performance measurement and evaluation will explore methods to enhance the Program’s performance management framework, including performance indicators, and the associated Performance Information Profile. To be completed by March 2023.
Program Operations Branch and the Skills and Employment Branch will work to ensure that performance measurement criteria and reporting requirements are clear to recipients and/or potential recipients. This could involve consultation with existing or future recipients to inform the data collection approach. To be completed by March 2023
Program Operations Branch, with the support of the Skills and Employment Branch, will identify opportunities to refine operational tools to ensure greater clarity on performance measurement and results reporting requirements. In addition, Program Operations Branch will explore how to better leverage data, through examining data requirements, and collection and management processes. To be completed by March 2023.
Introduction
This report presents the findings and conclusions from a limited-scope evaluation of the Enabling Fund for Official Language Minority. The report is organized as follows:
program description
evaluation approach and methodology
evaluation findings
key conclusions and recommendations
Program description
Program objectives
The Enabling Fund aims to enhance the development and vitality of official language minority communities by:
strengthening their capacity in the areas of human resources and community economic development
promoting partnerships at all levels, including federal partners
The program is part of the Government of Canada’s Action Plan for Official Languages - 2018 to 2023: Investing in Our Future. The Enabling Fund represents Employment and Social Development Canada’s (ESDC) key instrument to meet its legal and mandated obligations.  These obligations are found under Section 41 of the Official Language Act.
This evaluation will feed the horizontal evaluation of the Action Plan for Official Language 2018 to 2023: Investing in our Future, which is led by the Department of Canadian Heritage.
Program funding
As shown in Table 1, the Enabling Fund represents a total investment of $80.4 million over 5 years.
An annual budget of $13 million is allocated through contribution agreements to 14 non-profit organizations. These organizations include 1 national organization and 1 organization in each province and territory. Receiving both core and project funding, these 14 organizations hire more than 130 employees working in 50 different locations across the country. An annual operational fund of $1.8 million is managed by ESDC.
Included in the overall funding, the Enabling Fund received $6.85 million over 5 years (from 2018 to 2023). This funding aims to support Francophone early childhood education services in Francophone Minority Communities. This includes $6.25 million in contribution funding and $0.6 million in operating funding.
Program activities
Official language minority communities across Canada have different characteristics, needs and priorities. Accordingly, each recipient organization undertakes different activities, while still responding directly to the overarching objectives of the Enabling Fund. Each contribution agreement signatory leads, coordinates and supports capacity building in the areas of community economic development and human resources development.
These activities can be divided into 3 main areas.
Building partnerships and leveraging additional resources
The ability to convene stakeholders, build partnerships and leverage additional resources from partners is key to contribution agreement signatories’ enabling and capacity building role. To this end, they collaborate with a range of community stakeholders, the private sector, non-profit funders, and different levels of government. These efforts represent a core area of activity of the funded organizations.
Community economic development activities
Contribution agreement signatories also carry out various activities in support of community economic development.
Examples of eligible activities:
leading processes to encourage community participation in community consultations and economic development planning
developing and implementing local economic development initiatives to:

promote businesses (for example, business-planning services, trade missions, supporting the development of supply-chains)
promote the communities as tourist destinations
implement revenue-generating events (for example, tourism products)
attract immigrants and integrate them into the minority communities
assisting employers in meeting their skill needs (for example, job fairs, and job matching services)
developing workforce attraction and retention strategies
raising awareness about entrepreneurship
Human resources development activities
Lastly, contribution agreement signatories carry out various activities to support jobseekers, workers, entrepreneurs, and employers.
Examples of eligible activities:
developing learning tools
facilitating learning events (for example, workshops, training sessions and camps)
providing business-networking opportunities
providing guidance and support to jobseekers
providing mentoring to jobseekers, workers, and small business owners
Appendix A presents the logic model for the Enabling Fund and Appendix B provides the list of contribution agreements signatories.
Evaluation approach and methodology
Purpose of the evaluation
In accordance with the Financial Administration Act and the Policy on Results requirements, the Enabling Fund must be evaluated every 5 years. The program must therefore be evaluated by March 31, 2022.
Evaluation objectives:
confirm whether the objectives and activities carried out by the contribution agreement signatories continue to be aligned with program objectives and eligible activities
determine to what extent planned activities were implemented 
assess whether these contribute to enhancing the development and vitality of official language minority communities and identify examples of such contributions
gain insight about the pandemic’s impact on contribution agreement signatories to inform the description of the current program context
Evaluation lines of evidence and questions
The evaluation scope, questions and lines of evidence were developed in consultation with Strategic Integration and Corporate Affairs and the Program Operations Branch.
This evaluation is of a limited scope. The following was taken into account when setting the scope of the evaluation:
the program maturity
the stable nature of program activities carried out by contribution agreement signatories
the positive results of previous program evaluations
the quality of data collection and reporting instruments
Data collection for this evaluation took place during the COVID-19 pandemic and captured contextual insights about how organizations were adapting to the pandemic. However, assessing the impact of the pandemic on funded organizations and their activities was not part of the scope of the evaluation. Accordingly, the evaluation timeframe is set from April 2018 to March 2020 in order to exclude the impact of the pandemic from observed results. The Enabling Fund investment during this timeframe was $31.5 million.
Lines of evidence
Five of the 14 contribution agreement signatory organizations were selected to provide data as part of this evaluation:
Association Franco-Yukonnaise
Conseil de développement économique de l’Alberta
Community Economic Development and Employability Corporation (Québec)
Conseil économique du Nouveau Brunswick
Société économique de l’Ontario
Contribution agreement signatories in the Yukon, Alberta, and New Brunswick were randomly selected among northern, western, and eastern organizations to ensure regional representation. The organization in Ontario was selected given the size of the Francophone community that it serves.  The organization in Québec was selected because it is the only one serving Anglophones in Canada.
The evaluation is based on 2 main lines of evidence:
key informant interviews with 17 leaders and staff members of the 5 organizations
a review of 80 documents provided by 5 organizations between April 2018 and March 2020, which included:

65 quarterly activity reports (13 per organization) covering fiscal years 2018 to 2019 and 2019 to 2020
10 contribution agreements (2 per organization), 5 covering the fiscal years 2014 to 2018, and 5 covering the years 2019 to 2023 
5 annual reports (1 per organization) covering the fiscal year 2019 to 2020
Results reported in quarterly activity reports were classified in relation to the objectives and planned activities outlined in contribution agreements. Results reported for 2018 to 2019 were classified in relation to 2014 to 2018 contribution agreements. Results reported for 2019 to 2020 were classified in relation to 2019 to 2023 contribution agreements.
As part of this document review, detailed matrices were produced summarizing all the reported results for 2018 to 2019 and 2019 to 2020. Results reported for 2019 to 2020 were also compared with information provided in the 2019 to 2020 annual reports.
Document review results were then compared to the answer provided by the leaders and staff of the 5 organisations included in the evaluation.
Evaluation questions
The evaluation addressed 3 main questions and 1 sub-question:
Do objectives and activities carried out by contribution agreement signatories 2018 to 2019 and 2019 to 2020 continue to be aligned with the Enabling Fund objectives and eligible activities?
Do reported results demonstrate the extent to which contribution agreement signatories implemented the planned activities?
Do implemented activities and reported results contribute to enhancing the development and vitality of official language minority communities? 

What examples can be provided by selected Contribution Agreement Signatories?
Appendix C provides a summary of which lines of evidence inform each evaluation question.
Evaluation limitations
The evaluation faced challenges with singling out outputs and attributing outcomes to the Enabling Fund. This stems, in part, from the enabling nature of the program and the context in which contribution agreement signatories operate.
Five factors that impede the singling out of outputs and attribution of outcomes to the program were identified.
First, the staff employed through the core funding provided by the Enabling Fund secure significant additional funding from other sources. They use these funds to develop and implement activities, programs, and initiatives. Leveraged funding can be claimed as a program outcome. However, the outcomes associated with the activities, programs, and initiatives funded through leveraged resources cannot be attributed directly to the Enabling Fund investment.
Second, building partnerships, and enabling other organizations and stakeholders to develop and implement initiatives is a core area of activity of funded organizations. While signatories may provide leadership, support, and coordination for these initiatives, the outcomes of these initiatives cannot be attributed solely to the Enabling Fund.
Third, funding is allocated through contribution agreements to 14 non-profit organizations. These organizations use the funding to enable community economic and human resource development in official language minority communities across Canada. Each community has different levels of economic, human, and social capital resources on which funded organisations can draw. Accordingly, contribution agreement signatories operate in very different contexts and cannot be treated as equals or compared with each other. This impedes comparative output and outcome evaluation.
Fourth, for most program activities, the collection of reliable data on end users would, in practice, be very difficult. This hinders participant outcome analysis.
Finally, the difficulty of identifying valid counterfactuals combined with the influence of external factors further impedes outcome attribution. Examples of significant external factors include major structural or cyclical shifts in the economy and the changing demographic make-up of communities.
Due to these limitations, the evaluation is not designed to draw definitive conclusions about the program’s impact. Rather, it aims to provide insight into the contributions that funded organizations make to the development and vitality of the communities they serve.
Evaluation findings
Context, challenges, and opportunities faced by contribution agreement signatories
Context
The context in which contribution agreement signatories operate varies significantly across provinces and territories.
Some operate in jurisdictions that are officially bilingual and have large, well-established populations, while others serve much smaller populations in largely unilingual jurisdictions
In some provinces/territories, contribution agreement signatories can collaborate with a greater variety of existing institutions and organizations, while in others options are more limited
In some provincial/territorial jurisdictions, organizations serve many geographically dispersed official language minority communities, each of which has their distinct characteristics and economic contexts
Community specific contexts and characteristics influence the opportunities available to them, as well as the types of activities planned by funded organizations.
For example, in jurisdictions where bilingual labour is in demand, organizations may focus their efforts on the recruitment and placement of qualified immigrant workers. In so doing, they support the workforce needs of employers and contribute to the maintenance or growth of official language minority populations.
Alternately, in jurisdictions with relatively few bilingual job opportunities, organizations may focus on pre-employment training and employment assistance services for community members. Helping community members to integrate into the majority language workplace reduces the risk that they will leave the region to find work. In so doing, the organizations help to mitigate population decline in official language minority communities.
Challenges and opportunities
Staff turnover
Key informants were asked about the challenges faced by their organization. Overall, they reported few issues, but staff turnover was mentioned by 3 of the 5 organizations included in the evaluation. These organizations attributed staff turnover to:
competition for qualified Francophone workers, and 
an inability to provide competitive salaries compared to private and public sector employers
According to key informants, staff turnover destabilises the organization until the vacated position is filled and drains the organizations of acquired knowledge and skills.
Other challenges
Making program and services available and accessible to all official language minority communities in larger provinces and territories
Being visible and known by community members and stakeholders throughout the province/territory 
Being visible in service environments that include much larger Anglophone organizations, with significant marketing budgets
The COVID-19 pandemic
The Réseau de développement économique et d’employabilité Canada is the national level Enabling Fund contribution agreement signatory. The organization commissioned a report on the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the organizations and their activities across Canada.
The report found that organizations experienced initial challenges in moving their services online. Organizations also reported ongoing challenges delivering some types of programs and services while social distancing protocols are in effect. Finally, organizations explained that online programs and services are not accessible for individuals who do not have access to high-speed internet and computers.
The report also found that the move to online program and service delivery came to be perceived as an opportunity by most funded organizations. Activities that required time-consuming and costly travel before the pandemic are now being offered online.
Because of this change, programs and services are reaching members of official language minority communities in previously unserved rural and remote locations. Some organisations also see opportunities for collaboration between contribution agreement signatories to serve official language minority communities across provincial and territorial jurisdictions.
Alignment of objectives and activities
Key Finding
The objectives and implemented activities of the 5 organizations continue to be aligned with Enabling Fund objectives and eligible activities.
Alignment of objectives
The objectives of the 5 organizations continue to be aligned with those of the Enabling Fund.
Enabling Fund objectives
The Enabling fund aims to enhance the development and vitality of official language minority communities by:
strengthening their capacity in the areas of human resources and community economic development, and
promoting partnerships at all levels, including federal partners
Objectives of the 5 contribution agreement signatories
Objectives identified in the 2014 to 2018 and 2019 to 2023 contribution agreements of the 5 selected organisations.
Association franco-yukonnaise
2018 to 2019 objectives:
increase the economic development, human resource and management capacities of communities by developing and implementing comprehensive planning and priority setting processes
improve the economic performance of entrepreneurs and self-employed workers in the Yukon’s Francophone cultural community
improve the participation of Yukon Francophones in the Yukon labour market and economy by promoting the development Yukon Francophones’ entrepreneurship and labour market skills
develop, in collaboration with the other territories, a strategy and project to attract and retain Francophone economic immigrants and Francophone labour in the territories
promote the development of the tourism sector and the performance of Francophone entrepreneurs in this area
2019 to 2020 objectives:
implement community planning and priority setting processes
attract bilingual workers and improve the participation of Franco-Yukoners in the Yukon economy by promoting access to the labour market
improve the entrepreneurial performance of Franco-Yukoners in order to stimulate innovation and the creation and development of new businesses
Conseil de développement économique de l’Alberta
2018 to 2019 objectives:
support community economic development of Francophone and bilingual communities
support industries and economic sectors: tourism; green economy, sustainable development, reduction of greenhouse gases; Francophone economic immigration
support the Canadian economic Francophonie
support Francophone and bilingual entrepreneurs
2019 to 2020 objectives:
increase the capacity for economic development by implementing priority-setting processes in different communities 
increase the contribution to the economic development of municipalities by strengthening the ABMA (Association bilingue des municipalités de l'Alberta)
improve the skills required to meet the needs of the Alberta labour market
Community economic development and employability corporation (Quebec)
2018 to 2019 objectives:
revitalize local economies through community-based planning and project development
stimulate and support small business development for Quebec’s Anglophone communities
strengthen and promote Quebec Anglophone communities’ workforce to improve labour market competitiveness
increase CEDEC’s capacity to lead community economic development and human resource development in Quebec’s Anglophone communities
2019 to 2020 objectives:
share knowledge about collaborative private/public/civil society approaches which enhance economic development in Quebec official language minority communities
build constructive relationships with key public, private stakeholders that will:

influence policy
increase resources that enhance economic activity in the official language minority communities, and
spur innovative economic collaboration
implement an evaluation and performance strategy that will better identify, demonstrate performance and develop adaptable programming
create tailored frameworks, projects and tools that sustain and enhance economic activity in Quebec official language minority communities through private/public/civil society collaboration
Conseil économique du Nouveau-Brunswick Inc.
2018 to 2019 objectives:
increase the involvement and collaboration between partners and communities in matters of community economic development and human resources development
improve the community economic development planning and implementation capacities of Francophone communities
improve the human resources planning and skills development capacities of Francophone communities
2019 to 2020 objectives:
increase the involvement and collaboration between partners and communities in matters of community economic development and human resources development
increase trade and economic partnerships favouring the development of strategic linkages
improve understanding Francophone communities’ needs and increase their planning capacity
improve the skills of Francophone communities and the capacity of businesses / organizations / individuals in order to”

maximize the economic and social performance of Francophone communities, and 
meet the needs of the labour market
Société économique de l’Ontario
2018 to 2019 objectives:
know the challenges and opportunities related to the employability and economic development of Francophone communities in Ontario
fill the deficits in employability and economic development through a plan and services aimed at meeting supply and demand, as well as helping to maximize the performance of organizations, businesses and entrepreneurs, while reducing the gap between them and opportunities, and by equipping them more
create trust and mechanisms for collaboration between organizations, businesses, governments, and the community in order to promote the inclusion of all in the development of communities
2019 to 2020 objectives:
effectively support Francophone entrepreneurs for the creation, growth and continuity of their businesses through innovative projects that meet the needs of Francophone businesses in promising sectors relevant to Francophone communities
ensure recognized and sustained visibility for the Francophonie in Ontario by favouring structured and strategic relationships with provincial, national and regional partners and key players working to support the advancement of Francophone/ bilingual business communities
establish strategic alliances to promote multiculturalism and the economic integration of Francophones and Francophiles in Francophone communities, based on new economic market trendsoffer a range of services, tools and innovative practices to support employers to hire and retain qualified immigrant Francophone workers
Activities
The 5 organizations reported the activities they implemented from April 2018 to March 2020 in their quarterly activity reports. Reported activities were eligible for funding under the Enabling Fund and well aligned with the program’s objectives.
The 5 organizations contributed to the program objectives by engaging in different types of activities. This section summarises the types of activities that contributed to each of the program objectives.
Building partnerships and leveraging additional resources
Developing and maintaining partnerships with a wide variety of stakeholders, including: 

municipal, provincial/territorial, and federal governments
private sector organizations
non-profit organizations
primary, secondary and post-secondary education institutions 
Building and maintaining constructive relationships with key funders and policy-makers to educate them on the needs, priorities, and opportunities of official language minority communities
Identifying and mobilising key stakeholders to develop, fund, and implement economic development plans, projects, initiatives, and events
Supporting communities and partners to obtain funding for their economic development projects
Supporting intercultural, cross-sectoral, intercommunity relationship building and collaboration
Leveraging additional resources through:

revenue generating activities
successful funding proposals
financial contributions from partners
in-kind contributions from partners
Strengthening capacity for community economic development
Leading, supporting, and participating in community economic development planning processes
Working in partnership with communities and stakeholders to design, develop, obtain funding for, and implement economic development plans, initiatives, and projects to:

promote sustainable economic development
attract, recruit, and integrate immigrants and workers from other provinces/territories
repatriate youth who have moved to other regions/provinces/territories
support tourism development in official language minority communities or the industry at large in their province/territory
promote the province’s/territory’s official language minority communities cultural, artisan, and artistic community as well as their products
improve the offer of French language early childhood education services in their province/territory
Assisting employers in meeting their workforce needs through:

job fairs
job matching services, and
job specific skills development and training
Raising awareness about entrepreneurship, including targeted initiatives for immigrants, women, and youth
Strengthening capacity for human resources development
Organizing and supporting various events, workshops, networks, and forums to:

identify human resources skills development needs and opportunities
lead/contribute to planning exercises, and 
implement/support skills development initiatives
Developing a broad variety of learning tools to support:

small and medium enterprises
entrepreneurs
self-employed individuals, and 
job seekers
Organizing and supporting a broad variety of learning events, such as workshops, training sessions, and seminars/webinars to support: 

small and medium enterprises
entrepreneurs
self-employed individuals, and 
job seekers
Providing networking opportunities to entrepreneurs and self-employed individuals, including targeted events for women
Providing a range of small business support services, including: 

pre and post start-up support services
business transfer services, and 
business consulting services
Facilitating access to small business support services provided by other organizations
Providing a range of employment assistance services to job seekers, including:

pre-employment training
job search assistance
job matching
mentoring and employment maintenance supports
Designing and implementing targeted training and mentoring programs to address the specific labour market integration needs of specific sub-populations, including:

black official language minority communities youth
women
visible minorities
immigrants
indigenous peoples
The findings presented in this section are summarized from the more detailed findings presented in Appendix D. The appendix provides an inventory of the types or activities implemented by each organization from April 2018 to March 2020 in relation to Enabling Fund objectives.
Implementation of planned activities
Key Findings
The 5 organizations implemented planned activities from April 2018 to March 2019
Organizations took advantage of emerging opportunities to develop and implement additional activities
A few planned activities were cancelled in response to changing context
Implemented activities
The 5 organizations implemented planned activities from April 2018 to March 2019. Organisations adapted their activities to changing context. Changes in partner priorities, economic context, and funding availability, as well as lessons learned led contribution agreement signatories to adjust their planned activities. This process is encouraged and facilitated by ESDC, as it increases the organizations’ ability to achieve targeted project outcomes.
In their contribution agreements, each signatory organization identifies a list of their objectives, related planned activities and expected results. In their quarterly activity reports and annual reports, the organizations report on their progress toward implementing their planned activities and reaching their expected results. This data was used to assess the extent to which the 5 organizations implemented their planned activities. The accuracy of the data on implemented activities and populations served was confirmed through key informant interviews.
A detailed review of the 5 organizations’ documents revealed significant variation in contribution agreement structures and reporting style between organizations, and between fiscal years.  Some of the contribution agreements and reporting styles lend themselves more readily to facilitating an assessment of achieved results. Specifically:
some contribution agreements had clearly aligned project objectives, planned activities, and expected results, while others were less well aligned
some contribution agreements had clear and measureable targets, while others less tangible output targets, or targets that would be very difficult to measure
some quarterly activity reports were written in a way that clearly linked project objectives, implemented activities, and achieved results, while others were less structured
one organization demarcated itself in its ability to capture some of their activities’ contributions to intermediate outcomes
The content and organization of information provided in quarterly reports reflect the project objectives, planned activities, and expected results outlined in contribution agreements. Organizations with clearly articulated and well-aligned objectives, activities, and results submitted quarterly reports that more consistently captured results.
Despite the variation in the documents reviewed, the information was detailed enough to determined that most planned activities were implemented. Overall, the document revue revealed that the 5 organizations:
made reasonable efforts to implement their planned activities
adapted to changing opportunity structures and tried to take advantage of emerging opportunities
adjusted their planned activities based on lessons learned
The specific activities implemented by the organizations and their associated results are too numerous to present in this report. Examples of each organization’s activities and results are provided to illustrate the breadth of implemented activities the extent of the results achieved.
Association Franco-Yukonnaise
Examples of implemented activities and achieved results include the following:
from April 2018 to March 2020: 

provided a range of employment assistance services to 159 individuals
organized and provided 10 Yukon tourism familiarisation tours for travel agents, and travel bloggers/columnists, to attract francophone tourists to the Yukon
launched 3 online recruitment campaigns in 2019 to 2020 to attract workers to the Yukon

following the campaigns, 12,710 people visited the www.vivreauxterritoires.ca website, representing a 129% increase in the number of visitors
collaborated with le Centre du savoir sur mesure de l’Université du Québec à Chicoutimi to develop a training program for Francophones in the Yukon
Conseil de développement économique de l’Alberta
Examples of implemented activities and achieved results include the following:
created an association for bilingual communities in Alberta:

each member openly recognises the value of bilingualism
together, the members developed a Strategic Plan to guide their collaborative development efforts
supported francophone tourism in Alberta:

maintained the www.tourismealberta.ca website, which received an average of 10,000 visitors and 25,000 page views per quarter
produced and distributed over 5,000 copies of the Francophone Alberta tourism guidebook in popular tourist destination, tourist information centres, and travel agents 
developed an app to help visitors learn about the historical francophone neighbourhood of Rouleauville in Calgary

the app had been accessed 5,730 times by March 2020 
worked with the Réseau santé albertain and the Association canadienne-française de l’Alberta régionale de Edmonton to develop a strategic plan to launch a Francophone health centre in Edmonton
supported Francophone and bilingual businesses through 571 business-consulting interactions
Community Economic Development and Employability Corporation
Examples of implemented activities and achieved results include the following:
supported community economic planning, including consultations, plans, project funding proposals, project implementation, and progress assessment in 10 communities, in 2018 to 2019
supported tourism development planning, including consultations, plans, project funding proposals, project implementation, and progress assessment in at least 8 communities, in 2018 to 2019

for example, in collaboration with partners, helped to secure $9,756,279 in investments to develop tourism projects in Kegaska and Blanc Sablon
	
Blanc Sablon experienced to a 92% increase in visits
developed and delivered an integrated learning model combining training and paid job placements to improve skills alignment with local opportunities 
	in 2019 to 2020, the program was offered to over 40 participants in 5 communities
delivered Youth Start-Up seminars to at least 220 participants aged 18 to 35
Conseil économique du Nouveau Brunswick
Examples of implemented activities and achieved results include the following:
supported 60 employers in 2018 to 2019 to hire and retain Francophone immigrant employees
organised 15 entrepreneurship learning camps for youth in 2018 to 2019
supported the creation and launch of 6 youth cooperatives, involving 65 participants, and the creation of 12 summer jobs (2018 to 2019)
designed and implemented an initiative to promote women in male dominated fields, including

8 videos, which were viewed over 15,000 times
45 workshops in 15 schools, reaching over 1000 students
Société économique de l’Ontario
Examples of implemented activities and achieved results include the following:
lead the ongoing development and maintenance of a provincial Francophone heritage tourist circuit from 2018 to present, which includes over 80 tourist attractions
delivered entrepreneurial awareness and skills development activities to over 3,000 students in 7 school boards in 2019 to 2020
provided business-consulting services to more than 250 businesses in 2019 to 2020
delivered settlement and employment assistance services to over 300 immigrants and refugees in 2019 to 2020
Targeted subpopulations
All organisations developed programs and services designed to meet the specific needs of 1 or more Official Language Minority Community subpopulation.
Programs and services designed for immigrants were delivered in all of the organizations
Programs and services designed for women and youth were delivered in 4 organisations
2 or fewer organisations delivered programs and services designed for Black youth, Black immigrants, Indigenous people, seniors, and visible minorities
The distinct program needs of these subpopulations were identified through community consultations, planning exercises, research, surveys, and regular interaction with community members and stakeholders.
The organizations reported working in collaboration with a variety of organisations to identify needs, develop relevant programming, recruit participants and deliver services. Examples of services delivered include the following:
settlement and employment assistance services for immigrants
entrepreneurial supports and networking opportunities for women
entrepreneurial awareness and skill development activities designed to address the needs of youth, Black youth, immigrant women, and immigrants
pre-employment and job-specific training for Indigenous people, and immigrant women
Early childhood education initiative
The 2018 to 2023 Action Plan for Official Languages allocated an investment of $20 million in early childhood education and childcare. From that investment, the Enabling Fund received $6.85 million to foster the development of start-up capacities of early childhood educators. The initiative aims to increase the number of Francophone childcare spaces in Francophone minority communities.
The Réseau de développement économique et d’employabilité Canada was selected to implement the initiative and to redistribute funds to selected stakeholders. These stakeholders implement and deliver approved projects.
In the first stage of funding, the Réseau de développement économique et d’employabilité Canada conducted research to:
identify community needs
prioritize areas for improvement, and 
develop a funding plan
The organization then signed 12 sub-agreements with service providers to support community projects.
Each of the 4 Francophone organizations included in this evaluation had implemented activities in support of this broader initiative in 2019 to 2020.  Examples of supportive activities included the following:
undertaking market and feasibility studies
supporting the funding proposals submitted by service providers in their jurisdiction
providing day care start-up and management support services
providing entrepreneurial support for family day care centres and childcare services already in place to ensure their economic viability
creating a day care start-up guide
Contribution to enhancing the development and vitality of communities
Key Findings
The evidence summarized in this section and documented in Appendix D demonstrates that activities carried out by the 5 selected organizations:
build partnerships 
leverage additional resources 
contribute to enhancing community economic development and human resources development of official language minority communities
Each organization collaborated with a broad variety of partners, such as:
chambers of commerce
local economic development organizations
municipal, provincial, and federal governments
non-profit organizations
primary, secondary, and postsecondary education institutions
private sector businesses and employers
All organizations worked in collaboration with majority language organizations, as well as other Official Language Minority Community organizations.
As demonstrated in Table 2, each organization was successful in leveraging additional funds in fiscal years 2018 to 2019 and 2019 to 2020. Given the very different provincial and territorial contexts in which they operate, the amount of funding leveraged by each organization is not comparable. The amount of leveraged funding varied from one year to the next depending on the types of activities that were being implemented.
Implemented activities and reported results demonstrate that the contribution agreement signatories have delivered on expected outputs as outlined in the Enabling Fund logic model.  As illustrated in the logic model, outputs can reasonably contribute to increased human resources and community economic development capacity of official language minority communities.
The examples provided illustrate how the activities of the funded organizations contribute to the development and vitality of official language minority communities.
Examples of Association Franco-Yukonnaise contributions to program outcomes
Francophone immigration forum in Whitehorse
They organised and coordinated the forum, which brought together the main local and territorial stakeholders involved in the settlement and integration of Francophone immigrants. The forum identified the activities and services that were included in the Francophone Welcoming Initiative’s action plan for Whitehorse.
Networking event in collaboration with the Whitehorse Chamber of Commerce
Over 85 people participated in the event. Participants included business owners, municipal, territorial and federal public servants, municipal councillors, territorial government ministers, the mayor of Whitehorse, and other community members. The event helped to increase awareness about the organization and the Francophone community. It also allowed Francophone business people, entrepreneurs, and service providers to network and gain more visibility in the community.
Examples of Conseil de développement économique de l’Alberta contributions to program outcomes
Old School Cheesery Économusée
They facilitated the process of opening the first Économusée in Alberta. The designation as an Économusée brings visibility to the business. It also represents a new cultural tourism attraction and encourages tourism to the community of Vermilion, Alberta.
Entrepreneurial workshop for Francophone immigrant women
They collaborated with Francophonie Albertaine Plurielle to design and deliver a workshop for Francophone immigrant women who wish to launch a small business in Alberta. The workshop attracted approximately 50 participants. Many subsequently contacted the Conseil de développement économique de l’Alberta to receive start-up support services to launch a business. It also led to the creation of the Elles des Affaires, a women’s business group that offers professional development and networking opportunities.
Examples of Community Economic Development and Employability Corporation contributions to program outcomes
Earn while you learn program
They developed and delivered a program that combined workplace-specific French as a second language training with job specific training. Participants in the 300-hour training program received a salary during the course and then worked for a local employer. They were hired to fill a variety of entry-level positions such as cashiers, cleaning staff, and assistant cooks.
In 2019 to 2020, 11 people participated in the program, 8 of whom were hired by the employer. Two participants reported that their families were able to stay in the region because they found work. In addition to the impact on participants, the program helped to address a labour shortage affecting one of the main employers in the community.
Integrated Learning Model
The organization piloted an integrated learning model in 2 communities. The training was developed in collaboration with the communities, local employers and other stakeholders. It sought to address the literacy, language, soft-skills, and job specific skills needed by participants to meet the workforce needs of local employers.
In 2018 to 2019, 17 students participated in the program pilot. Of those, 11 completed the training and 5 (29%) obtained employment. These results compare favourably to the 13% average for other adult education programs in the 2 communities. A detailed program evaluation was completed to assess outcomes and to refine the program.
Examples of Conseil économique du Nouveau Brunswick contributions to program outcomes
Mode d’emploi program
They designed and delivered a 6-week pre-employment and employment assistance program for Francophone visible minority women. The program includes visits to employers and networking opportunities.
By March 2020, 3 cohorts had participated in the program. Following the training, half of the participants found work in their field. Some were hired by employers they had met through the program.
Innovating through improved processes program
The program covers up to $50,000 worth of business consulting services. It aims to improve participating businesses’ performance and competitiveness through lean manufacturing and improved business processes.
By March 2020, 15 businesses had participated in the program. The organization reported that the program was very well received by participants and had led to concrete results. 1 business saved $500,000 and another doubled its revenues thanks to changes made following their participation.
Examples of Société économique de l’Ontario contributions to program outcomes
Structured mentorship program for highly skilled immigrants
The program simultaneously addresses employers labour force needs and helps newcomers to obtain their first paid work experience in their field. It matches employers with highly skilled immigrant workers to fill open positions. The program is offered throughout Canada in collaboration with:
the Réseau de développement économique et d’employabilité du Canada
the Conseil de développement économique des municipalités bilingues du Manitoba
the Société de développement économique de la Colombie-Britannique
Being in demand from both employers and participants, the program has served over 3 times more participants than its annual target of 10 participants. Most participants remained employed post-participation.
Business Incubator program
They designed and launched an online business incubator program that serves Francophones throughout the province. Over the course of the program, participants complete the preparatory work necessary to be ready to launch their business. For example, they receive training, support from GrowthWheel certified experts, and networking opportunities. The program is in high demand.
Conclusion and recommendation
The findings presented in this evaluation report confirm that the 5 organisations are implementing relevant activities that contribute to the Enabling Fund program objectives.
The objectives and activities carried out by the contribution agreement signatories continue to be aligned with program objectives and eligible activities
The organisations implement most of the activities outlined in their contribution agreements
The activities carried out by the organizations:

build partnerships
leverage additional resources
contribute to enhancing the community economic development of official language minority communities
contribute to the growth and development of human resources in official language minority communities
The evaluation also found that the organisations adapt to changing contexts, including the COVID-19 pandemic. All organizations were able to adapt the majority of their programs and services to be delivered online. The pandemic made it more difficult to provide some types of programs and services. However, it also enabled organisations to reach more community members in rural and remote regions of their jurisdiction.
Recommendation
The program is encouraged to explore approaches to improve the program’s ability to consistently capture results from funded projects.
Rationale
The document review revealed significant variation in contribution agreement structures and reporting style between the 5 organizations.
Some contribution agreements had clearly aligned project objectives, planned activities, and expected results with clear and measureable targets. Other contribution agreements were less well aligned and had less tangible output targets, or targets that would be very difficult to measure.
Some quarterly activity reports were written in a way that clearly linked project objectives, implemented activities, and achieved results, while others were less structured.
The content and organization of information provided in quarterly reports reflect the project objectives, planned activities, and expected results outlined in contribution agreements. Organizations with clearly articulated and well-aligned objectives, activities, and results submitted quarterly reports that more consistently captured results.
References
Association Franco-Yukonnaise. Annual activity report: 2019 to 2020. 
Association Franco-Yukonnaise. Contribution agreements: 2014 to 2018, 2019 to 2023.
Association Franco-Yukonnaise. Quarterly activity reports: April to June 2018, July to September 2018, October to December 2018, January to February 2019; March 2019, April to June 2019, July to September 2019, October to December 2019, January to March 2020.
Community Economic Development and Employability Corporation. Annual activity report: 2019 to 2020.  
Community Economic Development and Employability Corporation. Contribution agreements: 2014 to 2018, 2019 to 2023.
Community Economic Development and Employability Corporation. Quarterly activity reports: April to June 2018, July to September 2018, October to December 2018, January to February 2019; March 2019, April to June 2019, July to September 2019, October to December 2019, January to March 2020. 
Conseil de développement économique de l’Alberta. Annual activity report: 2019 to 2020. 
Conseil de développement économique de l’Alberta. Contribution agreements: 2014 to 2018, 2019 to 2023.
Conseil de développement économique de l’Alberta. Quarterly activity reports: April to June 2018, July to September 2018, October to December 2018, January to February 2019; March 2019, April to June 2019, July to September 2019, October to December 2019, January to March 2020.
Conseil économique du Nouveau Brunswick. Annual activity report: 2019 to 2020. 
Conseil économique du Nouveau Brunswick. Contribution agreements: 2014 to 2018, 2019 to 2023.
Conseil économique du Nouveau Brunswick. Quarterly activity reports: April to June 2018, July to September 2018, October to December 2018, January to February 2019; March 2019, April to June 2019, July to September 2019, October to December 2019, January to March 2020.
Étude économique conseil. (n.d.). Réseau de développement économique et d'employabilité du Canada: Impact de la pandémie sur les activités du réseau dans son ensemble. Note qualitative. 
Société économique de l’Ontario. Annual activity report: 2019 to 2020.
Société économique de l’Ontario. Contribution agreements: 2014 to 2018, 2019 to 2023.
Société économique de l’Ontario. Quarterly activity reports: April to June 2018, July to September 2018, October to December 2018, January to February 2019; March 2019, April to June 2019, July to September 2019, October to December 2019, January to March 2020.
Appendix A: Enabling Fund Logic Model
Figure A 1: Enabling Fund for Official Language Minority Communities Logic Model
Figure A 1 – Text version
Visual representation of the Enabling Fund’s logic model. It presents the relationship between inputs, activities, outputs, immediate outcomes, intermediate outcomes and ultimate outcomes.
External factors and programs, from other government departments, other levels of government and other stakeholders have an impact on program outcomes. The influence of external factors increases progressively from the inputs to ultimate outcomes. Accordingly, while outputs can be said to lead to immediate outcomes, immediate outcomes can only be said to contribute to intermediate outcomes. 

In other words, it presents how:

inputs, consisting of funding and full-time employee equivalents, are used to deliver activities, which include:  

contribution agreement negotiation, reporting and accountability, stakeholder engagement, and tools development
recipient organizations lead, coordinate and/or support capacity building in the areas of community economic development and human resource development in official language minority communities
activities yield outputs, such as the following:

reports, policy and operational guidelines
products, such as plans, reports, tools and guides
engagements, such as committees, meetings, networking events and surveys
services, such as services to businesses, entrepreneurs, not-for-profit organizations, and services to jobseekers
outputs lead to immediate outcomes:

official language minority communities members have the knowledge, tools, and supports to help realize their economic potential
partnerships are established to support community economic and human resource development in official language minority communities
immediate outcomes contribute to the intermediate outcome:
official language minority communities members shape their economic development 
the intermediate outcome contribute to the ultimate outcome:
	Community economic development and vitality are strengthened
Appendix B: List of Contribution Agreement Signatories
List of the Enabling Funds’ national level and 13 provincial and territorial contribution agreement signatories.
National level
Réseaux de développement économique et d’employabilité Canada
Provincial and territorial
Alberta: Conseil de développement économique de l’Alberta
British Columbia: Société de développement économique de la Colombie-Britannique
Manitoba: Conseil de développement économique des municipalités bilingues du Manitoba
Newfoundland and Labrador: Réseau de développement économique et d’employabilité de Terre-Neuve-et-Labrador
Northwest Territories: Conseil de développement économique des Territoires du Nord-Ouest
New Brunswick: Conseil économique du Nouveau-Brunswick
Nova Scotia: Le Conseil de développement économique de la Nouvelle-Écosse
Nunavut: Carrefour Nunavut
Ontario: Société économique de l’Ontario
Prince Edward Island: Réseau de développement économique et d’employabilité de l’Île du Prince Édouard
Quebec: Community Economic Development and Employability Corporation
Saskatchewan: Conseil économique et coopératif de la Saskatchewan
Yukon: Association Franco-Yukonnaise
Appendix C: Evaluation questions and supporting lines of evidence
Five contribution agreement signatory organizations have been selected to participate in the document review and key informant interviews. These include:
Association Franco-Yukonnaise (AFY)
Community Economic Development and Employability Corporation (CEDEC)
Conseil de développement économique de l’Alberta (CDÉA)
Conseil économique du Nouveau Brunswick (CÉNB)
Société économique de l’Ontario (SÉO Ontario)
Contribution agreement signatories in the Yukon, Alberta, and New Brunswick were randomly selected among northern, western, and eastern organizations to ensure regional representation. The organisation in Ontario was selected given the size of the Francophone community that it serves. The organisation in Québec was selected because it is the only one serving Anglophones in Canada.
Documents reviewed included contribution agreements, quarterly activity reports, and annual reports from April 2018 to March 2020. The document review addresses questions 1, 2, 3, and 3.a.
The key informant interviews were carried out with the leaders and staff of the 5 selected contribution agreement signatories. Interviews address question 3.a as well as enable the collection of data for a GBA+ analysis. Interviews were completed in January 2022 by phone or on MS Teams.
Evaluation questions
Do objectives and activities carried out by contribution agreement signatories continue to be aligned with the Enabling Fund objectives and eligible activities?
Do reported results demonstrate the extent to which contribution agreement signatories implemented the planned activities?
Do implemented activities and reported results contribute to enhancing the development and vitality of official Language Minority Communities?
	What examples can be provided by selected contribution agreement signatories?
Appendix D: Alignment of activities
Association Franco-Yukonnaise
Community economic development activities
Organized, supported, and participated in community economic development planning activities
Worked in partnership with communities and stakeholders to design, develop, obtain funding for, and implement economic development plans, initiatives, and events
Organized and participated in activities (job fairs, recruitment campaign, and job matching) to recruit French-speaking workers from elsewhere in Canada and abroad

Successfully recruited French-speaking workers to come work in the Yukon 
Supported the social and economic integration of Francophone newcomers to the Yukon:

organized, supported, and participated in activities (events, networks, and education and awareness campaigns)
provided immigrant settlement services
Supported the development of Francophone tourism in the Yukon through: 

the production and distribution of the Yukon vacation guide
the creation and implementation of a marketing campaign
the organization and delivery of familiarization tours for Canadian and foreign French-speaking tour operators and media
participation in various events, networks, forums, conferences, and national and international Francophone summits to promote the Yukon as a tourist destination
Promoted the Yukon’s Francophone cultural and artistic community, artists and their products
Supported a day care to improve the offer of French-language services in early childhood education in the Yukon
Human resources development activities
Provided support to Francophone entrepreneurs and self-employed individuals in the Yukon, through networking events, training activities, information sessions, and business start-up support
Provided employment assistance services and short-term training, including targeted services for youth and immigrants
Organized 1 bilingual job fair per year
Building partnerships and leveraging additional resources
Identified and mobilised key stakeholders to develop, fund, and implement economic development plans, projects, initiatives, and events 
Educated potential partners and stakeholders on economic development opportunities associated with the Yukon’s Francophone community
Developed and maintained partnerships with a wide variety of stakeholders, including:

municipal, territorial, and federal governments
private sector organizations
non-profit organizations, and
primary, secondary and post-secondary education institutions
Leveraged additional resources through:

successful funding proposals
financial contributions from partners
in-kind contributions from partners
Conseil de développement économique de l’Alberta
Community economic development activities
Organized, supported, and participated in community economic development planning activities
Worked in partnership with communities and stakeholders to design, develop, obtain funding for, and implement economic development plans, initiatives, and events
Promoted sustainable development by raising awareness and encouraging Franco-Albertan stakeholders (municipalities, businesses, school boards) to undertake sustainable development projects
Supported efforts to attract and integrate Francophone immigrant workers in Alberta
Supported the development of the Francophone tourism industry in Alberta by:

producing, promoting, and distributing the Official Alberta Francophone Tourist Guide
maintaining and improving the Tourisme Alberta website (only available in French) 
implementing and supporting tourism development projects
participating in various Francophone events, networks, forums, conferences, summits, fairs in Canada and abroad to promote Alberta as a tourist destination
creating and launching a campaign to promote and increase Francophone tourism in Alberta
supported the improved offer of French-language early childhood services by contributing to planning activities and creating a day care start-up guide
Human resources development activities
Provided support to Francophone and bilingual businesses and entrepreneurs in Alberta by: 

maintaining a directory of businesses that offer services in French in Alberta on the CDÉA website
organizing and participating in networking activities, conferences, workshops, training, and galas, including a targeted networking event for women
providing information, support and mentoring services for entrepreneurs and small businesses
Raised entrepreneurial awareness, knowledge and skills of Francophone youth through contests, workshops, and training
In collaboration with partners, provided entrepreneurial training and workshops to immigrants
Building partnerships and leveraging additional resources
Identified and mobilised key stakeholders to develop, fund, and implement economic development plans, projects, initiatives, and events
Developed and maintained partnerships with a wide variety of stakeholders, including:

municipal, territorial, and federal governments
private sector organizations
non-profit organizations, and
primary, secondary and post-secondary education institutions
Supported communities and partners to obtain funding for their economic development projects
Contributed to the creation of a network of bilingual municipalities, implementation of a marketing strategy and recruitment of members
Leveraged additional resources through:

revenue generating activities
successful funding proposals
financial contributions from partners
in-kind contributions from partners
Community Economic Development and Employability Corporation (Quebec)
Community economic development activities
In collaboration with community partners, organized and supported community economic development planning activities, including:

community capacity assessments
economic demographic profiling
economic development plans, and 
progress assessment/evaluation
Worked in partnership with communities and stakeholders to design, develop, obtain funding for, and implement economic development plans, initiatives, and events
Supported the development of the tourism industry in Anglophone communities by helping communities to:

identify areas for tourism development as part of community economic development consultations and planning
identify funders and to apply for funding for tourism development projects
implement and evaluate projects
Human resources development activities
Deepened and shared knowledge of Quebec Anglophone’s labour market participation needs, opportunities, and challenges
Stimulated and supported small business development among Anglophones in Quebec by:

providing a range of small business support services, including pre and post start-up support, networking events, professional development opportunities, seminars, webinars, and workshops
facilitating access to small business support services offered by other organizations
Provided employment assistance services, including:

networking opportunities
workshops, short courses, integrated learning programs (skills development training and co-op placement), and
promoting career opportunities in the provincial and federal public service
Trained local people to meet local workforce needs (Job-specific language and skills training, soft-skill training)
Designed and implemented targeted initiatives to improve the labour market outcomes of Quebec Anglophone sub-populations, including newcomers, Black English-speakers, older workers, and Indigenous peoples
Building partnerships and leveraging additional resources
Identified and mobilised key stakeholders to develop, fund, and implement economic development plans, projects, initiatives, and events
Developed and maintained partnerships with a wide variety of stakeholders, including:

municipal, territorial, and federal governments
private sector organizations
non-profit organizations, and
primary, secondary and post-secondary education institutions
Supported communities and partners to obtain funding for their economic development projects
Supported intercultural (Anglophone, Indigenous, Francophone), cross-sectoral, intercommunity relationship building and collaboration
Built and maintained constructive relationships with key public and private stakeholders to influence policy, increase resources and increase economic activity in Quebec’s Anglophone communities
Leveraged additional resources through:

revenue generating activities
successful funding proposals
financial contributions from partners
in-kind contributions from partners
Conseil économique du Nouveau-Brunswick
Community economic development activities
Organized and supported community economic development planning activities, including community capacity assessments, economic demographic profiling, economic development plans, and progress assessment/evaluation
Worked in partnership with communities and stakeholders to design, develop, obtain funding for, and implement economic development plans, initiatives, and events
Supported the development of the Francophone tourism industry in New Brunswick and the Maritimes by:

organizing and participating in various Francophone events, networks, forums, conferences, summits, and fairs to promote New Brunswick and the Maritimes as a tourist destination
implementing and supporting tourism development projects
Organized and participated in various events, networks, and forums to recruit French-speaking labour abroad and to repatriate young people to the province’s Francophone regions
Supported the economic integration of Francophone immigrants in New Brunswick through employer and community education, pre-departure services, settlement services, and specialised employment assistance services
Provided day care start-up and management support services
Human resources development activities
Organized and supported various events, workshops, networks, and forums to:

identify human resources skills development needs and opportunities,
lead/contribute to planning exercises, and 
implement/support skills development initiatives in human resources
Supported Francophone and bilingual businesses and entrepreneurs through:

initiatives aimed at improving the knowledge and skills of entrepreneurs in business start-up, management, recruitment, innovation, exploitation of emerging niches and business transfer
networking activities, including support for the development of a website aimed at facilitating networking between potential buyers and businesses for sale
Raised entrepreneurial awareness, job market knowledge and skills of Francophone youth through contests, workshops, and training
Designed and implemented targeted initiatives to meet labour force needs and improve the labour market outcomes of women and visible minority women
Provided a range of employability and employment assistance services
Building partnerships and leveraging additional resources
Identified and mobilised key stakeholders to develop, fund, and implement economic development plans, projects, initiatives, and events
Developed and maintained partnerships with a wide variety of stakeholders, including

municipal, territorial, and federal governments
private sector organizations
non-profit organizations, and
primary, secondary and post-secondary education institutions
Supporting communities and partners to obtain funding for their economic development projects
Leveraged additional resources through:

revenue generating activities
successful funding proposals
financial contributions from partners
in-kind contributions from partners
Société économique de l’Ontario
Community economic development activities
Organized and supported community economic development planning activities, including community self-assessments, and planning events, networks, conferences, and galas
Worked in partnership with communities and stakeholders to design, develop, obtain funding for, and implement economic development plans, initiatives, and events
Supported for the development of the Francophone tourism industry in Ontario by:

implementing and support of tourism development projects
organizing of a conference on sustainable tourism
Organized and participated in activities (workforce needs identification, job fairs, recruitment campaigns, and job matching) to recruit Francophone immigrants

Successfully recruited Francophone immigrants to fill labour market needs in Ontario
Supported the economic integration of Francophone immigrants in Ontario by:

supporting and implementing related initiatives, and 
offering a range of employment assistance, matching, mentoring, and retention services 
Supported the improved offer of French-language early childhood services by:

undertaking market and feasibility studies
supporting funding proposals
providing entrepreneurial support for family day care centres and childcare services already in place to ensure their economic viability
Human resources development activities
Supported Francophone and bilingual businesses and entrepreneurs by providing a range of business support services, including:

networking events and webinars
consultation services
training
business start-up support
business accelerators and incubators
business transfer support, and
sustainable development accreditation
Raised entrepreneurial and community development awareness and skills of Francophone youth through contests, workshops, and training
Provided a range of employment assistance services to match the available workforce to the job market, including targeted services for women and immigrants
Building partnerships and leveraging additional resources
Identified and mobilised key stakeholders to develop, fund, and implement economic development plans, projects, initiatives, and events
Organized, participated in, and supported various events, networks, forums, conferences, and galas to develop and maintain partnerships with a wide variety of stakeholders, including:

municipal, territorial, and federal governments
private sector organizations
non-profit organizations, and
primary, secondary and post-secondary education institutions
Educated donors, municipal, provincial and federal government authorities, elected municipal officials, and members of provincial and federal parliament on the needs and priorities of Francophone communities in Ontario
Leveraged additional resources through:

revenue generating activities
successful funding proposals
financial contributions from partners
in-kind contributions from partners
