Executive  summary
Introduction
This report presents findings from the evaluation of the Federal  Income Support for Parents of Murdered or Missing Children (PMMC) grant which  was introduced in  January 2013. This grant provides income support  payments of $350 per week for up 35 weeks (up to $12,250 in total) to parents who suffer a loss of  employment income due to the death or disappearance of their child or children  under the age of 18, where the death or disappearance is the result of a  probable Criminal Code offence in Canada. Payments are available in the 52 weeks period after the  death or disappearance of their child (or children).
Along  with the introduction of the PMMC grant, the Helping Families in Need Act amended the Canada Labour Code to allow for unpaid leave and to protect the  jobs of parents whose child dies or disappears as a result of a probable Criminal Code offence.
This first evaluation of the PMMC grant examined questions  pertaining to the relevance, usage, awareness  and administrative costs of the grant. The evaluation used the following lines  of evidence:
an analysis of administrative data (grant  applicants data, Employment Insurance (EI) and Canada Revenue Agency taxation  files); 
a review of the literature; and 
43 key informant interviews with  federal government representatives, police officers and victim support groups.
The number of parents who applied to the program varied from 11  to 14 per year between 2013 and 2016, for a total of 50 applicants over that  period. Of those, 29 parents received grant payments. Between 2012 to 2013 and  2016 to 2017, a total of $315,350 was paid in grant. These numbers reflect, in  part, the low incidence of child murder and disappearance in Canada.
Key findings
Relevance of the program: need addressed by the PMMC  grant
The literature and the key informants interviewed for the  evaluation suggest that there is a need for the PMMC grant. Incidents such as those covered by this  program result in significant emotional impacts for the parents and may lead to  post-traumatic stress disorder. The trauma can impede parent’s ability to  function at work in the period following the incident and during the criminal  justice process. As well, according to key informants, parents who return to  work before they are ready often fail to function effectively and run a risk of  being long-term unemployed.
As pointed out by key informants, income support is one of  the greatest needs of parents whose child died or went missing due to a  probable Criminal Code offence. Family members may incur costs in order to  undertake their own search of the missing person or expenses in relation with  funeral, accommodation if the home is the crime scene, travelling to court,  loss income while away from work or therapy. The extent to which they face a  financial hardship depends on their pre-existing financial situation. On one  hand, as illustrated by key informants, parents with stronger labour market  attachment are more likely to qualify for income replacement such as Employment  Insurance or to have access to employer paid benefit (for example, long-term  disability insurance). On the other hand, researches show that families with  low income are more likely to be victims of homicide than economically  advantaged individuals.
In Canada, the need to provide  financial compensation or assistance to relatives of crime victims has been  acknowledged in many provinces and territories. However, the PMMC grant appears to  fill a gap in assistance, especially for family members of missing persons.  Similarly, countries such as the United States, United Kingdom, Australia and  some of the European Union countries are offering assistance to family members  of deceased victims to cover different type of expenses resulting from the  criminal incident. However, with one exception, it has not been possible to  find examples of specific programs targeted to relatives of missing person in  those countries.
Barriers to accessing the PMMC grant
Key informants identified a  range of barriers that may limit access to the PMMC grant by parents:
The level  of awareness of the grant is low among parents and victim support providers in  general. The approach used to share information does not always reach front  line staff in victim support provider offices and the information is not  distributed frequently. Key informants also suggested that the grant could be  advertised more in police stations and in court houses.  
Most of  victim support service providers agree that the personal turmoil of potential  applicants is one of the largest barriers to applying for the grant. Personal  turmoil likely prevents parents from not only not looking for support, but also  never accessing victim support services. 
Accessing  relevant information about the grant and understanding this information is a  challenge.
The following eligibility  conditions are seen by key informants as main barriers to accessing the grant:
A  proportion of the parents of missing or murdered children may not be able to  access the program due to having insufficient earnings to meet the eligibility  threshold.
Providing  evidence that a child is missing or deceased as a result of a probable Criminal  Code offence, and that the child was not a willing party of the probable  Criminal Code is difficult and involves a certain level of subjectivity. 
The age  limit of the victim 
Application  process revives negative emotions and it requires parents to acquire too many forms.
Characteristics of applicants and reasons for denials
PMMC  recipients were predominantly female and living in an urban area. Slightly more  recipients were married or in common law relationship as opposed to single,  divorced, separated, or widow. Almost all recipients were living in urban area.  On average, they earned $36,000 from employment in the year before the  incident.
Compared to recipients, parents  who had applied to the grant but were denied payments were predominately  single, divorced, separated or widowed as opposed to married or in common law  relationship. As well, denied applicants were most likely to be unemployed at  the time of the incident and had lower earnings from employment ($20,600) in  the year before the incident.
Out of the 50 parents who  applied for the grant between 2013 and 2016, 21 were denied funding. The main  reasons of denial were insufficient employment earnings, missing earnings  information, the missing child was older than 18 years of age or the incident  occurred before January 1, 2013.
Usage of the grant
The average length of time necessary to resolve cases of  murder or disappearance of children resulting from a probable Criminal Code  offence could not be found. However, Statistics Canada data show that the  median length of homicide court cases in Canada was over a year (451 days) in  2013 to 2014, which exceeds the duration of the grant payments.
The data analysis shows that the majority of recipients  received 35 weeks of grant payments (maximum allowed) and that the window  during which payments were received averaged 35.2 weeks. Most victim support  providers and police officers interviewed suggested that 52 weeks of income  support would be the minimum coverage needed for most parents. As well, many  key informants felt that the window should be of up to two or three years.
Support provided to parents by the grant
For recipients with the lowest earnings level, grant  payments replaced 145% of their lost earnings, on average. For recipients with  the highest earnings level, PMMC  grant payments replaced 22% of the loss earnings on average.
Cost analysis
The administrative costs of delivering the PMMC grant have  decreased from $1,389,800 in 2012 to 2013 to $191,100 in 2016 to 2017.  Accordingly, the ratio of administrative costs over the total program  expenditures (that is administrative costs and grant payments to recipients)  has decreased from 99.7% to 67.4% over that period. These numbers reflects the  significant investment that was made in start-up activities including the development  of information technology system to process applications and payments.  Considering that the incidence of murdered and missing children cases is low in  Canada, the program can only provide support to a limited number of  individuals. In this context, fixed costs will remain high compared to amount  directly provided to parents.
Lessons learned
The evaluation recognizes that the PMMC grant is a small and  relatively recent program with low, but very important materiality. In that  context, the evaluation findings help drawing lessons learned that the grant  program management may consider in the future.
Management response
Employment and Social Development Canada (the Department) is  pleased to receive and to respond to the evaluation report on the Federal  Income Support for Parents of Murdered or Missing Children grant (PMMC). This  report is timely and complements the report on the PMMC grant that was recently  released by the Federal Ombudsman for Victims of Crime (Ombudsman), released in  August 2017. In fact, many of the findings reported in the evaluation are  closely aligned with those of the Ombudsman.
The Parents of Murdered or Missing Children grant was  introduced in January 2013 and targeted a new client group for the Department  by providing support to parents coping with the death or disappearance of their  child due to a probable Criminal Code offence. The Department established a  specialized processing centre for this grant; and staff received specialized  training to better handle the sensitive interactions with parents who are  coping with these tragic circumstances. The Department regularly shares  information with victim-centered organizations and law enforcement agencies to  raise awareness of the grant. Furthermore, the Department proactively reaches  out to law enforcement when aware of incidents that may result in potential  applications.
Almost five years since the launch of the grant, the  Department has learned that the original estimates with respect to grant  take-up were high and that fortunately the size of this target group is smaller  than originally estimated. However, work remains to ensure that those who may be  eligible for it are aware of the grant.
The Department continues to work with partners including  Justice Canada to review and enhance the program in response to the Ombudsman’s  report and the findings highlighted in the evaluation will be leveraged to further  inform this process. Improvements to the grant are being approached through the  following three themes: providing citizen-centric service delivery; improving  access to the PMMC grant; and promoting awareness of the grant.
Providing citizen-centric  service delivery
The Department is reviewing the application materials  including the content of communications information, forms and definitions,  with the aim to improve clarity and reduce the application burden.
Improving access  to the PMMC grant
The Department is reviewing various aspects of the grant  including the application requirements and communications tools, and expanding  outreach to under-represented communities to ensure that victims’ families are  able to access the grant. In addition, the Department is reviewing the  eligibility criteria for the grant.
Promoting awareness  of the PMMC grant
The Department continues to participate in victim-focused  activities and conferences to raise awareness of the PMMC grant. Contact with  key stakeholders will be continued with expansion of outreach to target groups,  such as Indigenous organizations and advocacy groups for persons with  disabilities.
1. Introduction
This report presents findings from the evaluation of the  Federal Income Support for Parents of Murdered or Missing Children (PMMC)  grant. Introduced in January 2013, the PMMC grant provides up to 35 weeks of  income support to parents who suffer a loss of employment income due to the  death or disappearance of their child or children under the age of 18, where  the death or disappearance is the result of a probable Criminal Code  offence.
Along with the introduction of this program, the Helping  Families in Need Act amended the Canada Labour Code to allow for unpaid leave  and to protect the jobs of parents whose child dies or disappears as a result  of a probable Criminal Code offence.
This first evaluation of the grant examined questions  pertaining to the relevance, usage, awareness and administrative costs of the  grant. Lines of evidence used to address the evaluation questions consisted of:
an analysis of administrative data from the  grant applicants, Employment Insurance (EI) and Canada Revenue Agency taxation  files; 
a review of the literature; and
interviews with 43 key informants (federal  government representatives involved in the design and delivery of the grant,  police officers who had been leading investigation of missing or deceased child  in the past five years and victim support groups) distributed as follows : 
    
10  police officers among which three were from Indigenous police forces; 
24 victim support providers distributed as  follows: six national organisations; six police victim support providers, nine  provincial and territorial victim service providers, three Indigenous victim  service providers; 
9 Government of Canada officers from Employment  and Social Development Canada, Service Canada and Justice Canada.Between  January 1, 2013 and December 31, 2016, 50 parents applied to the PMMC grant.  This has limited the evaluator’s ability to conduct statistical analysis of  administrative data to examine the outcomes of the grant.
2. Description of the  PMMC grant
The PMMC grant provides parents with  payments of $350 per week paid bi-weekly for up to 35 weeks (up to $12,250) in  the 52 week period after the death or disappearance of their child (or  children) under the age of 18. The grant may be shared by eligible recipients.  A lump sum payment is possible up to one year less a day after the incident,  provided all criteria are met.
In  order to access the grant, the applicant must:
be legally  responsible for the child or children involved in the incident;
be on  leave from all employment as a result of the incident, or if already on leave  from employment at the time of the incident, be unable to return to work;  
have  recent labour force attachment having earned at least $6,500 in the previous  calendar year or in the 52 weeks immediately prior to the incident. Both  wage-earners and the self-employed are eligible for the grant; 
cannot be  receiving any type of Employment Insurance benefits or Quebec Parental  Insurance Plan benefits and must declare any Employment Insurance or Quebec  Parental Insurance Plan benefits received since the incident; and 
must not  have been charged with committing a Criminal Code offence that led to the death  or disappearance of the child.
Some  conditions also apply to the type of incidents for which the grant can be  obtained:
the grant  is available for incidents occurring in Canada on or after January 1, 2013; 
the child  has to be 18 years or less at the time of the incident; 
the death  or disappearance of the child is a result of a probable Criminal Code offence;  and
in the  case of a missing child, the child must have been missing for over one week. In  the case of a deceased child, the requirement is that it is not probable that  the child was a willing party to the crime that led to his or her death.
To  apply to the grant, parents have to complete an Application Form which can be  submitted online or in paper form. They also have to submit an Incident Report  Form completed and stamped by the law enforcement agency where the incident was  reported. As well, parents must submit an Employment Form completed and signed  by each of the employers they were working for in the 52 weeks before the  incident occurred.
3.  Key findings
3.1  Relevance of the program: need addressed by the PMMC grant
The literature reviewed and the key informants interviewed  for the evaluation suggest that there is a need for the federal government to  provide income support to parents of missing or murdered children. These  incidents generally result in a traumatism for the parents and impact their  overall life, employment and finance. As well, Canadian provinces and  territories and other countries recognize the need for specific programs to  cover expenses resulting directly from a crime. No program similar to the PMMC  grant exists at the provincial and territorial level. Therefore, the program  fills a gap in provincial and territorial funding for parents of missing or  murdered children.
3.1.1 Effects of the child disappearance or homicide on parent’s life, employment  and finances
General effects on  personal life
The literature shows that criminal incidents result in  significant psychological and emotional impacts; especially if the crime  affects a personal relationship.  According to a research report on the needs of persons bereaved by homicide,  family members may experience a traumatism for a long period of time after the  incident and can have difficulties functioning in their day-to-day life.  This traumatism may be further complicated by the need to deal with the  criminal justice process. As recognised in the Diagnostics and Statistics  Manual of Mental Disorder (DSM-V)  and in the literature,  family members of an individual who was a victim of crime are at risk of developing  post-traumatic stress disorder.
Impacts on employment
Incidents such as those covered under the PMMC grant create a  range of consequences for the employment of the victim’s family. Research shows  that family members of homicide victim experience difficulties functioning at  work due to factors such as inability to focus, lack of motivation, emotional  outburst and depression.  For example, relatives of a murdered person have reported leaving their job  because they would no longer feel comfortable with their responsibilities (such  as working with kids after the death of a child) or being terminated by their  employers who felt that they would no longer be able to do the job.  The effect on someone’s  ability to work may emerge a long time after the crime. Some homicide victim  relatives have reported suffering from a break down years after the incident or  being faced with a re-emerging traumatism once the offender is arrested.   As well, family members of victims of  unresolved crime have reported that they put their life on hold while waiting  for the offender to be arrested.
In the case of missing persons, interviews conducted in the  United Kingdom found that family members often feel the need to take time away  from work due to emotional stress or in order to undertake research of the  disappeared person.
The key informants interviewed for this evaluation echoed  findings presented in literature. All levels of victim service providers  interviewed reported that parents would need to take time away from work at two  key junctures: 1) right after the incident and 2) during the court process. In  particular, all victim support providers agreed that parents need time off work  during the legal proceedings and mentioned that parents often collapse after  the trial. Informants also reported that post-traumatic stress disorder often  occur a year following the incident.
Key informants pointed out that it is very common to see  parents returning to work before they are ready, and then experiencing large  setbacks in their grieving process. According to several victim support  providers, returning to work before being ready may also create some risks of  becoming chronically out of work. In particular, parents who need to return to  work before they are ready often fail to function effectively at work. As a  result, they either leave on their own or are forced to resign.
Overall, all key informants agreed that the amount of time  parents need to take off work varies from person to person and depends on  several factors (access to financial and social supports, ways of coping, the  presence of other children in the household, and the particular circumstances  of the incident). Most key informants do, however, think that parents need at  least a year off of work after the incident and generally take two or three  years to get back to a normal life. They may need more time if the child is  missing for a long period or if there are other children in their home grieving  the loss of a sibling. Indigenous victim service providers affirmed that it is  not uncommon for an Indigenous parent to be off work for two or three years  depending on their social support network.
Most police officers and victim support providers reported  that it is very common for parents to fear losing their jobs. This fear is  higher for single parent families where parents are living from paycheck to  paycheck. As well, many Government of Canada officials and victim support  providers mentioned that self-employed parents, those whose work is precarious  and lower income earners may have greater fears. While the parents may often  fear losing their employment, most victim support providers (from all  categories) noticed that employers are very understanding of parents in these  circumstances and try to be as supportive as possible.
Most Government of Canada informants, police officers and  victim support providers did not know the likelihood of losing or changing jobs  as a result of these incidents. Some did mention that it is common for parents  to lose or change their job because they need to take too much time off of  work, cannot cope with the work environment or decide to relocate in other city  or country.
Financial impacts
The murder or disappearance of a child also impacts the  family from a financial stand point. In the cases of disappearance, the family  may incur costs in order to undertake their own search of the missing person.  Such cost may include printing posters, buying advertising space or long  distance travel in order to investigate all possibilities related to the  disappearance.
In the case of homicide, having to pay for the funeral  expenses can result in financial difficulties for some families.  Other expenses include having to pay for accommodation if the home is the crime  scene; travelling to court, loss income while away from work, therapy or  counselling.  The costs paid by families as a result of a homicide can be significant;  averaging 37,000 pounds (approximately $61,000 Canadian) according to a  research conducted in the United Kingdom.
Victims support providers and Government of Canada officials  interviewed for the evaluation identified income support as the greatest or  second greatest need of parents of missing or murdered children. As noted by  victim support providers from all categories, parents are in need of income  support to fill in the gap while they take time off work for the trial and  subsequent to the trial. The police victim support providers indicated that  beyond income replacement, parents may need financial assistance for expenses  related to funeral, travel to attend the court process clean up in the case of  an incident occurring in the home, medication, child care for siblings and  moving costs.
According to Indigenous victim service providers  interviewed, the need for financial assistance is higher for Indigenous  families. The largest financial cost incurred by those families relates to  travel to access victim support services, Indigenous medical services and  trauma programs located in Toronto and Ottawa. Other costs relate to care, medications,  moving expenses, and travel to attend court proceedings.
The financial needs of families following the death or  disappearance of a child may depend on their pre-existing financial situation.  In this regard, research shows that individuals and families with low income  are more likely to be victims of homicide than economically advantaged  individuals. The financial situation of these families can exacerbate the  financial and employment consequences resulting from the incident. This was echoed by the key  informants whom spoke about the unequal access parents have to various sources  of income. They pointed out that parent’s ability to access other sources of  income is a product of the type of employment they have (for example, public  sector, private sector, self-employed), personal investments, and capacity to  save. For example, many parents in the public and private sectors will be able  to qualify for standard income replacement such as EI or may have employer paid  benefits such as long-term disability insurance.
Key informants noted that existing employment benefits that  provide better financial supports and job security generally require parents to  prove their inability to work during a time of personal turmoil. For numerous  reasons, many key informants thought it would be too difficult for parents to  access these supports due to the emotional turmoil they are going through.
3.1.2 Availability of compensation for crime victim relatives in Canada
In Canada, along with the PMMC grant, the federal government provides financial  assistance to victims of crime and, in some cases, to their relatives through  programs such as assistance for Attending Parole Board of Canada hearings;  Financial Assistance for Canadians Victimized Abroad; Victim Services and Assistance  for Families of Missing or Murdered Indigenous Women and Girls and Assistance  for Victims and Survivors of Crime with Disabilities.
A review of the provincial and territorial employment  standard acts showed that nine Canadian provinces and territories have labour  code protection allowing parents of disappeared or murdered children to take a  leave of absence from work. In most cases, the duration of the protected leaves  aligns with the Canada Labour Code which provides up to 104 weeks of protected  leave in the cases of child death and 52 weeks in cases of disappearance. There  were exceptions in two where the duration of both type of leaves was 35 weeks  in one jurisdiction and 37 weeks in another jurisdiction. The entitlement  criteria is generally less stringent in the provinces and territories where the  parents can access the protected leave after 30 or 90 days of continuous  employment while the Canada Labour Code criteria is six months of continuous  employment. There was one exception where the entitlement started after 12  months of continuous employment.
A review of provincial and territorial government websites  also showed that it is common for provinces to deliver compensation programs to  victims of crime or survivors of violent crimes.  Some of those programs  also provide compensation to the family of the victim. For example, the Crime  Victim Assistance Program in British Columbia reimburses certain expenses (for  example, counselling or funeral) to immediate family members but does not  provide income support to parents of missing or murdered children.
Another example is the Indemnisation des victimes d’actes  criminels in Quebec, which may provide a compensation of approximately $6,000  each to the mother and father of a deceased person. The program also covers the  costs of psychotherapy sessions for the relatives of a deceased or missing  victim. As well, since 2016, the parent of a child murdered by the other parent  can receive an allowance while being unable to work. To be eligible, it must  be proven that the incident was committed to harm the other parent. The  allowance covers up to 90% of employment income up to maximum insurable  earnings which was $70,000 in 2015.
Overall, while some provinces and territories provide some  support to parents of homicide victims, it was not possible to find any  provincial or territorial programs similar to the PMMC grant.
3.1.3  Supports for crime victim relatives in other countries
The need to provide some form of financial compensation to  close relatives of a homicide victim has been recognized in many countries  similar to Canada. Few examples of compensation programs offered in selected  countries such as the United States, United Kingdom and Australia and from the  European Union are discussed below. These examples discuss financial support  for family members of victims deceased as a result of a crime. With the  exception of Belgium (see subsection on European Union), the literature search  has not been successful at identifying specific programs that provide financial  support to parents of missing children.
Overall the examples discussed below provide a small glimpse  at what other countries do to support family members. Beyond those programs,  relatives of crime victims may be able to access financial assistance through  other existing government programs such Employment Insurance or other temporary  income supports. Therefore, it is not because the research has not been able to  identify any concrete examples of programs targeted at relatives of disappeared  persons that these individuals are not receiving any governmental assistance.
United States
Every State of the United States delivers its own  compensation program to victims of crime.  The scope of those programs varies across states. Funding is offered to family  of deceased victims to cover expenses that resulted directly from the crime,  such as mental health  counseling, wage loss, funeral and/or burial expenses.  The  funding limit varies across states but the average maximum is $25,000.  This amount, however, includes financial compensation provided to direct  victims of crime. Those programs are payers of last resort which means  that the victim has to obtain payments from other sources such as private  insurance before applying to the state programs.  Victim  compensation programs offered in the United States are mostly funded through  fees and fines charged to individuals convicted of a crime.
In the case of missing children, a survival guide for  families produced by the US Department of Justice recommends parents to contact  their state missing children’s clearinghouse, the Office for Victims of Crime  and state attorney general to inquire about compensation programs or financial  assistance available.  A search across a sample  of websites of national victim compensation organisations, state missing  children’s clearinghouses and state Offices for Victims of Crime has not yield  any concrete examples of financial assistance programs dedicated to parents of  missing children.
United Kingdom
The  Criminal Injuries Compensation Scheme in the United Kingdom compensates people  whose loved ones have died as a result of a violent crime. Under the Scheme, a loved one is a person with whom the applicant had a close  relationship of love and affection at the time of the incident or, if the loved  one is alive at the time of the application, a person with whom the applicant  continues to have such a relationship.  The  Scheme provides compensation payments up to a maximum amount of £11,000  (approximately $18,000 Canadians) for costs of bereavement.
The  Scheme does not provide financial assistance to parents of missing children. As  well, it has not been possible to find examples of financial assistance  programs for parents of missing children.
Australia
Victim compensation programs in Australia are delivered by  states. Like the United States, the scope of the programs varies across states.  In the State of Victoria, close relatives of a deceased person as a result of a  criminal offence can receive up to $50,000 Australians (approximately $50,000  Canadians) for costs such as medical expenses, funeral, counselling or  assistance for distress experienced.
The State of South Australia provides up to $20,000  Australian dollar (approximately $20,000 Canadians) in compensation for grief  and up to $14,000 Australian dollars for funeral expenses to parents of a  deceased child as a result of crime.
The research has not found any concrete examples of  financial assistance programs for parents of missing children in Australia.
European Union
In 2012, the European Union has established a Directive on  Victims of Crime which gives the status of victim to family  members of a person whose death was caused by a criminal offence. However, not all European Union members’ countries provide compensation to  relatives of the deceased victim. Among countries that offer compensation to  the relatives, Netherlands provides a fixed amount of 5,000 euros  (approximately $7,000 Canadian) to compensate for pain and suffering and  additional compensation for funeral expenses.  Another  example is Belgium where the relatives of a deceased person can receive  compensation for moral damages and funeral expenses. In  Belgium, the relatives of a missing person can receive up to 6,000 euros  (approximately $9,000 Canadians) for costs related to the proceedings as well  as funding for moral damages and medical expenses.
3.2  PMMC grant uptake
The number of parents who applied to the PMMC grant varied from  11 to 14 per year between 2013 and 2016. In total, 50 parents applied to this  grant during that period. Of those, 29 received payments. These numbers  reflect, in part, the low incidence of child murder and disappearance in  Canada.
According to data from the National Centre for Missing  Persons and Unidentified Remains of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police,  approximately 45,000 children went missing in Canada in 2015 and 2016. Of  those, approximately 75% were runaway. Moreover, approximately 90% of the  missing child reports are removed within a week and 60% of the reports are  removed within 24 hours of the disappearance.
While  it has not been possible to find data on the incidence of disappearances  related to possible Criminal Code offence, it is worth noting that 63 Amber  Alerts involving 73 abducted children were issued in Canada between 2003 and  2012. A  study from the Canadian Center of Child Protection of abducted then murdered  children found that 147 cases occurred over a 40 year period (between 1970 and  2010) which represents an average of four cases per  year. This number is, however, not representative of all abductions followed by  murder since the cases studied had to correspond to specific criteria.
Finally, the Statistics Canada Homicide survey shows that  between 40 and 60 children per year were victims of homicide in Canada in the  last 10 years.
3.3  Awareness and understanding of the PMMC grant
3.3.1  How parents are informed about the PMMC grant
All key informants agreed that parents typically learn about  the PMMC grant  through victim support services. Most police victim support service providers  explained that parents are referred to them by a major crime police officer,  investigator or the crown attorney’s office. The contact often occurs one to  two days after completing the police report. Once a contact is made, an  introductory package detailing supports and services available is shared with  the parents.
As explained by Government of Canada officials interviewed,  the federal government’s role in building awareness of the grant includes  developing the following material: 1) pamphlets; 2) service information kits  (e-kits) that are sent out quarterly; and 3) development of program information  posted on several Government of Canada websites. As well, Employment and Social  Development Canada (ESDC) staff, including those from Service Canada, conduct  victim support provider outreach by attending conferences and offering  information sessions, presentations and questions and answers. Service Canada  also monitors the media to identify incidents that would qualify for the Parents of Murdered or  Missing Children grant. When they find a case, they contact police  services and victim services in the region to make sure that they are aware of  the program.
Service Canada delivers the 1 800 O-Canada phone line that  answers questions from parents about the grant. Questions that cannot be  answered by Service Canada are sent to PMMC grant processing where there is said to be a two  day service standard to respond to inquiries.
3.3.2  Level of awareness of the PMMC grant
Informants from all  categories of victim service providers as well as police officers and  Government of Canada officials agreed that the level of awareness of the program is low. Some  Government of Canada officials made the nuance that awareness is fine for parents  of murdered children but low for missing children and those who died as a  result of Criminal Code offence that is not murder, such as negligence.
Victim support providers said that the awareness of the  program is also low among the victim support providers in general. Most  Government of Canada officials interviewed agreed with that statement. A victim  service provider, however, mentioned that it may be hard to advertise the grant  to victim support providers because they use a lot of volunteers and experience  a fair amount of turn-over.
Key informants identified the  following factors to explain the low level of awareness:
The  Service Canada is using a top-down approach to share information about the  grant. The information is usually shared through the management of  organizations (for example, victim services directors, victim services  coordinator, chief of police, etc.) and subsequently shared with front-line  staff. Key informants from the Government of Canada acknowledged that such  approach may not be efficient to reach frontline staff in the victim support  providers.  
Many key  informants perceived a lack of effort from the federal government to inform  victim support providers, police stakeholders, and parents on the program. They  believed that Service Canada e-blast mail out are not reaching victim support  providers quarterly. In this regard, many victim support providers mentioned  having received information about the program only when it was launched. 
A few  victim support providers believed that the lack of pamphlets and posters  advertising program in police stations or in court houses is a barrier to  awareness. 
Most  victim service providers and national victim service providers agreed that the  grant is not sufficiently advertised to parents or victim providers  themselves.  
According  to police victim support service providers, parents are not aware of the grant  as they do not even request assistance from victim support providers because  the overwhelming personal turmoil they experience and the early timeframe (a  few days following a traumatic event) frequently used to engage with parents. 
Another  possible factor identified by one police victim support service provider is the  lack of trained victim assistance personnel in some rural and remote communities.
While key informants from every category of victim support  providers agreed that there is an overall lack of awareness of the PMMC grant among  potential applicants, they identified some groups that are less likely to be  aware and spoke about the reasons. Firstly, the majority of victim support  providers and Government of Canada informants mentioned that Indigenous  populations would be less likely to be aware of the program as they have more  barriers to accessing information and services in general. Respondents added  that communications with Indigenous populations is harder due to language  barriers, lack of phone and permanent address, more limited access to the  Internet and distrust of police services. Some respondents suggested to provide  information on the grant to the band councils, First Nations settlements who  have a land-base and reserves, elders, traditional healers, Indigenous health  centers, family support workers and to Indigenous victim service providers. As  well, written materials should be made available in native language and the  grant should be advertised on the radio and in newspapers.
Secondly, many victim support providers mentioned that  individuals in rural or remote areas and newcomers to Canada are likely to be  less aware.
Finally, low income groups and persons with disabilities  were also mentioned to be at risk of being unaware of the program. These  individuals may have lower literacy levels, are less likely to have access to  online information and need additional support or modified materials to  understand programs in general.
3.3.3 Understanding of the PMMC grant eligibility conditions
Although most police victim  support service providers have never completed an application with a parent,  they think that it can be difficult for parents to understand whether or not  they are eligible for the PMMC  grant. Police victim support providers described the PMMC applications as being too long and containing  too many words on eligibility conditions. Based on their discussions with  parents, Government of Canada informants identified the same areas of confusion  as victim support providers. Those areas are:
Parents  tend to be unclear on how to determine if an incident was caused by a Criminal  Code offence, especially in contexts where it is difficult for police services  to disclose this information. 
Victim  support providers who have been helping a parent to fill grant applications are  unclear about the conditions necessary for a missing child to be eligible for  the grant, and the likelihood of having an application approved. 
Some  victim support providers mentioned not knowing how to interpret the criteria  pertaining to the child not being a willing party to the crime. 
Another  area of confusion relates to the eligibility of impaired driving in contexts  where police officers are unable to press charges. 
A few  victim support providers reviewed the program’s website and are not sure if  parents receiving social assistance payments or other government compensation  programs are eligible for the grant. 
Self-employed  parents or those with multiple employers find it difficult to understand if  they meet the income thresholds and/or what proof is required by employers to  apply for the grant. 
The  concept of splitting the grant between family members is difficult to  understand. For example, it is difficult to understand what happens if a  parents needs are not immediate and whether the first parent has to reimburse  the money disbursed if the second parent makes a delayed claim for support.
3.4  Barriers to accessing the PMMC grant
Key informants were asked their  opinion about different possible barriers that could limit the access to the PMMC  grant and possibly explain the limited uptake of the program. The following  presents the potential barriers discussed with the key informants.
Lack of awareness
Government  of Canada employees and victim support providers all suggested that the lack of  awareness is a large barrier to the PMMC grant access.
Personal turmoil
According to most  of the victim support service providers, the personal turmoil of potential  applicants is one of the largest barriers to accessing the grant. The trauma of  having a missing or murdered child is overwhelming to families. It prevents  parents from looking for supports from victim service providers. Several  informants mentioned that the families they work with would not be able to  navigate the grant application process. They would experience difficulty in  processing the quantity of information provided in the  program information kit and going through the multiple steps of the  application process.
Key informants also  underlined that the trauma is often aggravated when the child is missing for an  extended period of time. Most victim support providers mentioned that, for  family members of missing children, filling out the grant application may feel  like acknowledging that their children is death. This may discourage parents  from applying.
Few provincial  victim service providers had a different opinion and mentioned that the  personal turmoil is not a barrier to applying for the grant as it is their role  to help parents complete victim compensation forms.
Accessing  relevant information
Most Government of Canada informants and some victim support  providers who are responsible for obtaining PMMC grant information for the parents did not think  that accessing relevant information about the grant is a barrier. Those victim  support providers said that grant information is provided in a clear manner  with a follow-up phone number and opportunities to ask questions.
The majority of victim support providers had a different  perspective. They believed that there are some challenges with accessing  relevant information about the grant and this is preventing parents from  applying. For example, many victim support providers reported that they have  tried to address parent’s questions about the eligibility criteria by going on  the program’s web page and contacting Service Canada but were not successful in  doing so. Key informants often described the grant web page as non-user  friendly and hard to find information. Further, they pointed that information  about the program is currently only available in French and English, limiting  access to vulnerable populations such as new immigrants and Indigenous people.  Indigenous communities can experience a challenge in accessing materials  available by phone and Internet. Key informants added that any requirements to  print and scan materials as well as any requirement to engage with police  services (including police victim services) represent a barrier to Indigenous  communities.
Accessing  relevant information from Service Canada
Victim support providers reported mixed views in relation to  the information they received from Service Canada. Several victim support  providers who were not satisfied with information and support received from  Service Canada said the agent they talked to was lacking knowledge about the  grant. Many victim support providers reported that they have been unable to  obtain answers to multiple questions.
Government of Canada informants were confident that  inquiries about the PMMC  grant were addressed in a way that exceeds the service standards. They reported  statistics which demonstrate that the 1-800- O Canada line is highly  accessible. Specifically, agents are able to answer 80% of the calls within 18  seconds or 3 rings. If agents are unable to answer, a program processing agent  usually responds within two days. Few victim support providers raised concerns  with the fact that it is not possible to speak with grant program  representatives directly.
Understanding relevant information
On one side, the Government of Canada informants did not  report any issue with the ability of potential applicants to understand  information about the grant. They perceived the Service Canada line as  extremely effective. Some police victim support service providers also believed  that understanding the available information was not a barrier to applying for  the grant, but said that more printed information about the program is needed.
On the other side, most police victim service providers and  national service providers thought that it is difficult to understand the  available information. Most said that parents who don’t go through a victim  service provider would find it even more difficult.
Difficulty fulfilling eligibility conditions
Most police victim  support providers believed that grant eligibility conditions are a main barrier  to accessing the grant. The largest perceived eligibility barriers are the  insufficient income of potential applicants, providing evidence the child is  missing or murdered as a result of a probable Criminal Code offence, and that a  child was not a willing party to the probable Criminal Code offence and the age  limit of the child. Further details on why key informants thought that  fulfilling some of the program eligibility conditions is a barrier to accessing  the grant are provided as follows:
Insufficient earnings to meet  the requirements
Government of Canada informants mentioned that not having  sufficient employment earnings to meet the eligibility threshold is a  significant barrier to accessing the PMMC grant but also noted that the purpose  of this program is to provide income replacement. That being said, some of the  Government of Canada informants thought the earnings eligibility criteria  should be eliminated.
Most police victim support service providers and  national victim service providers interviewed believe that most family members  of a missing or deceased child would likely not be eligible for the grant due  to having insufficient earnings.
Providing evidence the child is  missing or murdered as a result of a probable Criminal Code offence
According to most victim support providers, providing  evidence that a child is missing or murdered as a result of a probable criminal  code offence is a barrier to accessing the PMMC grant. Police victim support service providers  mentioned that the context of these incidents is quite complex, with few cases  following easy trajectories. They mentioned that providing evidence is more  difficult in the cases of missing children than in homicide cases.
Obtaining the evidence can take time. For example, most  police victim support service providers reported that police services are  reluctant to tell parents that they believe the child is dead until they have  evidence that suggests that. There is also a certain level of subjectivity  involved. In many cases, victim support providers mentioned that police  services subjectively make the first assumption that missing children have run  away from their family rather than being abducted. Police officers and police  victim support service providers recommended that ESDC provides direction to  police officers on how and when to fill out the police confirmation form.
Key informants also noted that criminal charges for impaired  driving can be difficult to prove, especially if the driver is injured because  it will it is difficult to take blood tests to confirm impaired driving.
Providing evidence that the child  was not a willing party of the probable Criminal Code offence
Having to provide evidence that the child was  not a willing party of the probable criminal code offence was also seen as a  barrier to accessing the grant by key informants. Many victim support providers  said that police officers may be reluctant to confirm that the child was not a willing  party to a probable Criminal Code offence. Key informants believed that there  is a level of subjectivity involved in establishing the evidence and that the  process depends on the opinion of the police officer. An example of situations  seen as being subjective is when the child was part of street gangs, suspected  of participating in prostitution or in suspected of being involved in  drug-related transaction.
Few victim support providers and Government of Canada  informants had brought a different perspective and said that obtaining  confirmation from the police on whether the child was or not a willing party is  easy. Government of Canada explained that none of the program’s applicants were  rejected based on this criterion.
Victim over 18 years old: Many Government  of Canada officials, police officers and victim support providers agreed that  the age of the victim is a barrier to accessing the grant. Victim support  providers mentioned that parents of children aged over 18 years old also  deserve time to cope with the incident. They also pointed that persons under  the age of 25 are likely still in school full time and living at home with  their parents.
Incident  occurred abroad: Most police victim support service providers and  national victim service providers did not know if the condition that the  incident had to happen in Canada is a factor contributing to the low uptake of  the PMMC grant  since they have never been involved in such cases. However, victim support  providers who have worked on several of these cases believed this is an issue  for parents.
Application process
Most police victim support service providers and national  victim service providers did not know if the application process itself was a  barrier to accessing the program. However, several victim support providers who  have completed the form with potential applicants said that it is an onerous  process, it triggers negative emotions from the parents and it requires parents  to acquire too many forms. Few victim support providers also mentioned that  filling in the Employers Form can be challenging if parents do not have a good  relationship with their employer.
From a more general standpoint, many victim support  providers mentioned that applications to any victim compensation grants are  difficult across the board.
A few key informants would like Service Canada to help  parents complete the application form over the phone and be authorized to  obtain necessary forms from the police and employers.
Victim  support providers were asked if they think the grant is delivered in a timely  fashion but none of them were able to answer the question. Few provincial  victim service providers, however, said that they do not recall receiving any  complaints.
The service standard is to process the grant  within 35 days after the receipt of the complete application package. An  informal target has been established: 90%  of files are processed within 35 days of receipt of application and all  supporting documentation. To date, 100% of incoming files are processed within  this target.
On  average, PMMC recipients applied 14 weeks after they became entitled to the  grant. In some cases, 45 weeks have elapsed between the moment they became  eligible and the date of the application.
3.5  Characteristics of applicants and reasons for denials
3.5.1  Profile of applicants
It has not been possible to produce a detailed  socio-demographic profile of the grant applicants since the characteristics  reported in the available data are limited. For example, the data do not  provide information on whether applicants self-identified as persons with  disability or Indigenous individuals.
Available data show that every parent who applied to the  program between 2013 and 2015 and received payments (n=20; referred as  recipients in this report) was the legal or adoptive  parent of the missing or murdered child. In half of the cases, the child was  aged between 13 and 17 years old. The grant recipients were predominantly  female and slightly more than half were between 35 and 44 years of age. Slightly  more recipients were married or in common law relationship as opposed to single  / divorced / separated / widow. Almost all recipients were living in urban  area. They were mainly from Ontario followed by Quebec and Alberta. Most were  employed at the time of incident as opposed to unemployed or self-employed. On  average, they earned $36,000 from employment in the year before the incident.
There were three notable  differences between recipients and parents who had applied to the PMMC grant but were  denied payments (n=16):
Denied  applicants were predominately single / divorced / separated / widowed as  opposed to married or in common law relationship. Recipients were more likely  to be married or in common law relationship.
Most  denied applicants were unemployed at the time of the incident while most  recipients were employed.
Denied  applicants had lower employment earnings in the 52 week period or calendar year  before the incident ($20,600) compared to grant recipients ($36,000).
Overall, these differences suggest that denied applicants  may be more vulnerable economically than grant recipients. However, these  findings should be interpreted with caution as they pertain to a very small  number of individuals.
3.5.2  Number of ineligible  applicants and reasons for denials
Out of the 50 parents who applied for the grant between 2013  and 2016, 29 received grant payments and 21 were denied funding. The main  reasons of denial were insufficient employment earnings, missing information,  the age of the child or the incident occurred before January 1, 2013. None of  the rejected applicants were denied access to the grant because the incident  occurred outside Canada.
The data did not allow  identifying how many applicants were denied payments because they did not meet  the following eligibility criteria:
The child  is deceased or missing as a result of a probable Criminal Code offence
The child  is missing for over a week
The child  was not a willing party to the crime that led to his or her death
3.6  Usage of the grant
3.6.1  Adequacy of the 52 week income support period
It has not been possible to find data on the average length  of time necessary to resolve cases of murder or disappearance of children  resulting from a probable Criminal Code offence. A search of the Royal Canadian  Mounted Police, National Centre for Missing Persons and Unidentified Remains  suggests that cases of child reported as missing for more than a year (as a  result of a probable Criminal Code offence or not) are rare. For example, the  database search shows that of the children reported missing in Canada between  January and December 2016, two were still missing as of August 2017.
A study from the Royal Canadian Mounted Police identified five cases that  occurred in 2000 and 2001. Of those, three were resolved in approximately one  day while the two other cases were resolved in six and 21 days, respectively.  Similarly, the review of 147 abductions followed by murder conducted by the  Canadian Center of Child Protection showed that 35% of the victims, who were  located, were found within one day of their disappearance while 76% were found  within a month of the disappearance. On the other hand, data from the Statistics Canada Homicide Survey show that  the proportion of homicide cases (involving children or adult victim) solved by  the police has declined from approximately 95% in the mid-1960s to 75% in 2010.  This means that, in recent days, about a quarter of homicide cases may never be  resolved.
Once charges are pressed, the victim’s family has to deal  with the criminal court case process. The median length of homicide court cases  in Canada was over a year (451 days) in 2013 to 2014 which exceeds the duration  of the grant payments.
Most key informants in all categories agreed that the 52  week window to receive income support is not sufficient to address the needs of  most parents. All informants agreed that it could take more than a year to  determine why the child died and whether criminality was involved. Further,  many key informants reported that many parents will not have a criminal case  confirmation from police officers in time to access 35 weeks of support within  a 52 week window. Key informants also explained that the 52 week window is not  sufficient to cover the family’s attendance in the court proceedings and the  very common collapse of parents following the trial. Statements made by the key  informants are echoed in the literature which shows that families can have  difficulty to mourn the deceased person until the criminal investigation is  over   or that the criminal justice process can  bring back the trauma experienced by relatives of the crime victims.
When asked how long the window to receive income support  should be, most victim support providers, many police officers and some  Government of Canada respondents felt that it should be of up to two or three  years and some key informants suggested a five-year window. A large segment of  victim service providers suggested removing the window all together. Many key  informants (all stakeholders types) advocated for a flexible grant without  consecutive time requirements that allow parents to return to work based on  their needs.
3.6.2 Average grant payout and average number of weeks paid
The PMMC grant provides payments over a maximum of 35  weeks during a 52 week income support period to a maximum amount of $12,250.  Administrative data examined for the evaluation show that recipients who  applied for the grant between January 1, 2013 and December 31, 2015 (n=20),  received an average  amount of $11,025 over an average of 31.5 weeks per grant. However, the  majority of recipients (16 out of 20) received the maximum payable amount of  $12,250 over the maximum number of weeks (35 weeks).
The window during which the payments were received ranged  between 17 and 52 weeks but averaged 35.2 weeks. Most recipients (13 out of 20)  claimed PMMC grant payments  over consecutive weeks as opposed to alternate periods.
Most police officers, victim support providers and  Indigenous victim service providers interviewed for the evaluation thought that  the 35 weeks of income support is insufficient for parents grieving the loss of  a murdered or missing child and to allow parents to take time off work to  attend court proceedings. Some victim support providers and Government of  Canada officials believed that the 35 week income support would be sufficient  in most cases, but not in others. They explained that for those who are  eligible, the 35 week of the PMMC  grant payments coupled with EI benefits would likely provide a year of income  support. These same informants, however, recognized that not all parents  eligible to the program are entitled to EI, and that the PMMC grant provides  more limited coverage when divided between parents.
Most victim support providers and police officers suggested  that 52 weeks of income support would be the minimum coverage needed for most  parents.
3.6.3  Extent to which parents share the grant
Only  a small minority of parents shared the grant. In most cases, the grant was  uniquely received by a female.
3.7  Support provided to parents by the grant
Parents who were eligible for the PMMC grant between 2013 and 2016 were not all  comparable in terms of their employment earnings in the 52 weeks before the  incident. As such, the extent to which PMMC payments replaced loss income  varies importantly. At one end, eight recipients out of 29 had weekly earnings  below the $350 amount provided by the grant. The PMMC grant payment replaced 145% of their lost  earnings, on average. At the other end of the spectrum, PMMC payments replaced 22% of the loss earnings for  the very small minority of recipients who earned $1,201 and over per week.  Overall, on average, PMMC  payments replaced 78% of the lost weekly earnings of these 29 recipients.
It was not possible to undertake statistical analysis on the  employment and economic situation of recipients after they finished receiving PMMC payments due to  the small number of individuals who received the grant and the very short  timeframe of data available. However, available data still allow obtaining some  insights about the post-  PMMC experience for eleven recipients who applied to the grant between  2013 and 2015 and for whom at least one year of earnings data was available  following the end of the grant  payments. Almost all of these recipients were in receipt of employment earnings  in the year after the end of the PMMC  payments. Their average employment earnings were slightly lower in the post- PMMC payment year  ($40,000) compared to the earnings they had in the year before the incident  ($42,000). A minority of these recipients were in receipt of EI and/or social  assistance at one point during the year after their PMMC grant payments.
Of the 20 recipients who received payments between 2013 and  2015, half had at least one interruption in employment in the year after the  end of PMMC  payments. In a minority of cases, the reason was shortage of work which means  that for most recipients, the reason for having an interruption in employment  was related to illness or injury, quit, dismissal or other.
The majority of the victim support providers interviewed  were unable to answer whether the grant helped parents. Most police victim  support service providers mentioned that they think the grant would help  parents if the program was designed differently ( revised eligibility  conditions, improve the sharing of information, provide training on the program  and simplify the application process). In particular, most victim support  providers said that the amount of Parents  of Murdered or Missing Children support is not enough to cover the needs  of parents.
The majority of Government of Canada informants thought that  the PMMC grant  is reaching its expected outcomes. They have noticed general anonymous positive  feedback about the support received.
3.8  Cost analysis
As  shown in Table 1 below, the administrative costs of delivering the program have  significantly decreased over the years from $1,389,800 in the program  implementation year to $191,112 in 2016 to 2017. Accordingly, the ratio of  administrative costs over the total program expenditures ( administrative costs  and grant payments to recipients) has consistently decreased over time from  99.7% in 2012 to 2013 to 67.4% in 2016 to 2017.
The administrative costs for 2012 to 2013 and 2013 to 2014  mainly reflect the significant investment that was made in start-up activities  including the development of information technology system to process  applications and payments.
Considering  that the incidence of murdered and missing children cases is low in Canada, the  PMMC grant uptake may never reach a volume comparable to other programs  reviewed in Table 2. The likelihood of achieving economy of scale over time  could remain low for the grant. As well, some of the fixed costs may remain  high compared to amount directly provided to parents.
The  analysis presented in this report does not allow drawing overall conclusions  about the value for money of the grant. In order to do so, it would be  necessary to compare the costs of the PMMC grant with the benefits generated  for the Canadian society. Examples of those benefits could include a lower use  of EI or social assistance, helping parents to avoid long-term unemployment or  helping parents to avoid contracting financial debts. Conducting such analysis  was not possible as part of this evaluation due to the low number of program  participants and the short period of time for which data were available.
4. Lessons  learned
The evaluation recognizes that the PMMC grant is a small and relatively recent program with  low, but very important materiality. In that context, the evaluation findings  help drawing lessons learned that the grant program management may consider in  the future.
The literature as well as the key informants interviewed for  the evaluation suggests that there is a need to provide income support to  parents of missing or murdered children in order to help them deal with the  impacts of these incidents on their personal life, employment and finances.
In total, 50 parents applied for the program and 29 parents received payments between 2013  and 2016. While these numbers reflect, in part, the low incidence of child  murder and disappearance in Canada, key informants identified a series of other  factors that may create a barrier to accessing the grant. These include a low  level of awareness of the grant; the personal turmoil experienced by parents;  difficulties in accessing and understanding information about the grant and in  navigating the application process. The PMMC grant eligibility conditions (income threshold,  providing evidence the incident is related to a possible Criminal Code offence;  providing evidence the child was not a willing party to the crime and the age  limit of the victim) are also seen as a potential barrier to accessing the  grant. The grant data show that some of the denied applicants did not have  enough employment earnings to fulfill the income threshold.
The majority of the grant recipients received 35 weeks of PMMC grant payments  and payments replaced 78% of lost income, on average. According to the key  informants, 52 weeks of income support over a two or three year window would be  the minimum coverage needed for most parents.
The  ratio of administrative costs over the total program expenditures  (administrative costs and grant payments to recipients) has decreased from  99.7% to 67.4% between 2012 to 2013 and 2016 to 2017. Considering that the  incidence of murdered and missing children cases is low in Canada, the PMMC  grant can only provide support to a limited number of individuals and is  unlikely to achieve significant economy of scale.
Bibliography
American Psychiatric Association. 2013. Diagnostics  and Statistics Manual of Mental Disorder (DSM-V).
Canadian Center for Child Protection.  2016. Abducted then Murdered Children A Canadian Study. Preliminary Results  Report.
Canadian  Resource Center for Victims of Crime, Financial Assistance. (Retrieved on  August 4, 2017).
Canadian Resource Centre for Victims of Crime. 2005.  Developing a Strategy to Provide Services and Support to Victims of Unsolved,  Serious Crimes.
Casey, Louise. Undated. Meeting the Service Needs of  Families Bereaved by Homicide, Meeting  the Service Needs of Families Bereaved by Homicide, p. 5. (Retrieved on  August 12, 2017).
Connolly, J., & Gordon, R. (2015). Co-victims of  homicide: A systematic review of the literature. Trauma, Violence, & Abuse, 16(4), 494 to 505.
Dalley, Marlene L, and Jenna Ruscoe. 2003. The Abduction of  Children by Strangers in Canada: Nature and Scope. National Missing Children  Services National Police Service Royal Canadian Mounted Police.
Department  of Justice, Victim Funds. (Retrieved on August 4, 2017)
Department of Justice Canada. 2016. Justice Federal Victims  Strategy Evaluation.
Direction  de l’IVAC. 2015. Manuel des politiques de l’IVAC. Indemnisation des victimes  d’actes criminels.
Dunn, Peter, Chaston, Katy and Lesley Malone. 2006. In  the aftermath. The support needs of people bereaved by homicide: a research  report. Victim Support National Office.
Englebrecht, Christine M., Mason, Derek T. and Adams,  Peggy J. 2016. Responding to Homicide: An Ex ploration of the Ways in Which Family  Members React to and Cope With the Death of a Loved One. OMEGA: Journal and  Death and Dying, Vol 73 (4).
Employment and Social Development Canada. 2016. Evaluation  of the Employment Insurance Special Benefits for Self-employed Workers.
European  Union. Directive 2012/29/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of  25 October 2012 establishing minimum standards on the rights, support and  protection of victims of crime, and replacing Council Framework Decision  2001/220/JHA. (Retrieved on September 27, 2017)
Government  of British Columbia, Crime Victim Assistance Program Summary of Benefits  Available to Immediate Family Members. (Retrieved on August 7,  2017).
Government  of United Kingdom. Criminal injuries compensation: a guide (Retrieved on  August 3, 2017).
Holmes, Lucy. 2008. Living in Limbo the experience of and  impact on family of missing person. Missing People.
Hotton  Mahony, Tina and John Turner. 2012. Police-reported clearance rates in Canada,  2010. Juristat Article,  Statistics Canada.
Indemnisation  des victimes d’actes criminels (Retrieved on August 4, 2017).
Legal  Service Commission of South Australia, Victims of Crime Compensation (Retrieved  on September 27, 2017).
Maxwell, Ashley. 2015. Adult criminal court statistics in  Canada, 2013 to 2014. Juristat. Statistics Canada.
Mezey, G., Evans, C. and Hobdell, K. 2002. Families of  homicide victims: psychiatric responses and help-seeking. Psychology and  psychotherapy: theory, research ,  75(1), p65 to 75 and Parkes, C.M. (1993) Psychiatric problems following  bereavement by murder or manslaughter. British journal of psychiatry , 162, p. 49 to 54 cited in Dunn,  Peter, Chaston, Katy and Lesley Malone. 2006. In the aftermath. The support  needs of people bereaved by homicide: a research report, Victim Support  National Office.
Ministry  of Justice. The Criminal Injuries Compensation Scheme 2012. Government of  United Kingdom. (Retrieved on August 4, 2017).
National Association of Crime Victim Compensation Boards  (Retrieved on August 3, 2017: http://www.nacvcb.org/index.asp?bid=6).
O”Sullivan, Sue  2017. The Federal Income Support for Parents of Murdered or Missing Children  Grant: A Systemic Review. Office of the Federal Ombudsman for Victims of Crime.
Rosso, May Anne.  2015. How to Handle Crime-Related Debt. Collector, Vol. 81 Issue 4, p40 to 42.
Royal Canadian  Mounted Police.2016. Child abduction. Just the facts, Vol. 78, No. 1. (Retrieved on August 10, 2017).
Royal Canadian  Mounted Police, Canada’s Missing. National Centre for Missing Persons and  Unidentified Remains (NCMPUR) (Retrieved on August 7, 2017).
Schade Fonds Gewelds Misdrijven (Retrieved on September 27,  2017).
Service publique fédéral belge,  Justice, Commission pour l’aide financière (Retrieved on September 27, 2017).
Slowikowski, Jeff. 2010. When Your Child is Missing: A  Family Survival Guide. Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention.  US Department of Justice.
Spilman K, Sarah.  2006. Child Abduction, Parents’ Distress, and Social Support. Violence  and Victims, Volume 21, Number 2.
Statistics Canada. Homicide Survey, Table  253-0003 -  Homicide survey, victims and persons  accused of homicide, by age group and sex, Canada, annual (number).  CANSIM.
Van Wijk, A., Van Leiden, I., & Ferwerda, H.  (2017). Murder and the long-term impact on  co-victims: A qualitative, longitudinal study International  Review of Victimology, Vol 23 (2).
Veterans Affairs Canada. 2017. Evaluation of Commemorative  Benefits and Services.
Veterans Affairs Canada. 2016. Evaluation of the Financial Benefits  Program.
Victims  of Crime, Compensation and Financial Assistance (Retrieved on September 27,  2017)
Appendix A – Logic Model
Logic model



Text description of Logic Model
Appendix A includes a flow chart that  illustrates the logic model of the PMMC grant.
There are seven rows. From top to bottom,  the first row presents the situation, the second row presents the inputs, the  third row presents the activities, the forth row presents the two outputs of  the benefit, the fifth raw presents the two immediate outcomes, the sixth row  presents the intermediate outcome and the seventh row presents the ESDC  strategic outcome.
Situation 
Parents take time away from work to cope with the death  or disappearance of a child as a result of a probable Criminal Code offence.
Inputs 

Annual funding available for PMMC grants; 
All operational costs are absorbed by ESDC or Service  Canada

Activities: 

Service Delivery: application, assessment, processing and  grant payment activities
Outreach: Identification of and communication with  relevant stakeholders, development of engagement activities
Strategic communications
Policy analysis and reporting

Outputs 

Decision on eligibility for PMMC grant; 
Dissemination of information and promotional products to  stakeholders

Immediate Outcome 

Payment of PMMC grant to eligible parents; 
Greater awareness of PMMC grant among victim’s  stakeholders

Intermediate Outcome 
Parents have enhanced income security and greater sense  of well-being taking time away to cope with the loss of a child
Alignment with  the ESDC strategic outcome 
Income security, access to opportunities and well-being  for individuals, families and communities
Appendix B – Evaluation questions
Page details
Report a problem on this page







Date modified:
2022-04-19
