Executive summary
This summative evaluation of the Canada Education Savings  Program (CESP) examines the performance of the CESP. The CESP, which includes the  Basic Canada Education Savings Grant (CESG), the Additional-CESG (A-CESG) and  the Canada Learning Bond (CLB), provides incentives to save for post-secondary  education (PSE) using Registered Education Savings Plans (RESPs). In addition  to answering specific evaluation questions, the evaluation examines to what  extent the CESP is achieving its objective, which is “…ensuring that families  can better save for their children’s future education by providing stronger incentives through  the CESP.”
This report summarizes the evidence collected from 15  studies prepared specifically for this evaluation. Many other studies were also  used to complement these findings. Preliminary findings from the evaluation  were presented at the Departmental Evaluation Committee meeting in March 2014.
Main findings
Program relevance
Do PSE costs justify the need for the CESP? Do the  objectives of the CESP align with federal government priorities? How do grants  and bonds motivate people to save?
The rationale for the CESP is still justified by the  continuous increase in PSE-related costs. Government of Canada and Employment  and Social Development (ESDC) priorities emphasize the importance of the  program and PSE. To achieve more savings for PSE among low-income families, the  literature and international comparison have demonstrated that matching  contributions (i.e. grants) – such as the CESG – may be the most appropriate  incentive to increase saving for PSE.
CESP use
Are more low-income families saving for PSE in RESPs? What  are the take-up rates and their trends? Has there been a further change in  savings patterns since the A-CESG and CLB were implemented?
The cumulative level of RESP assets has increased from $2.4  billion in 1997 to $40.5 billion in 2013. In 2013, $883 million in grants were  disbursed via the CESP. The number of low-income families with RESPs continues  to increase – reaching 400,000 families with children in 2012.
The proportion of children under 18 years of age who  received the CESG at least once in their life has increased from 9.7% in 1998  to 47.1% in 2013 (i.e. of the roughly 6.9 million children under the age of 18  in Canada in 2013, over 3.2 million had an RESP and had received the Basic  CESG). Almost 2.5 million of these beneficiaries, or 75.3%, made a contribution  and received the Basic CESG in 2013. Of these, 860,000 (or about 35%) received  the A-CESG. The number of A-CESG beneficiaries receiving an additional 10% or  20% grant in a given year increased from 120,000 in 2005 to 860,000 in 2013. As  a proportion of the entire population of A-CESG eligible children in a given  year, this represents an increase from 2.7% in 2005 to 17.4% in 2012.
RESP take-up rates (i.e. the percentage of children under 18  years of age with an RESP) vary significantly by family income, ranging from  25.2% for families with income below $25,000 to 70.1% for families with income  over $125,000 in 2012, although RESP take-up quadrupled for low-income families  between 1999 and 2012. This four-fold increase may have been caused more by the  Basic CESG, as the rate of increase did not change noticeably with the  introduction of the A-CESG. However, it was shown that the CLB contributed to a  significant increase in RESP take-up among low-income families.
Findings indicated that RESP take-up rates are also strongly  influenced by parental aspirations, having a pre-existing savings habit, and  having good financial knowledge and awareness of the benefits of using RESPs.
Average annual RESP contributions adjusted for inflation (in  $2006 among those who contributed) declined from $1,436 to $1,331 over the 1998  to 2013 period. In 2013, those who only received the Basic CESG had average  contributions of $1,491 – about $500 more than those also in receipt of the  A-CESG and/or CLB. Contribution levels in 2013 varied significantly by  province/territory and were highest in the territories, British Columbia and  Ontario (all over $1,600) and lowest in New Brunswick ($1,127).
In addition, it was found that beneficiaries who were  registered for the A-CESG were more likely to receive RESP contributions in a  given year than other families with RESPs, indicating a positive savings effect  for families who take a proactive approach.
PSE savings outside RESPs
To what extent are Canadians saving for PSE outside of an RESP?
In 2013, one-quarter of families with an RESP also saved for  PSE using other means, as did 38.6% of families without an RESP. Among the  former group, the most common reasons for saving outside of RESPs were  ‘diversification’ (21%), ‘easy access to funds’ (17%), and ‘either maximized  the annual CESG received or the lifetime RESP maximum of $50,000’ (7%). The  most common reasons given by families without RESPs included ‘having  accessibility to funds’ (17%), ‘not having gotten around to it yet’ (14%), and  a lack of RESP awareness (11%). Among families without RESPs who were surveyed,  many showed a lack of understanding of RESPs and of the CESP.
RESP and CESP withdrawals
To what extent is the CESP improving the affordability of  PSE? What impact do RESPs and the CESP have on student loan and grant amounts?
Overall, RESP withdrawals reached over $2.7 billion in 2013,  of which $1.7 billion were PSE contribution withdrawals and $1 billion were  Education Assistance Payments (EAPs). About 17% of all PSE students made an RESP  withdrawal in 2013, up from less than 0.3% in 1998. The average annual RESP  withdrawal increased from $3,705 to $7,673 over this period.
Students with RESPs had smaller student loans on average. This  result may in part be explained by the fact that RESP withdrawals reduce  student loans dollar for dollar, except for a $100 per week in-study exemption  for EAPs and other sources of income. A new federal policy is currently being  rolled out to exempt contribution withdrawals from student loan calculations. However,  information on the effect of RESP withdrawals on eligibility for student loans  and grants is not readily available to the public.
Efficiency and economy
To what extent does CESP funding go to people who would not  otherwise have saved for PSE? What is happening with RESP contributions at the  higher income levels? How efficient is the CESP delivery model?
Families with higher incomes require little encouragement to  save for the PSE of their children as they have significantly more financial  resources at their disposal and they were already saving for PSE prior to the  introduction of the CESP in 1998. Results show that although 60.0% of families  with children aged 17-18 years old (and with a household income of $80,000 or  more) had PSE savings in 1999, only 11.5% had RESPs. Due to CESP rules , most of these children  were never eligible for the CESG. By 2012, RESP take-up among these families  with children of all ages had increased to 63.8%. Therefore, it appears that  much of the increase in RESP take-up for these families is due to a change in  the way they save for PSE.
Furthermore, it was estimated that over $400 million in  grants (or 49% of all CESP expenditures) were distributed to families with a  household income of $90,000 or more in 2013, of which $280 million (or 32% of  CESP expenditures) went to families earning $125,000 or more.
Regarding the effectiveness of the CESP delivery model, the  CESP appears to be efficiently delivered (in collaboration with external  stakeholders).
Recommendations
Explore  ways for funds to more effectively reach families with the greatest need for  assistance and encouragement to save for their children’s future PSE.
Complement  outreach efforts on promoting awareness with promoting understanding of the  CESP savings incentives in order to support increased participation among all  Canadian families.
Management response
Management acknowledges the contribution of those who  participated in the summative evaluation of the Canada Education Savings  Program (CESP). Management agrees with the evaluation findings and proposes the  following Management Response.
Since its introduction in 1998, the CESP has provided  savings incentives to encourage and reinforce the importance of early and  sustained saving for a child’s post-secondary education (PSE), specifically  using Registered Education Savings Plans (RESPs). The CESP provides two savings  incentives linked to RESPs: the Canada Education Savings Grant (CESG) and the  Canada Learning Bond (CLB).
The results of the Summative Evaluation of the CESP show  that the CESP has been effective in encouraging savings for children’s PSE and  that the CESP has achieved some notable results. The program’s design and  outreach efforts are especially focused towards lower income families. The evaluation  shows that the proportion of beneficiaries from lower-income families has been  improving considerably, and the proportion of program disbursements to  lower-income families has also been increasing. The Additional Canada Education  Savings Grant (A-CESG) and the CLB explicitly direct more funds to lower income  families and there are limits to the grants that one can receive to mitigate  extra gains by high income savers.
In addition, given the CESP’s unique program delivery model,  there are constraints within which it must function: over ninety RESP promoters  interface directly with Canadians (subscribers and beneficiaries), RESP policy  is under the purview of the Department of Finance and administered by the  Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) under the Income  Tax Act. The roles of these various program delivery partners are a  significant consideration.
The CESP has made considerable progress by ensuring newly  eligible families are informed of their CLB eligibility through direct,  quarterly mailings including information on how to access the CLB. The CESP has  established strong partnerships with community-based organizations (CBOs) to  address and mitigate barriers to accessing the CLB including local sign-up  events supported by Service Canada and RESP promoters. In addition, the CESP  has targeted specific, large RESP promoters to ensure existing clients, who had  already overcome the barriers and opened a RESP, were accessing the CLB (based  on their eligibility).
Key findings
Total savings in RESPs
The CESG  and the CLB have encouraged Canadians to amass a substantial amount of savings  in RESPs, rising to $40.5 billion as of 2013. 
The rise  in the amount of RESP funds to assist the PSE of Canadian students has been  equally striking with nearly $3 billion available to help with the financing of  any PSE course of studies as of 2013.
Program take-up
The evaluation has shown that the CESP has  encouraged an increasing number of Canadians (47.1% as of 2013) to open RESPs  and receive CESP benefits.
This increase in take-up has been widespread  across all economic groups. The growth in RESP take-up for families in the  lowest income bracket ($0 to $24,999 in family income) grew fourfold in 2012,  while doubling in the highest income brackets. 
Growth in take-up for those in permanently  low-income families (i.e. families who remained below the lowest A-CESG  threshold) increased by more than six times between 1999 and 2012. 
The Evaluation’s Survey of RESP Subscribers and  Non-Subscribers found that Government support (via either the CESG or CLB) was  the most oft-cited reason given by respondents (approximately 60% of all cases)  for using an RESP. 
The research also showed that cultural and  attitudinal factors are important in encouraging access to PSE, and that  holding and building savings over the long-term may play a role in fostering  aspirations and expectations for PSE.
Balancing CESP disbursements
The improvement in the CESP’s reach to families  who are most in need of financial assistance to help save for their children’s  future PSE is shown by the fact that the proportion of the CESP’s disbursements  directed to lower-income families (under $45,000 in income in 2012) has been  increasing (8.9 percentage points between 1999 and 2012). As a result, families  who are above the A-CESG thresholds (over $90,000 in income in 2012) have  received a decreasing share of payments (3 percentage points), while the share  of their population grew significantly (by 9.4 percentage points).
The proportion of disbursements going to families  with incomes greater than $125,000 stayed the same despite having an almost  100% increase in the proportion of the population in this income group over the  same period.
Undoubtedly, the introduction of the A-CESG  benefits helped to improve the balance in Government of Canada disbursements to  Canadian families.
Take-up of additional CESG and CLB
The evaluation found that some 34% of eligible  A-CESG families who made RESP contributions in 2012 did not receive this  additional grant. Similarly, about 23% of CLB-eligible families who had an RESP  did not receive the CLB. The program recognized this as an issue, and in 2013  the CESP introduced a new simplified application form in which subscribers are  automatically tested for the A-CESG and the CLB (i.e. “opt-in” design). This  approach leverages conclusions from the field of behavioural economics, namely  that providing the opportunity to “opt in” as a default in the application  process strengthens access and participation. The overall trends shown in the  evaluation demonstrate the ability of the program to encourage a significant  portion of all Canadians, even persistently low-income families, to save for  their children’s PSE, demonstrating the important contribution the CESP has  made in encouraging savings in RESPs for children’s future PSE. The Department  can foresee a future where the majority of children will have RESPs available  to help pay for their PSE.
Recommendations
Explore  ways for funds to more effectively reach families with the greatest need for assistance  and encouragement to save for their children’s future post-secondary education.

This recommendation is in-line with the Canada  Education Savings Act (CESA) which requires that “The Minister shall take  measures necessary to carry out the purpose set out in section 3, including  making known to Canadians, through informational and promotional activities,  the existence of CES grants and Canada Learning Bonds and any terms and  conditions.”
Management  agrees that it is necessary to focus its efforts to attempt to reach out to  families with the greatest need. The CESP will continue to adopt innovative  approaches that will foster and sustain new partnerships with community-based  organizations, RESP promoters and other federal and provincial departments, including  the Financial Consumer Agency of Canada (FCAC), with a focus on targeted  community based activities. This will include sustained efforts and support to  build on the success of the first ever Education Savings Week held in November 2014.
The CESP will work with the ESDC’s Innovation  Change Lab to pilot new approaches and products to better encourage enrollment  in the CLB.



Continue to undertake outreach efforts on promoting both awareness and understanding of  the CESP savings incentives to support increased participation among Canadian  families.

The CESP management agrees that awareness will  always be an important initial step, but will explore ways to improve  understanding (and reduce misunderstanding) about its savings incentives.
In support of these efforts the CESP, in partnership  with the Public Affairs and Stakeholder Relations Branch (PASRB) will develop a  new three-year communications and engagement strategy.
1. Introduction
Following the implementation of the Canada Education Savings  Grant (CESG) in 1998, which was introduced to encourage Canadians to save for  the post-secondary education (PSE) of their children in Registered Education  Savings Plans (RESPs), a first formative evaluation of the program was  completed in April 2003. The report indicated that the CESG encouraged saving  for the PSE of children, as savings in RESPs increased considerably following  the introduction of the grant. However, the evaluation also noted that  awareness of (and participation in) the program was significantly lower among  low-income families.
As a response to the finding of low participation on the  part of low-income families, in October 2004 enhancements to the CESG (referred  to as the “additional” CESG (A-CESG)) and the creation of the Canada Learning  Bond (CLB) were announced. A second formative evaluation of the revised Canada  Education Savings Program (CESP – which includes the CESG, A-CESG and CLB) was  completed in 2009 and examined the preliminary impacts of these two new  measures. Evidence indicated that the full effect of the two new measures had  not yet taken place. Therefore, the second formative evaluation recommended  that the CESP be re-evaluated when CESG participation growth rates begin to  stabilize
Evaluation began developing a framework for a summative  evaluation of the CESP. The full list of 51 evaluation questions can be found  in Appendix 1, which also indicates where each question is answered in the  report and the lines of evidence used. A brief description of each of the 15 lines of  evidence is provided in Appendix 2. An interim evaluation report presenting  preliminary findings of the evaluation was presented at the Departmental  Evaluation Committee in March 2014.
The CESP logic model, shown in Appendix 3, describes program  activities and outputs (e.g. grant payments) and how they lead to desired  outcomes. The current evaluation examines the following desired outcomes: 1)  families save for their children’s PSE in RESPs; 2) low-income families open  RESPs; 3) children under 18 have savings for PSE; 4) Canadians make more  informed choices about saving for post-secondary; and 5) Canadians are able to  finance their participation in PSE. The examination of the effect of the CESP  on the long-term strategic outcome (a skilled, adaptable and inclusive labour  force and an efficient labour market) is postponed to a future evaluation, as  are the issues of program delivery and the impact of the CESP on PSE access.
1.1 Limitations
It will not be until 2015 that CESG beneficiaries who were  born in 1998 will reach the age of 17 and begin attending a PSE institution. They  will be the first age cohort that could fully benefit from CESG payments to a  subscriber’s RESP for the 17 years that program funding is paid and have the  full amount of RESP assets possible. Thus, the full impact of the CESG on some  aspects (e.g. RESP assets) cannot be measured yet. In addition, the impact of  RESPs on financing PSE and reducing student debt also will not be possible to  measure for an even longer period of time.
Another limitation is that some of the lines of evidence use  dated Statistics Canada surveys. However, most of the findings from these  surveys were corroborated with more recent data sources, including data from  the CESP administrative database, a survey conducted by Evaluation during the  2013-2014 fiscal year, and analyses involving linked Canada Revenue Agency  (CRA) T1 income data and CESP administrative data up to and including the 2012  taxation year.
Finally, although random sampling was used for the 2013-2014  Evaluation survey, the survey data are un-weighted and the results should not  be extrapolated to the entire population. However, since the regional pattern  of response for the actual sample is very close to the distribution of the  sample that would be expected, this provides some confidence to the reliability  of the random sampling approach.
2. Background  information
2.1 RESPs  and CESP incentives
RESPs were introduced in 1972 and allow contributions to  grow tax-free until beneficiaries attend a PSE institution. Although there is  no longer an annual contribution limit, there is a lifetime contribution limit  per beneficiary, which has been $50,000 since 2007. Once a beneficiary begins  attending a PSE institution, RESP funds can be withdrawn and are paid out as  contribution withdrawals (also referred to as Refund of Contributions or ROCs  by the Canada Student Loans Program (CSLP)) to the subscriber and Education  Assistance Payments (EAPs) to the beneficiary depending on the details of the  RESP contract.  EAPs include accumulated investment  earnings in the RESP and government education savings incentives. RESP  contributions are withdrawn tax-free. However, EAPs are taxable to the  beneficiary attending PSE (since many PSE students have little or no income  EAPs are often withdrawn tax-free or at a low tax rate).
The CESP encompasses three specific measures:
the CESG,
the A-CESG and,
the CLB.
They are each discussed in turn.
The Basic CESG was introduced in 1998 and provides a grant  of 20% on the first $2,500 of annual RESP contributions for children until the  end of the calendar year during which they turn 17.  Unused grant room can be carried forward.
The A-CESG came into effect on January 1, 2005. The A-CESG  amount depends on the net family income of the beneficiary’s primary  caregiver(s):
If net family income was below $43,953 in  2013, the A-CESG was 20 cents for every dollar on the first $500 of annual  contributions into an RESP (i.e. a maximum of $100); and
If net family income was between $43,953 and  $87,907 in 2013, the A-CESG was 10 cents for every dollar on the first $500 of  annual contributions into an RESP (i.e. a maximum of $50).
It should be noted that the unused A-CESG room cannot be  carried forward (in contrast to unused CESG grant room).
The CLB was introduced in Budget 2004. To be eligible for  the CLB, the beneficiary’s primary caregiver(s) must be receiving the National  Child Benefit Supplement and the child must be born on or after January 1,  2004. To receive the CLB, an individual must open an RESP and apply for the  CLB, but contributions are not required.
The amount of the CLB is equal to the sum of the following  amounts, and can add up to a lifetime maximum of $2,000 per child:
$500 for the first year of eligibility for the  National Child Benefit Supplement, up to and including the child’s 15 year; and
$100 in each subsequent year, up to and  including the child’s 15 year.
2.2 Objectives  of CESP measures
The CESG was introduced in Budget 1998 along with  enhancements to the Canada Student Loans Program (CSLP) and the creation of the  Canada Millennium Scholarship Foundation as part of the Canadian Opportunities  Strategy. The strategy proposed action on many fronts, including promoting  access to PSE by helping students in financial need cope with rising costs and  helping families save for their children’s education in RESPs.
Part of this strategy aimed to address the challenge of  “encouraging families to save early for their children’s education”. As stated  in the Education Savings Act, the objective  of the CESG is to encourage the financing of children’s PSE through savings  from early childhood in RESPs. And, according to Budget 1998 (page 13), “…to  ensure families can better afford higher education for their children by  providing stronger incentives for saving through the new CESG…”
As mentioned in the introduction, the government response to  the low RESP participation by low- and middle-income families was the  introduction of the A-CESG and CLB. The basic objective of the A-CESG is to  strengthen financial assistance for low- and middle-income families who want to  save for the PSE of their children. The CLB was implemented with a similar  objective to the A-CESG – to help modest-income families to start saving early  for the PSE of their children – but without requiring contributions.
3. Relevance  of CESP in 2014
This section examines questions related to the relevance of  the CESP. Three of the key evaluation questions in this section include:
Do PSE costs justify the need for the CESP?
Do the objectives of the CESP align with federal  government priorities?
How do grants and bonds motivate people to save?
3.1 PSE costs
To examine the relevance of the CESP, it is important to  outline the context in which it operates. PSE credentials are becoming increasingly  important in the labour market. As tuition fees and other PSE-related costs  reach several thousands of dollars per year, most parents are expected to pay  some portion of the PSE costs of their children (based on the CSLP needs  assessment), which can be easier if parents save for PSE. The evaluation  acknowledges that not all low-income families should save for PSE, as immediate  financial demands (for food, shelter, etc.) can alone be overwhelming when  these families face financial hardship. In this overall context, different levels of government provide financial  support for PSE students through different means such as loans, grants, and tax  incentives (in addition to providing incentives for parents to save for the PSE of children via  the CESP).
Although just one element of total PSE costs, total required  fees  (tuition and additional fees)  for full-time domestic undergraduate university students in Canada were $3,884 in 2000-2001  and estimated at $6,253 in 2013-2014. This represents a 61% increase,  twice that of inflation. Although average public  college tuition fees are not as high as university tuition fees, they increased  at roughly the same rate. In addition to  outpacing the rise in prices in the economy, the growth in undergraduate university  and college fees has also significantly outpaced the rise in net family income,  albeit less so for families in the highest income tercile.  Thus, rising tuition and additional fees  appear to justify the need for the CESP to encourage PSE savings, although this  need is clearly lower for those in the highest income tercile.
Accounting for living expenses as well, TD Canada Trust  estimated that the overall cost of pursuing a four-year undergraduate degree  starting in 2011 was around $80,000 (for students living away from home all  four years).  This estimate is similar to estimates  contained in the Actuarial Report on the Canada Student Loans Program (CSLP),  where average total student expenses (which includes tuition fees, books,  shelter, food and transportation) for 2010-2011 were estimated to be $16,100.  These expenses are projected to first surpass  $20,000 annually in 2018-2019 and to eventually hit $36,400 in 2035-2036  (projections based on annual increase ranging from 2.8% to 3.8%). These findings  are also in-line with results from the 2013 CESP survey, where parents with  children under 18 years of age expected an annual cost of roughly $20,000 per  year once  their child went onto PSE.
To help cover rising PSE costs, many students (particularly  those from low- and middle-income families) might have to rely increasingly on  employment income (either while in study or prior to PSE) and student loans and  grants. Not surprisingly, this  will have an impact on student debt levels which, according to a 2013 Bank of  Montreal Student Survey, are already expected to be $26,297 for current  graduating students. Similarly, a 2012  Canadian University Survey Consortium survey noted that graduating students  reported an average total debt of $24,579. Given projected PSE costs  in the future, student debt levels are expected to continue to increase –  although this will be somewhat mitigated as more students with RESP savings  enter colleges and universities and as parental incomes and starting salaries  increase over time.
3.2 Alignment with federal government priorities
The department reiterated the importance of the CESP in the  2013-2014 Report on Plans and Priorities by underlining the importance of  “…reducing barriers to education by providing financial assistance to  individuals as well as incentives to save for a child’s post-secondary  education”. In January 2014, the Minister of State reiterated the importance of  RESPs and the CLB by mentioning that “Our government recognizes that access to  post-secondary education is vital, not only for a young person’s future, but  also for Canada’s long-term growth and prosperity. An RESP, supplemented with  the Canada Learning Bond, helps modest-income families make post-secondary  education a reality for their children”. These and other recent  references to the CESP and RESPs clearly show that education, a knowledge  society and saving for PSE continue to be a priority for the federal  government.
3.3 Efficient  incentives to increase savings
The effectiveness of grants and bonds in motivating people  to save in general is discussed below. This is an important discussion because  it speaks to the relevance of the CESP and whether the proper incentive(s) to  invest in RESPs are being offered.
Theory suggests that incentives which promote general  savings could result in three strategies (or a combination of the three): (i)  individuals divert savings from another savings vehicle in order to take  advantage of the incentive (i.e. no net increase in total savings); (ii)  individuals reduce their consumption to take advantage of the incentive,  leading to an increase in overall savings; or (iii) individuals save less of  their own money because the incentives enables them to reach the same savings  goal without contributing as much of their own money. The two current  approaches under the CESP to increase PSE savings are matching individual  contributions (CESG) and providing lump sum amounts to account holders (CLB). A  third possible approach (default participation that has been tested in other jurisdictions)  is also discussed.
Although not specifically related to PSE, the literature on  retirement savings indicates that matching contributions had positive but  modest effects on participation (e.g. a 25% matching contribution was  associated with a 5% participation increase). Madrian (2012)  summarized the results of matching contributions by indicating that “a matching  contribution increases savings plan participation and contributions, although  the impact is less significant than the impact of non-financial approaches  [automatic enrollment, simplification, planning aids, reminders, etc.]”. Although  matching contributions are shown to increase savings participation, the effect  of matching contributions on the savings rate (i.e. amount saved) was usually  found to be small and not always statistically significant.
The matching threshold appears to have a greater impact than  the matching rate. For instance, a matching contribution rate of 25% on a  higher maximum level of contributions (e.g. $5,000) was associated with higher  savings than a matching contribution rate of 50% on a lower maximum level of  contributions (e.g. $2,500).
Benjamin and Smart (2011) examined the effect of RESPs/CESP  on savings behaviour and their results indicated an increase in RESP balances  since the introduction of the CESP, but there was little evidence that overall  net financial assets increased among eligible households. In another study,  Benjamin and Smart (2012) reiterated this by indicating that “the main effect  of the CESP may be to induce substitution between tax-preferred assets, rather  than to increase overall household saving or educational attendance.” Nonetheless, they  conclude that “the RESP Program may have its greatest impact in serving to  educate households to plan ahead for the financing of university”.
The former Child Trust Fund (CTF) in the United Kingdom  offers an example of lump-sum contributions, as well as default participation  (i.e. automatic enrolment if an account was not opened within a year). Launched  in 2005, the CTF provided a universal benefit (£250 or £500) for children at  birth and when children reached seven years of age. Families were eligible to  initially contribute up to £1,200 annually (increased to £4,000 later on), and  savings grew tax free.
An evaluation of the CTF indicated that the  majority of parents (78%) opened a CTF account by themselves (including 67% of  low-income parents) but only about 37% of CTF accounts received an individual  contribution. Where accounts were opened automatically by the government, only  9% received individual contributions.
Finally, an experimental study from Oklahoma showed  that those who had a 529 plan (an education savings  plan operated by a state or educational institution designed to help families  set aside funds for future college costs) opened for them with an initial  deposit, matching incentives, program materials and regular statements were  more likely to have received contributions than children who did not benefit  from these advantages. However, evidence was  mixed regarding the effect on actual amounts saved. It was shown that the  program mainly benefits higher-income families.
The U.K. experience with the CTF and the experimental study  in Oklahoma suggest that automatic enrolment (which currently requires  income-testing consent on behalf of potential participants) would significantly  increase participation in the programs examined, but for the CLB the issue is  slightly different as CLB receipt does not require any contributions or savings.  The U.K. experience with the CTF suggests that if fully automatic CLB enrolment  was feasible/practical (which it currently may not be due to the requirement of  income-testing consent on behalf of potential participants), it could  significantly increase RESP participation, but it may not necessarily affect  individual RESP contributions – thereby not having much impact on encouraging  PSE savings using RESPs. These findings are supported by the literature  findings from Madrian & Shea (2001), Connelly and Kohler (2004), and Choi,  Laibson, and Madrian (2004). Thus, it would not be the most efficient way of  encouraging PSE savings using RESPs.
The literature presented here suggests that the current  federal approach of grants and bonds provides an appropriate incentive for  low-income families to save for PSE. In the case of the CLB, the financial  situation of many of these families might preclude them from making RESP  contributions. As evidence, the Survey of Household Spending (SHS) study showed  that families in the lowest income category spent about 82-85% of their annual  family income on basic necessities (i.e. food, shelter, clothing and  transportation) compared to roughly 60% and 42% for families in the middle- and  highest-income categories, respectively. With such a high percentage of income  being spent on the basic necessities by low-income families, their likelihood  of generating RESP savings on their own is significantly lower. Nevertheless,  others such as grand-parents, relatives, or friends may contribute into the  RESP account of children from low-income families and enable them to receive  the grants and bonds.
4. CESP performance: RESP savings
This section examines questions related to the performance  of the CESP as it relates to the achievement of expected outcomes, namely  whether more families (particularly those of low- and middle-income) are  opening and saving inside RESPs. Three of the key questions in this section  include:
What are RESP, CLB and A-CESG take-up rates and  what is the trend?
Has there been a further change in savings  patterns for PSE in RESPs since the A CESG and CLB were implemented?
Are more low-income families saving for PSE in  RESPs?
As indicated in Section 3.1, some families are unable to  generate savings due to financial constraints and/or limited income. The Survey  of Approaches to Educational Planning (SAEP) indicated that in 2013 about 68%  of children less than 18 years of age had savings for PSE, slightly lower than  in 2008 (70%). This was also confirmed by the Canadian Financial Capability  Survey (CFCS) which showed that 70% of families with children under 18 had PSE  savings in 2009. A common theme in this survey and in other studies is that around 60% of those  not saving for PSE have identified a lack of money as the main reason for not  saving for PSE. Not surprisingly, this proportion is higher among families with  lower incomes.
Nevertheless, there are families at every income level who  are able to save for PSE, even among those with limited financial means. The  case studies demonstrated that those who place a high priority on saving for  PSE were more often able to generate savings. Technical evaluation reports  using Statistics Canada survey data showed that families with a household  budget were also more likely to generate savings for PSE. The CESP survey  corroborated these findings in that 85% of families with an RESP indicated that  saving money each month was important, compared to 70% of families without an  RESP. The survey also indicated that even though the vast majority (close to  90%) of families that did not have an RESP knew about RESPs, awareness levels  were lower (about 76%) for respondents with a family income of under $45,000.
4.1 RESP  participation and savings
The cumulative level of RESP assets has increased from $2.4  billion in 1997 to $40.5 billion in 2013 (refer to Table 1). RESP asset levels in  2013 increased by $4.9 billion from 2012.
Up to the end of 2013, the cumulative amount of all CESP  payments paid into RESPs was $8.5 billion ($7.7 billion in CESGs, $298 million  in A-CESGs and $499 million in CLBs).
Since the introduction of the A-CESG, the annual amount of  A-CESG payments has increased from $7 million in 2005 to $54 million in 2013,  while annual CLB payments have increased from $450,000 in 2005 to $101 million  in 2013. Combined with CESG payments of $728 million in 2013, $883 million was  disbursed via the CESP in 2013.
Text description of table 1

Table 1: Table 1 lists cumulative RESP assets (in $billions), the growth rate of cumulative RESP  assets (in %), basic CESG payments made (in $millions), A-CESG payments made  (in $millions), CLB payments made (in $millions), and total CESP payments made  (in $millions) for each year during the 1997 to 2013 period. The data are based  on the CESP Annual Statistical Review 2013 for 1998-2013 data and the CESG  Quarterly Statistical Review (January 2001) for 1997 data.
Sources: CESP Annual Statistical  Review 2013 for 1998-2013 data, and CESG Quarterly Statistical Review (January  2001) for 1997 data.
Table 2 provides some insight into the share of eligible  children under 18 years of age who have ever received the CESG – in 1998, 9.7%  of all eligible children had received the CESG at least once. By 2013, the  share of eligible children who had received the CESG at least once had  increased to 47.1% (i.e. of the roughly 6.9 million children under the age of  18 in Canada in 2013, 3.26 million had an RESP and had received the Basic CESG  at least once).  Almost 2.5 million of these 3.26 million  beneficiaries, or 75.3%, made a contribution and received the Basic CESG in  2013. Of these, 860,000 (or about 35%) received the A-CESG.
Text description of table 2

Table 2 lists the cumulative  number of CESG beneficiaries less than 18 years of age, the number of children  in Canada less than 18 years of age, the percentage of CESG-eligible children  who have received the CESG, the number of children receiving the A-CESG and  basic CESG, the percentage of A-CESG eligible children receiving the A-CESG,  the number of children receiving the CLB, and the percentage of CLB-eligible  children who have received the CLB for each year during the 1997 to 2013  period. The data are based on the CESP Annual Statistical Review 2013,  Statistics Canada data (CANSIM table 051-0001), and Canada Revenue Agency data.
Sources: Columns A, D, F and G  are derived from the CESP Annual Statistical Review 2013. Column B is derived  from Statistics Canada data (CANSIM table 051-0001). Column C is derived from  dividing Column A by Column B. Column E is derived from calculations using CRA  data and data from Column D. ** Canada Child Tax Benefit data was not yet  available for 2013 – the number of A-CESG eligible children in 2012 was used to  estimate 2013. Note that the cumulative figures for the A-CESG were not  calculated, as the A-CESG is not retroactive like the Basic CESG and CLB.
The number of A-CESG beneficiaries (i.e. those receiving an  additional 10% or 20% grant in a given year) increased from 120,000 in 2005 to  860,000 in 2013. As a proportion of the entire population of A-CESG eligible  children, this represents an increase from 2.7% in 2005 to 17.4% in 2012.
It is important to note that the percentage of A-CESG  eligible children receiving the A-CESG would have been higher if all A CESG  eligible children who received contributions into their RESPs in a given year  had received the A-CESG. Additional data analysis examining families with  children using the CESP administrative data linked with CRA T1 income data  (representing 85% of all RESP expenditures) indicated that 33.8% of  A-CESG eligible families who contributed into an RESP in 2012 and received the  CESG did not receive the A-CESG. The three main reasons  for this are: (i) the RESP subscriber did not apply for the A-CESG at their financial  institution; and/or (ii) some financial institutions did not offer the A-CESG; and/or (iii) some of  these children received the A-CESG in the RESP of another relative outside  their household. In 2012, 30.9% of A-CESG eligible families who made an RESP  contribution were not registered for the A-CESG.
The annual number of CLB beneficiaries has increased from  800 in 2005 to 384,100 in 2013. The cumulative number of CLB beneficiaries has  increased to 604,566 in 2013 and the share of all CLB-eligible children who  have ever received the CLB has increased from less than 1% in 2005 to 29.4% in  2013. About 23% of CLB-eligible families with an RESP in 2012 did not receive  the CLB in 2012, as they were not registered for it at their financial  institution or children received the CLB in the RESP of another relative  outside their household. The program’s efforts to  promote A CESG and CLB since 2005 have helped to significantly reduce the  number of eligible RESP subscribers who did not apply for the A-CESG and/or  CLB. Moreover, a new streamlined application form was introduced in 2013 that  encourages new subscribers to apply for all CESP incentives (subscribers now  have to specifically opt-out of the incentives they do not wish to be  considered for).
4.2 Savings  patterns in RESPs
The number of children receiving RESP contributions has  increased each year since 1998. In 2013, 75.3% of RESP beneficiaries under 18  received a contribution, as not all children with RESPs receive contributions  every year.
In 2013, the average RESP contribution (among those with a  contribution in that year) was $1,497 compared to $1,202 in 1998. However, average annual  RESP contributions adjusted for inflation (in $2006) have declined over this  period – from $1,436 in 1998 to $1,331 in 2013 (refer to Graph 1: Average Annual RESP Contributions from 1998 to 2013). Further analysis using the linked CRA-CESP  data (i.e. data examining RESP subscribers living with their children and  representing 85% of all RESP expenditures) indicated that average contributions  adjusted for inflation have declined for all income groups since 2004.
Families receiving only the Basic CESG increased their  annual RESP contributions from $1,399 in 2006 to $1,676 in 2013 (or from $1,399  to $1,491 adjusted for inflation). By comparison, the average for those  receiving the Basic CESG and the A-CESG changed little, going from $1,170 to  $1,181 (or decreasing from $1,170 to $1,050 adjusted for inflation), while the  average for those receiving the CLB changed from $947 to $1,039 in 2013 (or  decreased from $947 to $923 adjusted for inflation).
Receipt of the CESP incentives and RESP contributions also  fluctuate significantly by other factors such as a child’s age, province,  parental education and financial literacy.
Graph 1 – Average Annual  RESP Contributions ($2006) from 1998 to 2013



Text description of graph 1

Graph 1 shows average annual RESP  contributions (in 2006 constant dollars) for all CESP beneficiaries, basic CESG  recipients, A-CESG recipients, and CLB recipients during each year from 1998 to  2013. Graph 1 is based on a 10% random sample of CESP administrative data of recipients  under 18 years old and includes only those with an RESP contribution for that  year.

Source: 10% random sample of CESP  administrative data of recipients under 18 years old. Averages include only  those with an RESP contribution for that year
4.2.1 Age
In 1998,  RESP beneficiaries were, on average, 8 years old at the time that an RESP  account was opened for them. By 2009, this average had dropped to 3.6 years –  where it has remained since (3.5 years in 2013).
In 2013,  the percentage of children who ever received the CESG was higher among families  with children aged 6 to 11 years old (52.6%) than among families with younger  children (41.3%) or older children (48.3%). Further, children 5 years of age  and younger with an RESP account were more likely to have received a  contribution in 2013 (84.0%) compared to children aged 6 to 11 years old  (75.5%) and children aged 12 to 17 years old (68.0%). However, older children  (12-17 years of age) received significantly higher RESP contributions ($1,764)  in 2013 than those under 12 years old (roughly $1,375). Plausible explanations  for these findings include: (i) older children having older parents who are  able to contribute more (and who tend to have higher disposable incomes than  younger parents – one factor being no daycare costs, for example); (ii) a sense  of urgency among parents of older children to contribute to potential PSE  studies that are quickly approaching; and/or (iii) older parents having a  clearer idea if their child will go onto PSE.
4.2.2 Province/territory
Ontario and British Columbia had the highest CESG take-up  rates in 2013 (slightly above 50%) while the territories (27.6%), Manitoba  (34.3%) and Saskatchewan (36.1%) had the lowest. Average annual RESP  contributions in 2013 were highest in the territories (between $1,642 and  $1,755), British Columbia ($1,700) and Ontario ($1,649) and lowest in New  Brunswick ($1,127).
Comparing these figures with average provincial  undergraduate tuition fees in 2013, there does not appear to be any correlation  between the level of RESP contributions and the level of tuition fees in a  particular province (although living costs may be a factor). Thus, there are  other factors such as family income levels, parental education, RESP  promotional activities, provincial incentives, student financial assistance  levels, etc. that might explain provincial differences.
One other factor that might partially explain provincial  differences in RESP contribution levels is the country of origin of RESP  subscribers. Analysis using the Access to Education and Training Survey (ASETS)  indicated that the higher level of RESP contributions in British Columbia is  likely due to there being a greater share of Chinese and East Indian immigrants  than in other provinces (both groups tend to make much higher RESP  contributions than families with two Canadian-born parents even when taking  into account other factors such as family income). For example, in 2008, of  households with a family income of $80,000 or more, the average RESP  contribution was over $2,700 for families where both parents were of Chinese or  East Indian origin and only about $1,600 for families where both parents were  born in Canada. The CESP survey corroborated this by showing that foreign-born  RESP subscribers were more likely than Canadian-born subscribers to make annual  RESP contributions exceeding $2,000.
4.2.3 Parental  education and aspirations
The 2013  CESP survey found a correlation between parental education and having an RESP. Findings  from the survey showed that close to 70% of parents with an RESP studied in  university compared to about 40% of those without an RESP. The survey also  indicated that more than 50% of parents with university studies and with an  RESP contributed $2,000 or more compared to 25% of parents without university  studies. Average RESP asset levels were also significantly higher among those  with university studies. These findings essentially confirm those found in  studies using older Statistics Canada surveys (the CFCS and ASETS).
Several studies in the literature review showed a  correlation between the presence of PSE savings and parental aspirations,  findings which were confirmed in the CESP survey (close to 43% of parents with  an RESP indicated that having PSE savings was related to how they felt about  their child’s potential college or university participation). As well, close to  60% of parents with RESP savings expected their children to go to university  compared to 37% of parents without RESP savings. However, the CESP survey  showed that some RESP subscribers decided against making further RESP  contributions because they did not expect their child to go onto PSE studies –  perhaps due to the lack of PSE ambitions of their child and/or  weaker-than-expected grades in school.
4.2.4 Financial  literacy and savings orientation
Having good general financial knowledge and awareness of the  benefits of using RESPs are two additional factors that help explain the  likelihood of saving for PSE in an RESP. The CFCS study showed that those who  self-identified as having good financial knowledge were 7.5 percentage points  more likely to have an RESP than those who did not self-identify as having good  financial knowledge. Further, the CESP survey indicated that 46.1% of families  not fully aware of the CESP and its benefits indicated that they would now be  likely to save in an RESP after the CESP features were explained to them.
Another  factor which influences the probability of saving for PSE in an RESP is having  a pre-existing savings habit. Studies conducted for the evaluation demonstrate  that having an RRSP is correlated to having an RESP and the level of annual  RESP contributions. Findings from the CESP survey revealed that 12-15% of RESP subscribers used  funds that would have gone into RRSPs in order to make RESP contributions. However,  about 40% of subscribers indicated that a more common way to enable RESP  contributions was to cut back on spending, of which the majority cut back on  either entertainment (i.e. going out for dinner, going to the movies, etc.) or  vacations. The ASETS study and case studies corroborated these results and  showed that, not surprisingly, a higher proportion (62.6%) of families with an  income below $40,000 had to cut back on spending compared to families with an  income between $40,000 and $79,999 (52.3%) and families with an income of  $80,000 or more (39.3%). Finally, the CESP survey revealed that less than 2% of  subscribers with children under 18 indicated taking out a bank loan or using a  line of credit to help make RESP contributions.
4.3 RESP  use by income group and contributors
Analysis using CRA T1 income tax data linked to CESP  administrative data (the data examined only RESP subscribers living with their  children and therefore represents 85% of all RESP expenditures) showed that the  2012 RESP take-up rate varies significantly by net family income, from 25.2%  for families with net family income below $25,000 to 70.1% for families with  net family income over $125,000.
4.3.1 RESP  use by family income level
Each year from 1999 to 2012, the number of families with  RESPs increased. Graph 2 examines families with children by income group and  shows that the number of families with RESPs increased every year in each  income group.
In parallel, more families in the two lowest income categories (of Graph 2) are receiving the A-CESG (as shown in Table 2).  The study using linked CRA-CESP data indicated that the RESP take-up rate among  families with an income below the lowest A-CESG threshold increased from 7.8%  in 1999 to 30.3% in 2012 (a four-fold increase), while the RESP take-up rate  among families with an income between the two A-CESG thresholds increased from  15.6% to 47.3% (a three-fold increase), and the RESP take-up rate among  families above the highest A-CESG threshold increased from 26.5% to 63.8% (over  a two-fold increase). However, although RESP  take-up rates continue to increase, Graph 3 shows that visually, the gap in RESP  take-up rates between these three groups of families is not narrowing, even  after the introduction of the A-CESG and CLB.
Graph 2 – Number of families with RESPs



Text description of graph 2

Graph 2 shows the number of families with RESPs for all CESP beneficiaries, basic CESG recipients, A-CESG  recipients, and CLB recipients for each year during the 1999 to 2012 period. Graph  2 is based on a 1% sample of families living with children (CRA T1 income tax  data linked with CESP administrative data with 545,274 observations from  1999-2012).
Sources: 1% sample of families  living with children (CRA T1 income tax data linked with CESP administrative  data with 545,274 observations from 1999-2012). This sample of families living  with children represents 85% of CESP expenditures. * Annual A-CESG thresholds  are used, which are also CCTB thresholds. For years before the introduction of  the A-CESG, CCTB thresholds are used.
Graph 3 – RESP take-up rates (%) by family income level from 1999 to 2012



Text description of graph 3

Graph 3 shows RESP take-up  rates (in %) by family income level for each year during the 1999 to 2012  period. Graph 3 is based on a 1% sample of families living with children (CRA  T1 income tax data linked with CESP administrative data with 545,274  observations from 1999-2012).
Sources: 1% sample of families  living with children (CRA T1 income tax data linked with CESP administrative  data with 545,274 observations from 1999-2012). This sample of families living  with children represents 85% of CESP expenditures. * Annual A-CESG thresholds  are used, which are also CCTB thresholds. For years before the introduction of  the A-CESG, CCTB thresholds are used. The $25,000 and $125,000 thresholds are  adjusted for inflation each year (real $2012).
The growth in RESP take-up rates among low- and  middle-income families has, not surprisingly, coincided with an increase in the  number of A-CESG beneficiaries (from 120,000 in 2005 to 800,000 in 2012 as  shown in Table 3). However, statistical analysis using the linked CRA-CESP data failed to attribute the growth in RESP take-up rates to the A CESG. RESP  take-up rates among low- and middle-income families were already increasing  prior to 2005 and did not accelerate after the introduction of the A-CESG. The  analysis of the linked CRA-CESP data also failed to uncover a significant  impact of the A-CESG on RESP contributions.
However, analysis using CESP administrative data showed  beneficiaries eligible and registered for the A-CESG were more likely to  receive contributions in their RESP (by over 10 percentage points) than all  other RESP beneficiaries. The analysis also showed a $233 increase in annual  contribution amounts for those eligible for the A-CESG who had an RESP before  the measure was put in place and made the effort to return to their financial  institution in 2005 or 2006 to do the paperwork required to register for the  A-CESG. As this small group is  not representative of the eligible population, one cannot conclude that the  A-CESG increased contribution amounts among the entire eligible population,  even though contributions did increase significantly in the group examined.
Further, the CRA-CESP study found that the CLB increased the  RESP take-up rate among low-income families. As only children born on or after  January 1, 2004 are eligible for the CLB, the analysis compared low-income  families with children born between July and December 2003 (i.e. not eligible  for the CLB) to low-income families with children born between January and June  2004 (i.e. eligible for the CLB) to examine the effect of the CLB. Results  showed that by 2012, RESP take-up rates were 8.3 percentage points higher among  the latter group. However, the analysis failed to uncover a significant impact  of the CLB on annual or cumulative RESP contributions. The CESP administrative  data analysis also showed that the CLB decreased the age at which RESPs are  opened by one year, on average.
4.3.2 Contributors to RESPs
Analyses using CESP administrative data indicate that the  vast majority (80%) of RESP beneficiaries had only parent(s) as subscribers. This  proportion was higher (90%) among those who received the A-CESG or CLB. The CESP survey produced  similar findings and noted that the most common contributors among relatives  and/or friends were grandparents (70%), followed by a child’s other  parent/guardian (10%), aunt or uncle (7%), and other relatives and friends (13%).
The fact that the proportion with only parent(s) as  subscribers was higher among those with lower incomes might be partially  explained by the correlation between incomes from different generations. Corak  et al (2010) show that income from two different generations is correlated,  meaning that those from low-income families were more likely to come from a  low-income family background. Therefore, their parents (i.e. grand-parents of  the RESP beneficiaries) are less likely to become RESP subscribers, as they are  highly likely themselves to be a low-income family
4.3.3 Use of grants by temporarily low-income families
The CRA-CESP study demonstrated that in 2012 families  permanently in low income were more likely to  make an RESP contribution (if they had an RESP) but made smaller contributions  on average than families who were temporarily in low income. Correspondingly,  they received a lower amount of the Basic CESG but received more grants  overall, as they were more likely to be registered for the CLB and receive it  than families who were temporarily in low income.
5. PSE savings outside of RESPs
The use of RESPs to save for a child’s PSE has increased  dramatically since the introduction of the CESP in 1998, but many families  (with and without RESPs) continue to save for PSE outside of RESPs. This  section examines the extent to which this is taking place and why.
5.1 Who  saves outside of RESPs?
The 2013 CESP survey found that 25.1% of families with RESPs  for their children under 18 years old saved for PSE using non-RESP means, while  38.6% of families with children under 18 years old without an RESP did so. Further  analyses of the survey data showed that a greater proportion of families with  incomes under $45,000 saved for PSE using non-RESP means than families with  incomes of $45,000 or more. The analyses also indicated that saving outside of  an RESP occurred more frequently among parents without university studies than  among parents with some university studies.
The 2013 CESP survey also revealed that the most common  methods of saving for PSE outside RESPs were the use of a dedicated savings  account in the name of the child (approximately 35%), followed by the use of  other types of accounts (close to 19%) and Tax-Free Savings Accounts (TFSA –  15%). Other savings methods included real estate investments and/or the rental  income derived thereof, life insurance funds and/or policies, and RRSPs. The case  studies produced similar findings.
5.2 Reasons for saving outside of an RESP
The most common reasons for saving outside of RESPs (among  RESP subscribers) given in the CESP survey were ‘diversification’ (21%) and  ‘easy access to funds’ (17%). Another 7% of families indicated that they had  either maximized the annual CESG received (i.e. contributed $2,500 and received  the maximum $500 in grants) or that they had contributed the lifetime RESP  maximum of $50,000. Almost all surveyed families who provided these answers had  an annual income of $90,000 or more. Additionally, some subscribers indicated  that RESPs were not able to completely cover the increasingly high costs of  university (and that additional non-RESP savings was needed). The case studies  also identified flexibility (i.e. accessibility to funds, use of funds for any  purpose, and allowing other people to contribute) as reasons for contributing  to PSE savings via other means.
Reasons given by non-subscribers for using non-RESP methods  to save for PSE included ‘having accessibility to funds’ (17%) and ‘not having  gotten around to it [opening an RESP] yet’ (14%). Only 10.8% listed a lack of  RESP awareness (and the associated benefits thereof) as the main reason for  saving outside of an RESP. The frequency of this answer was even lower among  parents with children under 18 years of age (only 5.9%). Thus, it appears as  though awareness is not really an issue when it comes to explaining lack of  RESP take-up among non-subscribers who are already saving for PSE. Among those  not saving for PSE at all, 90% of those surveyed indicated being familiar with  RESPs, but a significant portion were still unaware of the benefits of using an  RESP, as over 40% said they would now be likely to save in an RESP after the  benefits were explained to them.
6. CESP performance: Use of RESPs while in PSE
This section shifts the focus from saving for PSE to the use  of RESP savings for PSE studies. The section provides evidence on the following  evaluation questions:
To what extent is the CESP improving the  affordability of PSE?
What impact do RESPs and the CESP have on  student loan and grant amounts?
At the end of 2013, RESP beneficiaries who were 17 years old  had accumulated an average of $12,906 in RESP contributions and $2,518 in CESG/A-CESG  grants for a total of $15,424. Assuming a rate of return equal to inflation,  total RESP savings would amount to an average of $17,053 for 17-year-old  beneficiaries in 2013. Close to 41% had less than  $10,000 in RESP savings, a quarter had between $10,000 and $20,000, 23% had  between $20,000 and $40,000, and 10% had over $40,000.
6.1 Use of RESP savings by PSE students
In 2013, total aggregate RESP withdrawals reached over $2.7  billion, up markedly compared to the $45 million withdrawn in 2000. Similarly, the number of  students withdrawing from RESPs has increased steadily since 1998, from less  than 10,000 to 356,916 in 2013. In percentage terms, about 17% of PSE students  made an RESP withdrawal in 2013, up from less than 0.3% in 1998.
Between 1998 and 2013, the average annual RESP withdrawal  increased from $3,705 to $7,673 (among those with an RESP withdrawal of at  least $1). Graph 4 shows that this increase is mainly due to the increase in  contribution withdrawals during PSE, as EAPs (the withdrawal of accumulated  investment earnings in the RESP and government grants) have remained relatively  stable since 2007 (average Canadian undergraduate tuition fees are also shown  as a point of reference).
Graph 4 – Average RESP withdrawals and average canadian undergraduate tuition fees – 1998 to 2013 ($)



Text description of graph 4

Graph 4 shows average RESP  withdrawals and average Canadian undergraduate tuition fees for each year  during the 1998 to 2013 period. Graph 4 is based on a 10% random sample of CESP  administrative data and Tuition and Living Accommodation Costs survey data from  Statistics Canada.

Source: 10% random sample of CESP  administrative data and Tuition and Living Accommodation Costs survey data from  Statistics Canada. Average withdrawals are calculated excluding zeroes.
In 2012,  over 45% of students with RESP withdrawals were in their first year of a PSE  program, 25% were students in their second year, 16% were students in their  third year, and the remaining in further years. Administrative data analyses  revealed that in 2013 the average withdrawal was highest if the student was in  the first year of a PSE program and declined thereafter. Further analyses indicated  that approximately 70% of students with RESP withdrawals were in university,  while 30% were in college or other studies. Not surprisingly, 2013 RESP  withdrawals for those studying at university ($7,908) were greater than for  those studying at a college or other PSE institution ($6,814).
The average  cumulative amount of RESP withdrawals increased from $8,000 for the generation  who reached 18 years old in 1998 to $15,500 for the generation who reached 18  years old in 2008. Of beneficiaries who started withdrawing from an RESP before 2009, 28% made a  withdrawal in only one year, 23% in two years, 41% in three or four years, and  7% made a withdrawal in five or more years.
6.2 Impact of RESPs on PSE funding
Those with RESP savings should be in a better financial  position to afford their PSE studies than those without RESP savings, all else  being equal. Analyses using the ASETS confirmed this, as did the CESP survey. The  CESP survey showed that PSE students with an RESP withdrew an average of $6,830  from their RESP, accessed $9,525 in non-RESP funding (i.e. any other type of  financial support – loans, grants, employment income, etc.), and had  PSE-related costs averaging $14,094 in 2012. By comparison, students without an  RESP accessed $8,958 in non-RESP funding and had PSE-related costs of $12,739  in 2012. Thus, on average, students without an RESP appeared to be short of  funds to finance their PSE.
Based on the above figures, the percentage of PSE-related  costs in 2012 that were covered by RESP withdrawals (i.e. ROCs and EAPs)  equates to 48.5%, among those who made RESP withdrawals. Respondents provided a  lower percentage (37%) when specifically asked “…what percentage of these  [PSE-related] costs were covered by the RESP savings that were used.” A similar  percentage (36%) was reported in the ASETS study by RESP users. Therefore, it  appears that during the time period covered by these studies, RESP savings  covered about 40% of PSE-related expenses, in years students had RESP  withdrawals.
6.2.1 RESPs and student loans
Three evaluation studies using different Statistics Canada  surveys – the Youth in Transition Survey (YITS), the National Graduates Survey  (NGS), and ASETS – all found that students with RESP savings were less likely  to have a student loan. The NGS and ASETS studies  also found that those that have RESP savings had lower amounts of student debt.
CESP survey results provide additional insight concerning  RESPs and student loans – 24.9% of students with an RESP have had to access  student loans while in PSE compared to 54.8% of students without an RESP. As  well, students with an RESP accessed an average of $5,511 in student loans in  2012 while students without an RESP accessed an average of $6,613 – or 16.7%  less. This is partly explained  by the fact that RESP withdrawals reduce student loan amounts. Note that  because RESP beneficiaries are more likely to be from families with higher  income levels, they are less likely to be eligible for student loans and, thus,  have to rely on other sources of funds to finance their PSE, such as RESPs.
6.2.2 Impact of RESP withdrawals on federal and provincial/territorial  loans and grants
RESP withdrawals may decrease eligibility for student loans  and grants. For instance, EAPs (i.e. the CESG, A-CESG, and returns on  contributions and the grants) are treated as in-study income and reduce loans  dollar for dollar, above the $100 per week in-study exemption for EAPs and  other sources of income. Therefore, the reduction  rate of EAPs is more likely to be close to 100% for students working while  studying. As EAPs are also considered as taxable income, students must include  them as part of their income when filing income taxes. This can have a direct  impact on eligibility for Canada Student Grants for students from low- and  middle-income families one year later, as eligibility is based on gross annual  family income from the previous year.
Until the 2013-2014 academic year, RESP contribution  withdrawals (ROCs) were also considered in the CSLP needs assessment  calculation for determining loan and grant eligibility. ROCs were considered as  targeted resources (assessed at 100%) for both independent and dependent  students with a non-parent as the subscriber. However, starting with  the 2014-2015 academic year, ROCs were excluded from the CSLP needs assessment  calculation. The decision to change the federal policy was motivated by the  understanding that considering ROCs as a targeted resource in the CSLP needs  assessment may disproportionally affect low-income students with RESPs compared  to their higher-income counterparts.
To clarify the impact of RESP withdrawals (EAP and ROCs),  the Student Financial Assistance Estimator on the CanLearn website was used and  showed that EAP withdrawals may reduce (almost dollar-for-dollar) student  financial aid, regardless of whether or not a student is dependent or  independent. However, this reduction only occurs for in-study income above the $100 weekly  exemption for a typical study period of 34 weeks ($3,400).
It was also revealed that ROCs used to lead to a major  reduction in student financial aid (by up to 93% of the value of the ROCs) for  independent students until 2013-2014. Even though the new CSLP policy has  excluded ROCs from the needs assessment process for the federal portion of a  student loan since 2014-2015, in practice many provinces/territories have not  updated their application forms which could lead to  uneven effects across jurisdictions. In cases where the new federal policy has  not been implemented, counting ROCs as resources continues to lead to up to a  near 100% reduction in student financial aid – implying that some students  withdrawing RESP savings could end up with similar PSE funding levels as those  without RESP savings, when taking into account student financial aid and RESP  withdrawals (EAP and ROCs). The key difference, all other things being equal,  is that students with RESP savings will have less student loan debt to repay  once PSE studies are completed.
Although Quebec does not participate in the CSLP (having its  own program), the province excludes all RESP withdrawals from student loans  calculations. This significantly increases available student resources for  those with an RESP and applying for financial assistance in Quebec compared to  those with RESPs applying in the rest of Canada.
About 43% of surveyed families with PSE students were aware  that RESPs can impact on student loan and grant calculations, but they were not  necessarily aware to what extent. Currently, there is no precise information  available to the public on the effect of RESP withdrawals (EAPs and  contribution withdrawals) on student loan and grant calculations.
7. Efficiency and economy of resources to reach objectives
Effective April 1, 2009, the Treasury Board Secretariat  Directive on the Evaluation Function requires that evaluations address  ‘efficiency and economy’, which is comprised of an “assessment of resource  utilization in relation to the production of outputs and progress toward  expected outcomes”.
To assess the resource utilization of the CESP in achieving  its objectives, Section 7.1 examines if the resources/inputs (i.e. grant and  bond payments as described in the logic model in Appendix 3) are used  efficiently and if there is any potential economy of resources/inputs that  could be achieved without having a significant impact on outcomes (i.e.  encouraging families to save for the PSE of their children). In addition, this  section examines the extent to which CESP funding goes to people who would not  otherwise have saved for PSE in an RESP and looks at what is happening with RESP  contributions at the higher income levels. Section 7.2 examines the extent to  which other inputs (e.g. operating budget) are used efficiently.
7.1 Efficiency & economy – Assessment of resource utilization
The objective of the CESG, which comprised 82.4% of all CESP  payments in 2013, is to address the challenge of “encouraging families to save  early for their children’s education.” A logical question to ask is if there is  a need to encourage all families, specifically those with higher incomes, to save  early for their children’s education via government grants. The reason to ask  this question is because families with higher incomes:
Have  more financial resources at their disposal and are therefore able to save more  money than lower- and middle-income families (as the SHS study demonstrated). Thus,  their need for the incentives offered through the CESP is lower.   
In  addition, they can better afford to pay a part of their children’s PSE costs  during PSE studies using their income in those years.


Have a higher degree of financial literacy than lower- and middle-income families  and are therefore more aware of the costs associated with PSE and the  importance of saving early for PSE.

Were  more likely to have already been saving for PSE before the CESP was introduced  in 1998:   
Data  from the 1999 SAEP showed that 62.6% of families with children less than 18  years of age and with a household income of $80,000 or more reported having saved for their child’s PSE compared  to 18.7% for those with a household income of less than $30,000 (note that RESP  take-up was 15% among all families in 1999).

Given  that the 1999 SAEP was completed shortly after the introduction of the CESP in  1998, it is reasonable to assume that for most of these children saving began prior to 1998. Hence, a majority of  these families with a household income of $80,000 or more would not have  required encouragement from the CESP to save for PSE. Instead, most of these  families saving for PSE outside of an RESP likely changed the way they saved  and used RESPs to take advantage of the grants being offered via the CESG. 
In-depth analysis of the 1999 SAEP confirmed  these points by revealing that 60.0% of families with a household income of  $80,000 or more and whose youngest child was 17 or 18 years of age had PSE  savings in 1999, while this proportion was 58.2% for families with a similar  income and with children aged between 0 and 4 years old. However, RESP  participation was only 11.8% among the former group while it was 33.6% for the  latter group. Due to program rules, the bulk of children who  were 17 or 18 years old in 1999 were never eligible for the CESG.
The above points indicate that families with higher incomes  can save, are aware of the importance of saving, and already were saving for their  children’s PSE before the CESP was implemented. In addition, as RESP take-up  among families above the highest A-CESG income threshold increased to 63.8% in  2012, it appears that much of the increase in RESP take-up since 1999 is due to  a change in the way they save for PSE.
Considering this, it may not be necessary to offer them  financial incentives via the CESP as an impetus. The reason for this is that  the inputs (i.e. grant funding in RESPs) will not really impact outputs (i.e.  saving for the PSE of children) to the same extent as for those below the  highest A-CESG income threshold, since PSE saving among families above the  highest A-CESG income threshold was already taking place on a large scale prior  to 1998. Moreover, the CESP survey indicated that in 2013 close to 75% of  families with incomes of $90,000 or more indicated that they would still have  saved for PSE using an RESP in the absence of the CESP.
That being said, there is likely still value in having the  CESP, even for higher-income families, as some of them were likely induced to  save more (and more regularly) for their children’s PSE. As well, there is  little question that the existence of the CESP in combination with tax changes  to improve the flexibility of the RESP (e.g. raising the RESP annual  contribution limit per beneficiary from $1,500 in 1990 to $4,000 in 1997, and  then removing the limit in 2007) have increased RESP take-up among families at  all income levels, as the linked CRA-CESP data analysis demonstrated. However,  as some studies have shown, a high percentage of savings generated from the  introduction of a new savings incentive are often due to a substitution effect.
Given the evidence presented, a majority of families with  higher incomes would be saving for their children’s PSE regardless of the  existence of the CESP – it just so happens that now most of this saving takes  place inside an RESP, due in part to the 20% grant on their RESP contributions.  Thus, for these families there is little economy because the cost of resources  used is much higher than is needed to achieve the expected outcome of saving  for PSE.
Aside from efficiency and economy, there is also an issue of  equity. The analysis of the merged CESP-CRA databases showed that those with  $125,000 or more in family income (adjusted for inflation) received 31.9% of  all CESP payments in 2012 even though they accounted for only 17.1% of all  families with children less than 18 years of age (refer to Table 3). This  amounted to at least $224 million in CESP payments in 2012. Even the  introduction of the CLB and A-CESG did not change the proportion of CESP  payments going to these families, as they received 31.8% and 32.9% of all CESP  payments in 1999 and 2005, respectively. As the percentage of these families  increased during this period, from 9.6% in 1999 to 17.1% in 2012, the  discrepancy between the percentage of resources allocated to them and their  share in the population has narrowed during this period. For families with less  than $45,000 in family income, the discrepancy has narrowed as well during this  period, as their share of CESP expenditures increased significantly.
Text description of table 3

Table 3 shows the percentage  distribution of all families with children less than 18 years of age, the  distribution of CESP payments made (in $millions), and the distribution of CESP  payments made (in percentage terms) based on family income (in 2012 constant  dollars) for the years 1999, 2005 and 2012. Table 3 is based on a 1% sample of  families living with children (CRA-CESP linked data with 545,274 observations  from 1999 to 2012).
Source: 1% sample of families  living with children (CRA-CESP linked data with 545,274 observations from  1999-2012). This sample of families living with children represents 85% of CESP  expenditures. * CESP-assisted grant payments and the percentage distribution is  based on families where the parent(s) live with their children (roughly 85% of  all CESP costs) – thus, 15% of all CESP-assisted grant payments are excluded  from this table.
Moreover, out of CESP payments made in 2012, 49.6% went to  families with a family income of $90,000 or more. Assuming this proportion for  2013, this represents well over $400 million in 2013 CESP payments that were  disbursed to these families, of which $280 million were disbursed to families  earning $125,000 or more.
Families in one of the two lowest income categories in Table  3 received 24.3% of CESP payments in 2012 while accounting for 36.9% of all  families with children less than 18 years old. This amounted to at least $171  million in CESP payments in 2012, up substantially from $37 million in 1999 and  $72 million in 2005, representing a 362.2% increase over the 1999 to 2012  period. By comparison, CESP payments increased by 187.2% over this same period  for families with $125,000 or more in family income.
For lower-income families, it appears to be efficient to  help them save for PSE, as not many were saving for PSE prior to 1998. The  evaluation acknowledges that it is more difficult for most families with an  annual income of under $90,000 to save for their children’s PSE. Nevertheless,  as a high number of these families do save for PSE, it is essential to  underline the contribution of the CESP. Furthermore, it should be noted that  even low-income families without savings can open an RESP and receive the CLB.
Several lines of evidence highlight the contribution of the  CESP in helping to finance PSE savings in RESPs among middle- and lower-income  families:
The CESP survey revealed that 67.6% of families with an annual income of less than  $45,000 with an RESP for a child indicated that the CESP encouraged them to  start saving earlier than they otherwise would have, while this proportion was  58% for families with an annual income of $45,000 to $89,999.
The  percentage of families with less than $30,000 in household income and with PSE  savings increased from 19.5% in 1999 (SAEP) to 45.7% in 2008 (ASETS), and  declined slightly to 44.2% in 2013 (SAEP). Over the same period,  the percentage of families with $30,000 to $49,999 in household income with PSE  savings increased from 36.9% in 1999, to 56.5% in 2008, and fell to 53.4% in  2013.

The  number of middle- and low-income families with children receiving the CESG has  increased significantly since 1998 (see Section and continues to increase.   
The introduction of the CLB has led to a significant increase in RESP take-up among  the lowest income families (although there was no evidence to attribute the  growth in RESP take-up rates to the A CESG, as RESP take-up rates among  families with lower incomes were already increasing prior to 2005 (refer to  Section 4.3.1)).


Based  on the SAEP/ASETS, the average RESP value (in constant dollars) for families  having under $30,000 in household income increased from $3,812 in 1999 to  $7,230 in 2012, while the average RESP value for families having $30,000 to  $49,999 in household income increased from $3,800 in 1999 to $6,500 in 2012.
7.2 Efficiency of program delivery
This section examines the efficiency of the delivery model  of the CESP. In terms of the delivery of the CESP (from an administrative  standpoint), there appear to be some issues with the delivery of the A-CESG. The  study using the merged CESP-CRA data indicated that 34% of A-CESG eligible  families who made RESP contributions in 2012 did not receive the A-CESG in 2012  (likely either because their financial institution did not offer the A-CESG or  because eligible families did not apply for the A-CESG). Similarly, about 23%  of CLB-eligible families who had an RESP did not receive the CLB (for the same  reasons as the A-CESG as outlined in Section 4.3). Although the government  introduced a new form in 2013 that has addressed this issue for newly-opened  RESP accounts, the problem still exists for many families who opened an RESP  before 2013.
It is important to note that RESPs are not directly  administered by the Government of Canada (aside from the CRA’s role in  registering the plans). The CESP is delivered through an alternative service  delivery arrangement with financial institutions, banks, mutual fund companies  and scholarship foundations. The only CESP program delivery costs are salary  and non-salary dollars pertaining to federal-level employees (other  administrative costs such as IT, call centres, etc. are not included). The file  review indicated that CESP operating costs rose from $3.7 million to $8.5  million from 1998 to 2013. Dividing the CESP operating budget by total CESP  payments indicates that operating costs were 2.5% of total CESP payments in  1998 and 1.0% in 2013.
A comparison between CESP delivery efficiency and that of  other ESDC strategic outcomes and programs was conducted in the file review. The  results showed that CESP operating costs were comparable with programs falling  under the Income Security strategic outcome (0.1%) and Social Development  strategic outcome (2.1%) and with other programs such as Employment Insurance  (9.7%) and the CSLP (3.1%). However, using this  approach to measure program delivery efficiency is complicated by the fact that  the CESP delivery model achieves considerable savings with its alternative  service delivery model where financial institutions and group providers play a  significant role in program delivery without cost to the Government of Canada.
Therefore, although the CESP appears to be among the most  efficiently delivered ESDC programs using this metric, it should be kept in  mind that the CESP is delivered via a unique alternative service delivery model  (some of whom charge fees to account holders to cover their delivery costs –  which does not impact the Government of Canada’s program delivery efficiency)  compared to programs delivered exclusively by ESDC. This makes comparisons  to other programs in which the Government of Canada plays a greater role in  service delivery more difficult.
8. Conclusions, recommendations and future work
Overall, the increase in PSE costs justifies the need for  the CESP. There has been no evidence of a priority shift by the government  regarding the importance of learning, saving for PSE or the importance of RESPs  and the CESP.
A significant increase in RESP participation and accumulated  RESP savings has occurred at every income level. Participation has increased  every year for all income groups – notably, RESP take-up among families with an  income under the lowest A-CESG threshold increased four-fold since 1999 and  reached 30% in 2012 (with the CLB found to have had a significant impact). For  families with an income between the two A-CESG income thresholds, RESP take-up  reached 47% in 2012. Nevertheless, RESP take-up rates among these families  continue to remain much lower compared to that of families with an income above  the highest A-CESG income threshold. Thus, the latter group receives a  significant portion of all grant payments (and a larger share than their share  of the overall population of families with children less than 18 years of age).
There are still some parents who decide to save for their  children’s PSE outside of RESPs. However, it appears that the general awareness  problem of the CESP that existed previously has mostly been resolved, but there  continues to be a lack of understanding of CESP and RESP rules (and the  benefits associated with RESPs).
As the program has developed, the number of PSE students  using RESPs while studying continues to increase substantially, as do RESP  withdrawals. The use and the impact of the CESP and RESPs on students may  warrant consideration as the topic of a future evaluation.
8.1. Recommendations
Explore  ways for funds to more effectively reach families with the greatest need for  assistance and encouragement to save for their children’s future post-secondary  education.
Complement  outreach efforts on promoting awareness with promoting understanding of the  CESP savings incentives in order to support increased participation among all  Canadian families.
List of Abbreviations
A-CESG: Additional Canada  Education Savings Grant

ASETS: Access to Education and Training  Survey

CESG: Canada Education Savings  Grant

CESP: Canada Education Savings Program

CFCS: Canadian Financial Capability  Survey

CLB: Canada Learning Bond

CRA: Canada Revenue Agency

CSLP: Canada Student Loans Program

CTF: Child  Trust Fund

EAP: Education Assistance Payment

ESDC:  Employment and Social Development  Canada

NGS: National Graduates Survey

PSE: Post-Secondary Education

RESP: Registered Education Savings Plan

RRSP: Registered Retirement Savings Plan

SHS: Survey of Household Spending

YITS: Youth in Transition Survey
Appendix 1 – Evaluation questions
Relevance: Continued need for the program
1. Do PSE costs justify the need for the CESP?
Source Documents: Literature Review, SHS Study, CESP Survey    Section of this report or available in Technical Report (TR): 3.1
What  are the current debt levels for graduating students and what is its trend?  Source Documents: Literature Review, CESP Survey  Section of this report or available in Technical Report (TR): 3.1
What are the tuition costs for different types of PSE and what is its trend?  Source Documents: Literature Review, CESP  Survey  Section of this  report or available in Technical Report (TR): 3.1
What  are the living costs for students and what is its trend?  Source Documents: Literature Review, SHS Study  Section of this report or available in Technical Report (TR): 3.1
2. Is there a need for society to save more for PSE?
Source Documents: Literature Review, SHS Study  Section of this report or available in Technical Report (TR): 3.0
How do grants and bonds motivate people to save?      Source Documents: Literature Review      Section of this report or available in Technical Report (TR): 3.3
Why are some families saving for PSE while  others are not saving?      Source Documents: SHS Study, Case  Studies, CESP Survey      Section of this report or available  in Technical Report (TR): 4.0
How do families prioritize their spending and  saving?      Source Documents: SHS Study, Case Studies, CESP Survey      Section of this report or available in Technical Report (TR): 4.0,  4.2.4
What are the characteristics of families who do  save versus those who do not save?      Source Documents: SHS Study, Case Studies, CESP Survey      Section of this report or available in Technical Report (TR): 4.0
3. How do RESPs compare to PSE savings plans in other countries?
Source Documents: Literature Review    Section of this report or available in Technical Report (TR): 3.3
Are  there other countries with programs similar to the CESP and what are their  features?      Source Documents: Literature Review       Section of this report or available in  Technical Report (TR): 3.3
Relevance: Alignment with Government Priorities
4. Do the objectives of the CESP align with federal government priorities?
Source Documents: Literature Review   Section of this report or  available in Technical Report (TR): 3.2
Is there an apparent or explicit pattern within the Government of Canada of  building savings programs?      Source Documents: Literature Review   Section of this report or available in Technical  Report (TR): 3.2
Have  recent public statements by the Government of Canada added to or improved the  CESP/RESPs or have they marginalized/reduced these programs?    Source Documents: Literature Review   Section of this report or available in  Technical Report (TR): 3.2
Is the CESP consistent with/contribute to the Government of Canada’s priority “to  create the best-educated, most-skilled and most flexible workforce in the  world”?      Source Documents: Literature Review   Section of this report or available in  Technical Report (TR): 3.2
5. Do the objectives of the CESP align with ESDC strategic objectives?
Source Documents: Literature Review   Section of this report or available in  Technical Report (TR): 3.2
Relevance: Alignment with Federal Roles and Responsibilities
6. What is the role and responsibility for the federal government in  delivering the CESP?
Source Documents: Literature Review   Section of this report or  available in Technical Report (TR): 3.2. 7.2
Performance: Achievement of Expected Outcomes
7. What are RESP, CLB and A-CESG take-up rates and what is the trend?
Source Documents: Administrative Data Analyses, ASETS Study, CFCS Study   Section of this report or available in  Technical Report (TR): 4.1
What is the socio-economic and financial literacy profile of RESP, CLB and A-CESG  participants and what is the trend?      Source Documents: Administrative Data Analyses,  ASETS Study, CFCS Study, Literature Review   Section of this report or available in Technical Report  (TR): 4.1, 4.2, 4.3
At  what age of the beneficiary are RESP accounts opened and what is the trend?      Source Documents: Administrative Data Analyses   Section of this report or available in Technical Report  (TR): 4.2
8. Is there evidence to suggest that savings patterns for PSE in RESPs have  changed due to the introduction of the CESG in 1998?
Source Documents: Literature Review,  Administrative Data Analyses, ASETS Study, CRA-CESP Study   Section of this report or available in  Technical Report (TR): 4.1
Are  more people saving for PSE using RESPs since 1998?      Source Documents:  Administrative Data Analyses, CRA-CESP Study   Section of this report or available in Technical Report (TR): 4.1
What  has been the incremental impact on savings for PSE in RESPs?      Source Documents: No  evidence   Section of this report or available in Technical Report (TR): No  evidence
Has  there been a further change in savings patterns for PSE in RESPs since the  A-CESG and CLB were implemented?      Source Documents: Administrative  Data Analyses, CRA-CESP Study   Section of this report or available  in Technical Report (TR): 4.1, 4.2, 4.3
What  is the average annual amount saved for PSE in RESPs?      Source  Documents: Administrative Data Analyses, CRA-CESP Study, Literature  Review, ASETS Study, CFCS Study   Section of this report or available in Technical  Report (TR): 4.2
What  is the total amount of PSE savings in RESPs and what is its trend?      Source  Documents: Administrative Data Analyses, Literature Review, ASETS Study   Section of this report or available in Technical Report  (TR): 6.0, 6.1
To  what extent are RESP savings for PSE diverted from RRSPs or other savings  vehicles?      Source  Documents: CESP Survey, SHS Study, Case Studies, CRA-CESP Study   Section of this report or available in Technical Report  (TR): 4.2.4
To what extent are CLB recipients contributing their own resources to RESPs?      Source  Documents: Administrative Data Analyses, Case Studies   Section of this report or available in Technical Report  (TR): 4.3.2
To  what extent are families who are in debt putting money into RESPs?      Source  Documents: Case Studies, CESP Survey, CFCS Study   Section of this report or available in Technical Report  (TR): 4.2.4
9. To what extent are Canadians saving for PSE outside of an RESP?
Source Documents: CESP  Survey, Case Studies, YITS Study, ASETS Study, CFCS Study   Section of this report or available in Technical Report (TR): 5.1
What  sources of savings are they using?      Source Documents: CESP Survey, Case  Studies, YITS Study, ASETS Study, CFCS Study   Section of this report or available in  Technical Report (TR): 5.1
Why  are they not using RESPs?      Source Documents: CESP Survey, Case Study   Section of this report or  available in Technical Report (TR): 5.2
10. Are more low-income families saving for PSE in RESPs?
Source Documents: Administrative Data Analyses, ASETS, CRA-CESP Study   Section of this report or available in Technical Report (TR): 4.3.1
To  what extent are A-CESG and CLB payments going to individuals who are in  temporarily low-income families versus those in permanently low-income  families?      Source  Documents: CESP Survey, CRA-CESP Study   Section of this report or available in Technical  Report (TR): 4.3.3
Why  are there some fairly high contributions at the very low family income levels?      Source Documents: No evidence   Section of this report or available in  Technical Report (TR): No evidence
To  what extent are RESP contributions for beneficiaries in low income families  coming from relatives and/or friends?      Source Documents: CESP  Survey, Case Studies, Administrative Data Analyses   Section of this report or available in Technical Report (TR): 4.3.2
11. Does having savings for PSE affect parental aspirations for their  children’s PSE participation?
Source Documents: Literature  Review, CESP Survey, ASETS Study, CFCS Study   Section of this report or available in Technical Report (TR): 4.2.3
12. What share of PSE funding comes from RESPs?
Source Documents: ASETS  Study, CESP survey   Section of this report or available in Technical Report (TR): 6.1, 6.2
How many students are withdrawing from RESPS and  what is the trend?      Source Documents: Literature  Review, Administrative Data Analyses   Section of this report or available in Technical Report (TR): 6.1
13. To what extent is the CESP improving the affordability of PSE?
Source Documents: CESP  Survey, ASETS Study  Section of this report or available in Technical Report (TR): 6.2
To  what extent are parents who contribute to an RESP better prepared to bear the  financial burden of their children’s PSE?      Source Documents: ASETS Study   Section of this report or available in  Technical Report (TR): 6.2
How  does the presence of funds in RESPs affect the demand for student loans?      Source Documents: Literature Review, YITS  Study, NGS Study, CESP Survey, Note on Interaction, ASETS Study, CFCS Study   Section of this report or available in  Technical Report (TR): 6.2
What impact do RESPs and the CESP have on student loan and grant amounts?      Source Documents: Literature Review, YITS  Study, CESP Survey, Note on Interaction, ASETS Study, CSGP Survey   Section of this report or available in  Technical Report (TR): 6.2
What  is the impact of RESPs and the CESP on reducing student debt loads?      Source Documents: Literature Review, NGS  Study, ASETS Study   Section of this report or available in  Technical Report (TR): 6.2
What  portion of PSE costs are covered by RESP savings?      Source Documents: CESP Survey, ASETS Study   Section of this report or available in  Technical Report (TR): 6.0, 6.1, 6.2
What  other PSE funding strategies do students use?      Source Documents: YITS Study, NGS Study,  CESP Survey, ASETS Study, CFCS Study   Section of this report or available in  Technical Report (TR): 6.2
Performance: Demonstration of Efficiency and Economy
14. To what extent does CESP funding go to people who would not otherwise  have saved for PSE in an RESP?
Source Documents: CESP Survey, SHS Study, ASETS Study, Literature  Review, CRA-CESP Study   Section of this report or available in Technical Report (TR): 7.1
How  much additional funds do the CESP incentives leverage?      Source Documents: Administrative Data  Analyses   Section of this report or available in  Technical Report (TR): 4.1, 7.1
15. How efficient is the CESP delivery model?
Source Documents: Literature Review, CRA-CESP Study   Section of this report or available in Technical Report (TR): 7.2
What  are the administrative costs of the CESP and what is their trend (per  beneficiary, per dollar administered)?      Source Documents: Literature Review   Section of this report or available in Technical  Report (TR): 7.2
How  do these costs compare to the costs of administering other similar programs  (CPP, EI, etc.) that are solely government-delivered?      Source Documents: Literature Review   Section of this report or available in  Technical Report (TR): 7.2
Appendix 2 – Summary of studies conducted in support of the summative evaluation
ESDC (2012D), “Literature/File Review for the Summative Evaluation of the  Canada Education Savings Program (CESP)”
The purpose of the literature and file review was to provide  an overview of the information already available in the public domain and  internal ESDC documents, completed surveys and research papers, and then  compile the information (from over 70 documents) in order to provide evidence  for a series of evaluation questions. This review demonstrated that much  information was already available in the literature.
ESDC (2012C), “Impacts and Effects of the CESP on Family Savings: A Study  Using the Access and Support to Education and Training Survey (ASETS)”
This study attempted to provide evidence on the impacts and  effects of the CESP on family savings by using the 2002 Survey of Approaches to  Educational Planning (SAEP) and 2008 ASETS, both of which were administered by  Statistics Canada. The analysis was restricted to families with children under  18 years of age. The analysis was provided for different levels of income in  order to compare the impacts of the CESP across income groups. The report  provided information on families who had PSE savings and those which did not  have PSE savings. The results were based on a sample of 7,545 parents with  children aged 0-17.
ESDC (2012G), “PSE Students and RESP Savings Use: A Study Using the ASETS”
This study focused on the impact of the CESP on the  affordability of PSE studies. The report also used data from Statistics  Canada’s ASETS in order to determine what share of PSE funding came from RESPs  and to what extent the CESP is improving the affordability of PSE. The selected  sample used in this study was made up of 6,327 youth aged 18 to 24 years old.
Gray & McDonald (2012), “An Evaluation of the RESP program based on the  National Graduate Survey”, Prepared for ESDC
This report used the 2000 and 2005 NGS of Statistics Canada,  which surveyed students from public PSE institutions (universities, colleges  and trade schools) who have graduated or completed the requirements for  degrees, diplomas or certificates. The survey was designed to determine, for  instance, the extent to which graduates of PSE programs were successful in obtaining  employment; the relationship between the graduates' programs of study and the  employment subsequently obtained; the graduates' job and career satisfaction;  and the rates of under-employment and unemployment. The report included both  descriptive statistics and regression analyses. The first part of the report  focused on the incidence of RESPs as a funding source for PSE, while subsequent  parts examined the impact of RESP funding on student loans.
ESDC (2012A), “Saving for PSE: Findings from the Canadian Financial  Capability Survey”
The CFCS is a survey that was conducted by Statistics Canada  in 2009, with the objective of shedding light on Canadians’ knowledge,  abilities and behaviour concerning financial decision-making (i.e. how  Canadians understand their financial situation, the financial services  available to them, and their plans for the future). The study derived from the  survey (sample size of 4,637) examines savings for PSE (including RESP savings)  by individuals who are financially responsible for children under the age of 18  years old. The main purpose of the report was to identify the characteristics  of PSE savers and measure the RESP take-up rate by socio-demographic  characteristics.
ESDC (2012B), “Impacts and Effects of the CESP on Family Savings: A Study  Using the Survey of Household Spending (SHS)”
The Statistics Canada SHS was designed to collect annual  information about expenditures for consumer goods and services, changes in  assets, mortgages and other loans, annual income, as well as information about  dwelling characteristics and household equipment. The SHS is conducted annually  from January to March of each year. For this study, the Public-Use Micro Files  (PUMFs) were used, spanning from 1997 to 2009. Each year of the SHS was compared  to ensure continuity in the variables. The focus of this study was mainly on  household savings in general. It first examined whether families (especially  low-income families) had adequate financial resources to generate savings and  how they prioritized their spending. Then, it attempted to understand the  possible impacts of the A-CESG and CLB on the net savings amounts and rates of  eligible families.
Finnie & Wismer (2012), “Assessing the Use of Registered Education  Savings Plans (RESPs) using Youth in Transition Survey (YITS) &  Post-Secondary Education Participation Survey (PEPS)”, Prepared for ESDC
In this report, both the YITS (cohort A) and the PEPS were  used for the analyses. The YITS-A follows a representative sample of youths  starting in 2000 who were born in 1984. For this report, Cycles 3 and 4 (2004  and 2006) were used, as it is in these cycles where respondents (aged 18 to 21)  had their first PSE experiences. The PEPS was conducted in February and March  2002 on youths between 18 and 24 years of age to collect information on  education programs, student loans, and other PSE-related information. Using  these surveys, this paper sought to answer a number of questions regarding  savings behaviour of parents and how these were related to access to PSE and  how PSE students funded their participation.
ESDC (2013A), “Registered Education Saving Plans: Participants, Take-up and  Trends”
This report also used the administrative databases to  examine issues related to participation in the RESP program. Using a 10% random  sample for the 1998 to 2011 period of 452,837 beneficiaries (and 288,461  subscribers), the study looked at the number of RESP participants, RESP take-up  and trends from 1998 to 2011. It also examined the profile of RESP participants  and looked at the age at which RESP accounts are opened.
ESDC (2013B), “Registered Education Savings Plans: Saving Habits”
This report used the administrative databases to examine  issues related to saving habits of RESP users. A 10% random sample for the 1998  to 2011 period of RESP beneficiaries from the CESP administrative database was  used (452,837 beneficiaries in the sample). The report mainly examined annual  RESP contributions, lifetime savings and the effects of the A-CESG and CLB on  saving.
ESDC (2013C), “Registered Education Savings Plans: Canada Learning Bond  Recipients”
This paper examined the RESP saving behavior of low-income  families that have received the CLB at least once. The paper used a 10% random  sample of RESP beneficiaries from the CESP administrative database and examined  the period between 2005 and 2011. Since the report focused on CLB recipients  the sample was restricted to those recipients, which accounted for 41,963  observations. The report attempts to answer if CLB recipients were contributing  their own resources to RESPs, and the extent to which families entered and  exited low-income status.
ESDC (2013D), “Registered Education Saving Plan Withdrawals”
This report assessed the impacts and effects of the CESP on  the savings of families. It attempts to answer how many students are  withdrawing from RESPs and what is the trend and what portion of PSE costs are  covered by RESP savings. The paper uses a 10% random sample of 483,334 RESP  beneficiaries between 1998 and 2012, of which 113,226 have withdrawn from their  RESP during their PSE studies.
R. A. Malatest & Associates (2013), “Case Studies with Low-Income  Families”, Prepared for ESDC
The case studies involved conducting a total of 104 in-depth  interviews with parents from low- and middle-income families. Low-income  families were defined as families with a total annual household income of less  than $40,000, while middle-income families were defined as families with a  total annual household income of between $40,000 and $82,000. These interviews were  equally divided between subscribers (i.e. those who have opened an RESP), and  non-subscribers (drawn via random-digit telephone dialing). The primary purpose  of the case studies was to document and assess the reasons for which some  low-income families choose to save for PSE while others choose not to. In  addition, the case studies provided evidence on the extent to which outside  family members, relatives or friends are contributing to the RESPs of  low-income families.
ESDC (2014D), “CESP Survey: Technical Evaluation Report”
A survey was  conducted by R.A. Malatest and Associates with 2,015 families with children  less than 18 years of age and children 18 and older who were attending a PSE  institution, with a mixture of families with and without RESPs. The purpose of  the survey was to gather information on four main issues: (i) why some families  save for PSE using RESPs while others do not; (ii) the characteristics of those  who save using RESPs versus those who do not; (iii) the impact of parental  aspirations on RESP savings and children’s PSE participation; and (iv) the  impact of RESP savings on PSE costs and student loan use. The survey was mainly  conducted by telephone (or through the Internet) and had an average duration of  approximately 20 minutes.
ESDC (2014C), “Examples of the Impact of RESP Withdrawals on Student Loan  and Grant Amounts”
This report provided an initial examination of the impact of  RESP withdrawals on student loan and grant amounts by presenting hypothetical  examples that students could be confronted with when making RESP withdrawals. To  determine the possible impact of RESP withdrawals on student financial aid for  these hypothetical examples, Evaluation used the “Student Financial Assistance  Estimator”, an online tool that it is provided by the department to help  students obtain an estimate of the student financial aid (student loans and  grants) that they might receive. Although these  hypothetical examples do not measure the importance of the interaction in terms  of dollar value, they clearly demonstrate the strong interaction between the  CSLP and CESP.
ESDC (2015), “Analysis of the Canada Education Savings Program  Participation and Expenditures for Different Income Groups”
The study examined how participation and program  expenditures vary by income group, how the introduction of the A-CESG in 2005  affected the RESP participation of lower-income families, and examined if RESP  contributions affect RRSP contributions. The analyses are based on a random  sample of families living with children under 18. The sample was based on  linked data from the CRA T1 and CCTB files, and CESP administrative data and  used a 1% sample of families who are in the CCTB database between 1999 and  2012. These are families living with children under 18 and who are primarily  responsible for these children and registered for the CCTB.
Appendix 3 – CESP Logic Model
Text description of graph 5

Appendix 3  describes the Logic Model of the CESP, including the strategic outcome,  long-term outcome, 2nd level outcome, 1st level outcomes, outputs, activities  and inputs. 
Strategic Outcome: A skilled, adaptable and inclusive labour force and an efficient labour market
Long Term Outcome: Canadians are able to finance their participation in post-secondary education
2nd Level Outcome: Children under 18 have savings for post-secondary education in RESPs
1st Level  Outcomes:

Canadians make more informed choices about  saving for post-secondary education
Low-income families open RESPs for their  children’s post-secondary education
Families save for their children’s  post-secondary education in RESPs
Clients are satisfied with the quality of  service they receive

Outputs:

Outreach and communications products
Bond payments
Grant payments
Service to Clients

Activities:

Information, service provision and outreach     
Design, develop and undertake outreach and  communications activities to increase awareness and understanding of the  program, early saving and program participation
Information services to Canadians and promoters


Program management     
Provision of service to Canadians and over 8o  program promoters, including compliance reviews, development of policy and  guidelines, and training promoters
Developing   and ensuring systems integrity
Partnership development and maintenance



Inputs: Grant and bond payments, FTEs & operating  budget
Appendix 4 – References
Internal studies
ESDC (2011A), “Evaluability Assessment for the Summative Evaluation of the Canada Education Savings Program (CESP)”.
ESDC (2012A), “Saving for PSE: Findings from the Canadian Financial Capability Survey”.
ESDC (2012B), “Impacts and Effects of the CESP on Family Savings: A Study Using the Survey of Household Spending (SHS)”.
ESDC (2012C), “Impacts and Effects of the CESP on Family Savings: A Study Using the Access and Support to Education and Training Survey (ASETS)”.
ESDC (2012D), “Literature/File Review for the Summative  Evaluation of the Canada Education Savings Program (CESP)”.
ESDC (2012E), “Evaluation Framework for the Evaluation of  the Canada Education Savings Program”.
ESDC (2012F), “Evaluation Methodology for the Evaluation of  the Canada Education Savings Program”.
ESDC (2012G), “PSE Students and RESP Savings Use: A Study  Using the ASETS”.
ESDC (2013A), “Registered Education Saving Plans:  Participants, Take-up and Trends”.
ESDC (2013B), “Registered Education Savings Plans: Saving  Habits”.
ESDC (2013C), “Registered Education Savings Plans: Canada  Learning Bond Recipients”.
ESDC (2013D), “Registered Education Saving Plan  Withdrawals”.
ESDC (2013E), “RESP Contributions by Foreign-Born Parents:  Using the Access and Support to Education and Training Survey (ASETS)”.
ESDC (2014A), “Canada Education Savings Program (CESP) and  Family Savings: Interim Evaluation Report”.
ESDC (2014B), “Registered Education Saving Plan  Contributions above the Maximum Grant Limit”.
ESDC (2014C), “Examples of the Impact of RESP Withdrawals on  Student Loan and Grant Amounts”.
ESDC (2014D), “CESP Survey: Technical Evaluation Report”.
ESDC (2015), “Analysis of the Canada Education Savings  Program Participation and Expenditures for Different Income Groups”.
External studies contracted by ESDC
Finnie and Wismer (2012), “Assessing the Use of Registered  Education Savings Plans (RESPs) using Youth in Transition Survey (YITS) &  Post-Secondary Education Participation Survey (PEPS)”, Prepared for ESDC.
Gray and McDonald (2012), “An Evaluation of the RESP program  based on the National Graduate Survey”, Prepared for ESDC.
R. A. Malatest and Associates (2013), “Case Studies with  Low-Income Families”, Prepared for ESDC.
Other studies
Audet, Mathieu and Bele (2011), “Parental Savings for their  Children’s Post-Secondary Education: Does Financial Literacy Matter?”, prepared  for ESDC.
Bank of Montreal (2013), “2013 Bank of Montreal Student  Survey”, conducted by Pollara.
Benjamin (2003), “Does 401(k) eligibility increase saving?  Evidence from propensity score sub-classification”, Journal of Public Economics  87, pages 1259–1290.
Benjamin and Smart (2011), “Do RESPs Increase Household  Saving?”, Preliminary Draft.
Benjamin and Smart (2012), “Savings Trends in Canada”,  prepared for ESDC.
Berger, Motte and Parkin (2009), “The Price of Knowledge  2009: Access and Student Finance in Canada”, 4th edition, Millennium Research  Series, Canada Millennium Scholarship Foundation.
Beshears et al. (2006), “The importance of default options  for retirement savings outcomes: Evidence from the United States.” NBER,  Working Paper #12009.
Beverly, Clancy and Sherraden (2014), “Testing Universal  College Savings Accounts at Birth: Early Research from SEED for Oklahoma Kids”,  Centre for Social Development, Research Summary 14-08.
Canadian University Survey Consortium (2012), “Survey of  Graduating Undergraduate Students”, June 2012, Prepared by Prairie Research  Associates.
Choi, Laibson and Madrian (2004), “Plan Design and 401(k)  Savings Outcomes”, Written for the National Tax Journal Forum on Pensions.
Connolly and Kohler (2004), “The impact of superannuation on  household saving”, Research Discussion Paper, Economic Research Department,  Reserve Bank of Australia.
Corak et al. (2010), “A Comparison of Upward and Downward  Intergenerational Mobility in Canada, Sweden and the United States”, Paper  Prepared for the 31st General Conference of The International Association for  Research in Income and Wealth, St. Gallen, Switzerland, August 22-28, 2010.
Dworak-Fisher (2008), “Encouraging Participation in 401(k)  Plans: Reconsidering the Employer Match.” U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics  Working Paper 420.
Dynarski (2004), “Who Benefits From the Education Savings  Incentives? Income, Educational Expectations, and the Value of the 529 and  Coverdell,” Harvard University, Kennedy School of Government & National  Bureau of Economic Research.
Engelhardt and Kumar (2007), “Employer Matching and 401(k)  Saving: Evidence from the Health and Retirement Study.” Journal of Public  Economics, 91(10): 1920-43.
ESDC (2011B), “Summative Evaluation of the Canada Student  Loans Program”.
ESDC (2011C), “Final Report: Linking CSLP-CESP-LAD Data to  Analyze Program Interactions”, prepared by CESP and CSLP Directorates.
ESDC (2014E), “Canada Student Loans Program - Policy  Manual”.
Finance Canada (1998), “Building Canada for the 21st  century: The Budget Plan 1998”.
Finance Canada (1998), “Building Canada for the 21st  century: The Canadian Opportunities Strategy”.
Finance Canada (2004), “New Agenda for Achievement: The  Budget Plan 2004”.
Financial Services Authority of Great Britain (2005),  “Measuring Financial Capability: An Exploratory Study”, University of Bristol,  Personal Finance Research Centre.
Gale, Iwry and Orszag (2005), “The Saver’s Credit: Expanding  Retirement Savings for Middle- and Lower-Income Americans”, The Retirement  Security Project, Number 2005-2.
Human Resources and Skills Development Canada (2003),  “Formative Evaluation of the Canada Education Savings Grant”.
Human Resources and Skills Development Canada (2009),  “Formative Evaluation of the Additional Canada Education Savings Grant and  Canada Learning Bond”.
Human Resources and Skills Development Canada (2014),  “Canadian Education Savings Program Annual Statistical Review 2013”.
Human Resources and Skills Development Canada (2014), News  release, “Minister Bergen encourages families to apply for the Canada Learning  Bond”, January 23, 2014.
Informetrica (2008), “Review of Registered Education Savings  Plan Industry Practices”.
Kempson, Finney and Davies (2011), “The Child Trust Fund  Findings from the Wave 2 Evaluation”, Personal Finance Research Centre,  University of Bristol.
Madrian and Shea (2001), “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia  in 401(k) Participation and Savings Behavior”, Quarterly Journal of Economics,  2001, v116 (4, Nov), pages 1149-1187.
Madrian (2012), “Matching Contributions and Savings  Outcomes: A Behavioral Economics Perspective”, NBER Working Paper No. 18220.
Mitchell, Utkus and Yang (2007), “Turning Workers into  Savers? Incentives, Liquidity, and Choice in 401(k) Plan Design.” National Tax  Journal, 60(3): 469-89.
Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions  Canada (2012), “Actuarial Report on the Canada Student Loans Program as at 31  July 2011”.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development  (2014), “Education at a Glance 2014: Organization for Economic Cooperation and  Development Indicators”.
Scotiabank Group (2014), “Canadian Parents Are Not Confident  They Are Saving Enough for Their Children's Post-Secondary Education”,  conducted by Nielsen from August 19 through August 27, 2014.
Statistics Canada (1995-1999), “The Daily: University  tuition fees”, Tuition and living accommodation costs at Canadian universities  and colleges.
Statistics Canada (2014), “Survey of Approaches to  Educational Planning, 2013”, The Daily, October 29, 2014.
Statistics Canada (2013), “Tuition and Living Accommodation  Costs for Full-Time Students at Canadian Degree-Granting Institutions Survey”.
TD Canada Trust Education and Finance (2011), “Parents  struggle to save for kids’ post-secondary studies”.
VanDerhei (2010), “The Impact of Automatic Enrollment in  401(k) Plans on Future Retirement Accumulations: A Simulation Study Based on  Plan Design Modifications of Large Plan Sponsors”, EBRI Issue Brief, April  2010, No. 341.
World Bank (2013), “Matching Contributions for Pensions: A  Review of International Experience”.
