Executive summary
Introduction
Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC) worked  jointly with Nunavut and 11 other Provinces and Territories (P/Ts) to undertake  the 2012 to 2017 second cycle for the Labour Market Development Agreement  (LMDA) evaluation. The evaluation cycle consisted of conducting two to three  studies per year on the Employment Benefits and Support Measures (EBSMs)  similar programming delivered under these agreements. These studies generated  evaluation evidence on the effectiveness, efficiency and design/delivery of  EBSMs for Canada and participating P/Ts.
Under LMDAs, Canada transfers $2.14B Employment Insurance  (EI) Part II funds to P/Ts for the design and delivery of programs and services  to help unemployed individuals, mainly eligible under EI, to find and maintain  employment.
The programs and services delivered by Nunavut have to  correspond to the EBSM categories defined under the EI Act. The following is a  short description of the four categories of programs and services examined in  the evaluation:
Skills  Development (Adult Learning and Training Supports) helps participants, including apprentices, obtain employment skills by  giving them financial assistance in order to attend classroom training. 
Targeted  Wage Subsidies (Training on the Job) help participants obtain on-the-job work  experience by providing employers with a wage subsidy.
Self-Employment (Nunavut  Entrepreneurial Incentive) provides financial  assistance and business planning advice to participants to help them start  their own business. 
Job Creation Partnerships provide participants with opportunities to gain work experience that  will lead to ongoing employment. Employment opportunities are provided by  projects that contribute to developing the community and the local economy.
Employment  Assistance Services such as counselling, job search skills, job  placement services, the provision of labour market information and case  management.
Three additional programs and services are available under  the LMDA and they are: Labour Market Partnerships, Research and Innovation and  Targeted Earnings Supplements. They were not evaluated as part of this  evaluation. The Targeted Earnings Supplements program is used in one province  only while Labour Market Partnerships, and Research and Innovation will be  evaluated at a later stage.
Table i provides an overview of the share of funding  allocated to the four EBSMs examined and the average cost per participant.
Source: EI  Monitoring and Assessment Reports 2002 to 2003 to 2014 to 2015. No participants  in Employment Assistance Services were reported between 2002 and 2005 in these  reports.
This report presents a summary of the findings from five  studies. Results were produced for active and former Employment Insurance  Claimants as well as for youth (under 30 years old) and adults (30 years old  and over) when the number of participants was sufficient to conduct  quantitative analyses. Active EI claimants were actively on EI at the time of  their EBSM participation. Former EI claimants received EI up to three years  before starting their EBSM participation.
Key findings
Overall, labour market outcomes provide some indications  that LMDA-funded programs and services delivered in Nunavut are generally  helping participants to improve their labour market attachment after  participation.
With some exceptions, participants in LMDA programs and  services showed higher average earnings and lower average proportions on EI and  social assistance during the five years after program participation when  compared to the five years prior to participation.
Some participants do not appear to be securing employment  following their participation in LMDA programs and services, as reflected in  the general decrease in the proportion of participants employed in the  post-participation period compared to the pre-participation period. However,  employment outcomes should be interpreted with caution taking into  consideration the limited employment opportunities in Nunavut, particularly in  smaller communities.
Labour Market outcomes
Most participants have higher average  earnings after program participation
As shown in Figure i, active  claimants who participated in Adult  Learning and Training Supports and Employment Assistance Services showed  higher average employment during the five years after their participation when  compared to five years prior to participation. As well, former claimants who  participated in Adult Learning and  Training Supports and Training on the Job also showed higher average employment  earnings after participation compared to before participation.
Considering the small number of active claimants who participated  in Employment Assistance Services (n=52), their figures should be interpreted  with caution. As well, Employment Assistance Services are relatively modest  activities such as counselling, job search assistance and case management. By  themselves, they are not expected to lead to substantial effects on labour  market outcomes.
Figure i. Change in average earnings of participants 5 years pre- and post-participation in LMDA programs and services



Text description of Figure i
Note: outcomes for active  participants in Employment Assistance Services should be interpreted with  caution given the small number of participants (n=52).
The average proportion of  participants on Employment Insurance and social assistance is generally lower  after program participation when compared to before program participation
As shown in Figure ii and iii,  overall, the average proportion of  participants who use EI and social assistance is shown to be lower in the  post-participation period for active and former claimants of Adult  Learning and Training Supports as well as former claimants of Training on the  Job. In addition, the average  proportion of former claimants who use EI is also shown to be lower in the  five years after program participation for those who participated in Employment  Assistance Services (when compared to five years prior).
Figure ii. Change in average proportion of active claimant participants on Employment Insurance and Social Assistance 5 years pre- and post-participation in LMDA programs 
and services
  



Text description of Figure ii
Note: outcomes for active  participants in Employment Assistance Services should be interpreted with  caution given the small number of participants (52 claimants).
Figure iii. Change in average proportion of former claimant participants on Employment Insurance and Social Assistance 5 years pre- and post-participation in LMDA programs 
and services
  



Text description of Figure iii
The average proportion of participants  employed is generally lower after program participation when compared to the  before program participation
As shown in Figure iv, active EI claimants of Adult Learning and  Training Supports were the only participants who showed an increase in the  proportion employed between the pre- and post-participation periods.  Participants of the other programs and services displayed decreases in the  proportion of participants employed in the post-participation period compared  to the pre-participation period. These decreases can be partially explained by  the high unemployment levels in Nunavut and the limited employment  opportunities, particularly in smaller communities.
Figure iv. Change in average proportion of participants employed 5 years pre- and 
post-participation in LMDA programs and services
  



Text description of Figure iv
Note: outcomes for active  participants in Employment Assistance Services should be interpreted with  caution given the small number of participants (n=52).
Lessons learned about program design and delivery
Key informants interviews with service providers and program  managers as well as the documents reviewed and the questionnaires filled by  provincial/territorial representative also generated a few lessons about  program design and delivery:
Adult Learning and Training  Supports
To collect labour market information,  representatives from the Department of Family Services regularly attend  trade shows, mining symposiums and hold meetings with industry in the area to  determine the local labour market demand. The Department also examines what  programs, offered by the Nunavut Arctic College, correspond to labour market  demand.  Program participants are expected to do further  research on training options and local labour market demand as part of the  application process. This may contribute to program effectiveness.
According to Career Development Officers  and managers interviewed as part of the evaluation, the main challenges related  to program design and delivery included:
The perceived insufficient level for some  components of financial assistance. 
Maintaining regular contact with participants  for monitoring purposes can be difficult for Career Development Officers.
Adult Learning and Training  Supports for apprentices
Existing Canadian literature showed that  there is a fairly high non-completion rate among apprentices (40-50%).  Furthermore, subject  matter literature revealed that despite the growth in apprenticeship  registrations in Canada, there has not been a corresponding increase in  completion rates.  According to Career Development Officers and  managers involved in apprenticeship delivery drop-out can be is due to factors  such as:
The difficulty associated withrelocation for training purposes.
Low level of essential skills. 
Financial difficulties.
Lack of housing.
Lack of training and job opportunities.
Family issues.
Substance abuse.
Delays in conducting exams following the end of  training.
Additional challenges identified by Career  Development Officers and managers in relation to program design and delivery  include the need to:
Provide additional financial supports (high cost  of living in the north, equipment and books, and relocation).
Provide information on apprenticeships both  online and in pamphlet because of the high cost of Internet.
Provide mandatory counselling to participants in  order to help identify challenges, including social challenges.
Provide pre-apprenticeship training, especially  essential skills training.
Provide tutoring support given the fact that  some apprentices may be shy and have difficulty learning in large groups.
Training on the Job
According to the EI Monitoring  and Assessment Reports, the number of new interventions has decreased between  2005 to 2006 and 2013 to 2014. According  to key informants, factors affecting take-up included:
The reporting burden to employers.  
Employers cannot access the program multiple  times.
Level of funding is insufficient to encourage  employers to participate.
The positions supported usually need to be new  jobs.
Recommendations
A total of 6 recommendations emerged from the evaluation findings.  They are as follows:
The report presents challenges experienced by Adult Learning and Training  Supports (including the Apprentice component) participants in general.  These challenges are centered on the low levels of literacy and essential  skills, low education, lack of work related skills and perceived insufficient  level of financial support. As well, labour market statistics demonstrate that  Inuit experience significantly higher unemployment rates and lower levels of  education compared to the average rates in the territory.
Recommendation 1: The provision of literacy and essential skills training is important in the  Nunavut context to support individuals to prepare for vocational training and  to reintegrate into the labour market. These measures should be reported  separately from other Adult  Learning and Training Supports interventions given their unique  objectives.
Recommendation 2: Consideration should be given to examine to what extent the level of financial  supports provided under the program are sufficient.
Recommendation 3: Consideration should be given to examine to what extent Career Development  Officers can increase monitoring and provide additional supports to  apprentices.
Outcome analysis results show that the Training on the Job  program is improving the earnings of participants and reducing their use of EI  and social assistance as well as the dependence on government income support.  However, the number of interventions declined between 2005 to 2006 and 2013 to 2014. According to key  informants, this is due to the reporting burden on employers, the limitation on  using the program multiple times and employers’ capacity to create a new  position.
Recommendation 4: Depending on labour market priorities and budget allocation across the various  EBSMs, Nunavut may wish to explore ways of removing barriers to employer  participation in Training on the Job.
A study carried out across Canada regarding the timing of  participation in Employment Assistance Services showed that receiving  assistance early after starting an EI claim can lead to better labour market  impacts.
Recommendation 5: Consideration should be given by Nunavut to request timely access to data on  new EI recipients for targeting purposes, especially if awareness about  Employment Assistance Services is also an issue in the territory.
The LMDA evaluation was only able to produce labour market  outcomes, given the small number of participants. Labour market outcomes were  produced over five years and for the entire population of participants using  rich data on EI claimants, EBSM participation data and Canada Revenue Agency  taxation files. Some data gaps were identified in order to support future  evaluation activities.
Recommendation 6: Improvements in the data collection process are recommended to address key  program and policy questions of interest to Canada and Nunavut. Specifically:
Collect data on whether participants are members  of designated groups including Inuit and persons with disabilities.
Collect data on the type of training funded  under Adult Learning  and Training Supports and the type of assistance provided under  Employment Assistance Services. Nunavut, ESDC and other P/Ts should work  together to define common categories for both EBSMs.
Collect detailed data on the cost of EBSM  interventions.
ESDC and Nunavut should carry out a data  assessment regarding the integrity of data uploads and the standardization  process of Nunavut data within ESDC.
Management response
Introduction
The Nunavut Department of Family Services worked in close  collaboration with the Evaluation Directorate of ESDC during the planning and  implementation of the second cycle for the LMDA evaluation. The Department of  Family Services would like to thank all members of the LMDA Evaluation Steering  Committee for their dedication and commitment to the success of this evaluation  process. The Department of Family Services agrees with the evaluation  recommendations and is pleased to submit this management response. These  findings are an important source of advice, as governments work together to  renew the labour market transfer agreements.
Detailed response from the Department of Family Services
The Department of Family Services identified the following actions  in relation to the recommendations coming out of the evaluation:
Recommendation  1: The provision of literacy and essential skills training is important in  the Nunavut context to support individuals to prepare for vocational training  and to reintegrate into the labour market. These measures should be reported  separately from other Adult  Learning and Training Supports interventions given their unique  objectives.
Recommendation  2: Consideration should be given to examine to what extent the level of financial  supports provided under the program are sufficient.
Recommendation  3: Consideration should be given to examine to what extent Career  Development Officers can increase monitoring and provide additional supports to  apprentices.
Response:
Recognizing that the objective of Literacy and Essential  skills training is to support clients to move on to further training, the  Department of Family Services will work toward reporting on literacy and  essential skills training separately from other Adult Learning and Training  Supports interventions.
As well, the Department of Family Services will review the  financial supports under the program in order to determine if they are  sufficient to allow for an individual to receive the training required and to  complete it toward a graduation or certification. In addition, the Department  will devote efforts to increase monitoring and provide additional support to  apprentices.
Recommendation  4: Depending on labour market priorities and budget allocation across the  various EBSMs, Nunavut may wish to explore ways of removing barriers to  employer participation in Training on the Job.
Response: The Department of Family Services will review practices and  processes in the effort to increase employer satisfaction, ease of service and  their participation numbers.
Recommendation 5: Consideration should  be given by Nunavut to request timely access to data on new EI recipients for  targeting purposes, especially if awareness about Employment Assistance  Services is also an issue in the territory.
Response: Although this affects a small number of EI eligible  participants, the Department of Family Services will devote efforts to secure  timely access to data on EI recipients for targeting purposes.
Recommendation 6: Improvements in the  data collection process are recommended to address key program and policy  questions of interest to Canada and Nunavut. Specifically:
Collect data on whether participants are members  of designated groups including Inuit and persons with disabilities.
Collect data on the type of training funded  under Adult Learning  and Training Supports and the type of assistance provided under  Employment Assistance Services. Nunavut, ESDC and other P/Ts should work  together to define common categories for both EBSMs.
Collect detailed data on the cost of EBSM  interventions.
ESDC and Nunavut should carry out a data  assessment regarding the integrity of data uploads and the standardization  process of Nunavut data within ESDC.
Response:
The Department of Family Services  will work with its systems’ resources and current infrastructure to allow for  improvements in data collection processes and data details. These changes will  account for data collection decisions made by the Forum of Labour Market  Ministers Working Group on the new performance measurement strategy for the  program.
1.   Introduction
Employment  and Social Development Canada (ESDC) worked jointly with Nunavut and 11 other  Provinces and Territories (P/Ts) to undertake the 2012 to 2017 second cycle for  the Labour Market Development Agreement (LMDA) evaluations. The evaluation work  consisted of conducting two to three studies per year on the Employment  Benefits and Support Measures (EBSMs) delivered under these agreements. The  studies aimed to generate evaluation evidence on the effectiveness and  design/delivery of EBSMs for Canada overall, for Nunavut and for the 11 other  P/Ts that opted for a joint evaluation process with the Government of Canada.
This report presents a summary  of the findings from the studies conducted for Nunavut. The report is organised  as follows:
Introduction with an overview of the studies  summarized in this report including their scope and methodology, and contextual  information on the LMDAs. 
Findings section with a discussion around the  unique labour market context in Nunavut, territorial labour market priorities  and a summary of evaluation evidence.
Comparison of key findings by program type.
Conclusions and lessons learned. 
Recommendations that emerge from the evaluation  findings.
1.1  Labour Market Development Agreement background
LMDAs are bilateral agreements between Canada and each  province and territory, and were established under Part II of the 1996  Employment Insurance (EI) Act. As part of these agreements, Canada transfers  $2.14B annually to P/Ts to design and deliver programs and services to assist  individuals to prepare for, obtain and maintain employment.
The Canada-Nunavut LMDA was signed on May 11, 2000. The  agreement transferred responsibility to Nunavut for the design and delivery of  programs and services. The Nunavut Department of Family Services administers  these programs, which are classified under two categories: 1) Employment  Benefits and 2) Support Measures.
Employment Benefits
Employment Benefits are  offered to unemployed individuals who 1) are actively on EI (that is, active  claimants); 2) ended their benefit period within three years before  participating (former claimants); or 3) established a claim for maternity or  parental benefits within the past five years and are returning to the labour  force for the first time (former claimants).  Employment Benefits include the following  categories:
Skills  Development (Adult Learning and Training Supports) helps  participants, including apprentices, obtain employment skills by giving them  financial assistance that enables them to select, arrange and pay for classroom  training. 
Targeted  Wage Subsidies (Training on the Job) help participants obtain on-the-job work experience by  providing employers with financial assistance to help with the wages of  participants.
Self-Employment (Nunavut  Entrepreneurship Incentive) provides financial assistance and  business planning advice to EI-eligible participants to help them start their  own business. This financial assistance is intended to cover personal living  expenses and other expenses during the initial stages of the business.
Job Creation Partnerships provide  participants with opportunities to gain work experience that will lead to  ongoing employment. Employment opportunities are provided by projects that  contribute to developing the community and the local economy. The program is  not delivered in Nunavut.
Targeted Earnings Supplements encourage  unemployed persons to accept employment by offering them financial incentives.  The program is not delivered in Nunavut.
Support measures
Support Measures are  available to all unemployed individuals including those not eligible to receive  EI and include:
Employment Assistance  Services such as individual counselling, action planning,  help with job search skills, job-finding clubs, job placement services, the  provision of labour market information, and case management and follow-up.
Labour Market Partnerships provide  funding to help employers, employee and employer associations, and communities  improve their capacity to deal with human resource requirements and implement  labour force adjustments. These partnerships involve developing plans and  strategies, and implementing labour force adjustment measures. 
Research and Innovation supports activities that  identify better ways of helping people prepare for or keep employment and be  productive participants in the labour force. Funds are provided to eligible  recipients to enable them to carry out demonstration projects and research for  this purpose.
Targeted Earnings Supplements, Labour Market Partnerships,  and Research and Innovation were not covered under the second cycle of the LMDA  evaluation.
Table 1 provides an overview of the share of funding  allocated to the four programs and services examined under the second cycle for  LMDA evaluation and the average cost per participant. It is noted that the  average cost per participant was calculated based on the 2002 to 2005 data from  the EI Monitoring and Assessment Reports. The 2002 to 2005 period corresponds  to the cohort of participants selected for incremental impacts and cost-benefit  analysis in the LMDA evaluation.
Source: EI  Monitoring and Assessment Reports 2002-2003 to 2014-2015. No participants in  Employment Assistance Services were reported between 2002 and 2005 in these  reports.
1.2 Methodology
This  section presents key aspects of the quantitative analyses carried out as part  of the LMDA studies, while a more detailed description of the methodology is  provided in Appendix A.
All quantitative  analyses were based on administrative data from the EI part I (EI claim data)  and part II (EBSM participation data collected by Nunavut and transferred to  ESDC) linked to the T1 and T4 taxation files from the Canada Revenue Agency.  The analysis of labour market outcomes was based on 100% of participants in the  reference period selected.
Outcome analysis
Incremental impacts  were not estimated for EBSMs in Nunavut because of the small number of  participants. An attempt was made to estimate incremental impacts for active  and former claimants who participated in Adult Learning and Training Supports.  However, the balancing tests requirements were not satisfied and the results  are not robust enough to be included in this report.  Alternatively, an outcome analysis was  conducted in three  studies using selected indicators (for example, earnings from  employment/self-employment, incidence of employment, use of EI or Social Assistance and dependence on income support). The analysis provides  descriptive statistics on the labour market experience of participants before,  during and after participation. For example, it displays the average annual  earnings of active claimants before, during and after participation and presents  what changes were experienced in their earnings from before to after  participation.
Overall, the analysis was conducted on a period of  approximately 9 to 12 years (five years before participation, one or two years  during participation, and three or five years after participation). Two cohorts  of participants were used in separate studies; however, the discussion will  focus mainly on the 2001 to 2007 cohort because data for the 2006 to 2008  cohort only extends for three years after participation.
When the  number of participants was sufficient, outcomes were examined for active and  former EI claimants who were youth (under 30 years old) and adult workers (30  years old and over).
Strengths and limitations of the studies
One of the key strengths from the LMDA evaluation studies is  that all quantitative analyses were based on administrative data rather than  survey responses. Compared to survey data, administrative data are not subject  to recall errors or response bias.
The outcome analysis provides an assessment of how the  labour market experience of participants evolved over time but does not allow  an assessment of the extent to which those changes were due to EBSM  participation. For example, increases in employment earnings over the period  examined could be partly due to inflation or normal wage increase associated  with experience. With that respect, the outcome results should not be  interpreted as a direct measure of program effectiveness.
When interpreting qualitative findings, readers should keep  in mind that those are based on the perception of a small number of key  informants who are directly involved in the design or delivery of the program.  Their perception may be representative of their own region or community but not  necessarily of the entire territory. Since the number of key informants  interviewed in each study is small (that is, ranging between 4 and 5), the  number of informants who reported a specific finding is not indicated in the  report. However, the report does note when there was a clear disagreement  between key informants.
1.3  Overview  of the studies summarized in this report
Evaluation  findings presented in this report were drawn from five separate studies on  participants who received programs and services under the Canada – Nunavut  LMDA. These studies examined issues related to EBSM effectiveness and  design/delivery, using a mix of qualitative and quantitative methods. Each  study examined evaluation issues in relation to active and former EI claimants  who participated in EBSMs.
Table  E1 in Appendix E presents an overview of  these studies, including the type of evidence generated, the methods used, the  reference period and the length of the post-program period over which program  effects were observed.
2. Evaluation findings
2.1  Rationale  and Labour Market context
Labour Market context
Nunavut covers an area of approximately 2,093,190 km and has a total population of 37,146 (as of October 2016).  The vast majority of the population is Inuit (84.2%). Iqaluit is the biggest  community with a population of 7,590 and only three (of 25) communities have  populations in excess of 2,000 (Rankin Inlet, Arviat and Baker Lake). In  addition to being small in numbers, Nunavut’s 25 communities are also remote,  with no roads connecting any of the communities. Connectivity is further  limited by the limited and expensive internet available in the territory.
As shown in Figure 1, Inuit experience significantly high  unemployment compared to the total working age population of Nunavut. In 2015,  20.9% of the Inuit population was unemployed compared to 15.7% of the total  working age population of Nunavut.
Figure 1. Unemployment rate of Inuit and total population (15 and over) in Nunavut between 2004 and 2015



Text description of Figure 1
Source: Statistics Canada, Labour Force Survey as prepared by the Nunavut  Bureau of Statistics.
Similar  disparities can also be observed with respect to levels of education. Figure 2  illustrates the educational levels of Nunavut residents aged between 25 and 64  years old. Data show that 59.6% (6,370) working-age Inuit lack a High School  diploma, compared to only 5% (170) for non-Aboriginal people. As well, only  1.8% (192) of working-age Inuit have a university degree compared to 47.4%  (1,616) for non-Aboriginal people.
Figure 2. Nunavut population (aged 25 to 64 years) by Aboriginal status and highest level of education in 2011



Text description of Figure 2
Source: 2011 National Household Survey  99-012-X2011046
LMDA investments align with territorial government priorities
Active labour market  programs aim to help unemployed or underemployed individuals find and maintain  employment. These programs are fairly similar across member countries of the  Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development and consist of skills training  in a classroom setting, work experience with employers (often subsidized) or in  the public/non-profit sector, return-to-employment assistance and  self-employment assistance.
In Nunavut, the Ministry of  Family Services administers a range of active labour market programming  targeted at various groups of individuals including EI claimants and social  assistance recipients. There  are three regional Career Development Offices available to deliver these  services in person and from a distance. For people without a Career Development  Officer in their community and who do not have access to a fax machine,  scanner, or computer, they can visit their local Government of Nunavut office  for assistance or speak to a Government Liaison Officer. Programs  and services offered to active and former EI claimants are mainly funded under  the LMDA transfer.
Investments under the LMDA  in 2014 to 2015 were mainly targeted toward Employment Assistance Services and Adult Learning and Training  Supports with 44% and 38% of total budget respectively.  As well, 678 individuals participated in  Employment Assistance Services, followed by 208 in Adult Learning and Training  Supports, 39 in Adult Learning and Training Supports for Apprentices, 7 participated  in Training on the Job and 2 in Nunavut Entrepreneurship Incentive.
Regarding government  priorities, in 2014 the Government of Nunavut developed Sivumut Abluqt,  establishing a vision for the 2014 to 2018 period. In this document, the  Government of Nunavut identifies “self-reliance and optimism through education  and training” as one of four priorities. Commitments under this priority  include “enable Nunavummiut to enter into training to become trades apprentices  and to complete their certification requirements on the job” and “support labour  force training, development and employment through strategic alliances with  sector partners”. In addition, the Nunavut Adult Learning Strategy for 2006 to 2026  has an objective to “provide stable long-term funding for literacy, adult  education, training and employment programs”. Finally, the Department of Family  Services has the mandate to provide services to the public in order to link  people with jobs.
Overall, outcomes for Adult  Learning and Training Supports, Training on the Job and Employment Assistance  Services participants reported in this LMDA evaluation demonstrated that LMDA  funded programs and services delivered in Nunavut are generally helping  participants to improve their labour market attachment after participation. As  such, evaluation evidence suggests that LMDA funded programming are generally  contributing to achieving the Government of Nunavut’s priority of self-reliance  through training as well as contributing to fulfilling the objective of the  Nunavut Adult Learning Strategy and the mandate of the Career Development  division of the Department of Family Services to provide services to the public  in order to link people with jobs.
2.2 Adult Learning and Training Supports
2.2.1 Program description
Based on a document  review and 4 key informant interviews completed in summer 2015
The Skills Development program in Nunavut is called Adult  Learning and Training Supports. The program aims to assist active and former EI  claimants in obtaining the skills they need to return to employment, ranging from  basic to advanced skills. The types of training that are supported under the  program include employment skills training, pre-employment, life skills,  pre-trades, workplace training and literacy training with a work-related  component.  Financial supports that are  provided under the program include:
tuition  fees
books  and material
special  equipment
training  allowance
living  away from home allowance
transportation
childcare 
disability  supports
The maximum support provided is $20,000, however additional  funds can be provided in extenuating circumstances. Eligible clients may also receive a variety of services  including financial and career counselling that aims to reduce their barriers  to employment.
Key informants identified that office administration is one  of the most popular training programs.   Other popular training programs include environmental technologists and  heavy equipment operators.
2.2.2  Program delivery
Based on a document  review and 4 key informant interviews completed in summer 2015
Career Development Officers deliver the programs including  the case management of participants.  To  begin the application process, Career Development Officers first assess the  needs, interests and goals of individuals to determine if Adult Learning and  Training Supports is a suitable intervention that would assist them to return  to employment. For participants deemed eligible for the program, Career  Development Officers assist them in determining the type of training that they  would like to take and then assist participants in filling out the program’s  application. The application also requires that participants collect and submit  information such as financial information, transcripts and childcare  information.
The application process typically takes one week according  to key informants. Career Development Officers review applications in order to  ensure that they are complete and identify the supports required for the  participant. The Career Development Officers approve Adult Learning and  Training Supports agreements that are under $20,000 whereas agreements over  that amount require manager approval.   The level of investment in program allocations is based primarily on a  combination of participant interests, career counselling decisions and labour market opportunities.
To monitor participants’ progress, Career Development  Officers typically conduct bi-weekly follow-ups with participants.  In addition, there is a requirement to obtain  bi-weekly attendance updates from the course instructors.  Career Development Officers can also discuss progress  with participants and determine if any additional supports may be needed.
2.2.3  Targeting to Labour Market demand
Based on a document  review and key 4 informant interviews completed in summer 2015
With the advice of Career Development Officers, participants  do further research on training options and local labour market demand as part  of the application process.
To stay informed, the Department of Family Services contacts  Nunavut Arctic College in order to assess what programs are being offered locally  and examine which training corresponds to demand.  The department conducts research by regularly  attending trade shows, mining symposiums and holding meetings with industry in  the area to determine labour market demand.
2.2.4 Profile of program participants
Socio-demographic  characteristics
Table B1 in Appendix  B presents  the socio-demographic characteristics for two cohorts of active and former EI  claimants who started an intervention in 2001 to 2007 and 2006 to 2008.
The  majority of active participants in both the 2001 to 2007 and 2006 to 2008  cohorts were male (68% and 80% respectively) and between 25 to 34 years old (41%  and 48%). Most of the  participants self-identified as Aboriginal individuals in both cohorts (83% and  96%). The most common skill level required for the job held before  participation was on-the-job training (39% and 42%), followed by secondary  school or occupational training (25% and 34%) and college or apprenticeship  training (23% and 15%).
Former claimants who participated in the program in 2001to 2007  and in 2006 to 2008 followed similar trends as active claimants. Former  claimants were also predominantly male (58% and 69% respectively) and between 25 to 34 years old  (47% and 51% respectively). Most of the participants self-identified as  Aboriginal individuals in both cohorts (70% and 96% respectively). Participants  most frequently held jobs requiring secondary or occupational training (33% and  35% respectively) followed by on-the-job training (36% and 32% respectively)  before participation.
Barriers faced by  participants
Based on a document  review and 4 key informant interviews completed in summer 2015
Key informants were asked to identify the main barriers to  employment or to participation faced by participants. The most frequently  identified barriers were the following:
Lack of education and credentials.
Addiction issues. 
Lack of work experience/employment  opportunities. 
Essential skills challenges and low literacy  levels. 
Lack of available childcare.
2.2.5 Outcomes
Active claimants
As shown in Table B2 in Appendix B, active claimants who started participation between 2001 and 2007 earned, on average, $15,081 more  annually in the five years after participation compared to the five years  before participation. Figure 3 depicts the  growth in average annual earnings for these participants from $12,526 in the 5th  pre-program year to $35,304 in the 5th post-program year. It is noted that  average earnings were not adjusted for inflation using the Consumer Price Index  given the fact that the program start year varied between 2001 and 2007. As  well, the average annual proportion of participants employed increased from 89%  to 91% from before to after participation.
The average annual  proportions of participants claiming social assistance benefits declined by 3  (from 29% to 26%) percentage points between the pre-and-post program periods.  The average annual proportions of participants claiming EI and the level of  dependence on income support remained unchanged at 27% and 15% respectively.
Figure 3. Average earnings for active claimants in Adult Learning and Training Supports (2001 to 2007)



Text description of Figure 3
Notes: Average earnings include participants with zero earnings in a  specific year.
Active claimants who started  participation between 2006 and 2008 experienced an increase in average annual  earnings ($18,526), a decrease in the average annual proportion of participants  claiming social assistance (10 percentage points) between the pre- and  post-program periods and a decrease in the level of dependence on income support  (3 percentage points).
There was, however, an increase  of the average annual proportion of participants claiming EI (9 percentage  points). The average annual proportion  of participants employed remained unchanged at 97%.
Labour market  outcomes for sub-groups of interest were as follows:
Youth (under 30 years old) who started  participation between 2001 and 2007 experienced a large increase in the average  annual earnings ($20,480) from before to after participation. They also experienced an increase  in the proportion employed (5 percentage points). Furthermore, the average  annual proportion of youth claiming social assistance decreased by 4 percentage  points while the annual proportion of youth claiming EI increased by 6 percentage  points. This was reflected in a small  increase of 1 percentage point in the dependence on income support.
Adults  (30 years old and over) who started participation between 2001 and 2007  experienced an increase in the average annual earnings ($11,498) and decreases  in the annual proportion of adults claiming EI (4 percentage points) and social  assistance (1 percentage point). This  was reflected in a small decrease of 1 percentage point in the dependence on  income support. Finally, adults experienced a small decrease in the  proportion employed (2 percentage points) but 91% of them were employed  annually during the post-program period.
Overall, there are clear  indications that active claimants who participated in Adult Learning and  Training Supports improved their labour market attachment mainly through  increases in earnings and reduction in social assistance use. This  interpretation accounts for the unique labour market context in Nunavut and the  fact that the vast majority of participants are Aboriginals (mainly Inuit). As  reported in section 2.1, Inuit experience significantly high unemployment and  lower education levels compared to the total working age population of  Nunavut.  As well, these numbers should  be interpreted taking into consideration the limited employment opportunities  in Nunavut, particularly in smaller communities.
Former claimants
As shown in Table B3 in Appendix B, former claimants who started participation between 2001 and 2007  earned, on average, $9,388 more annually in the five years after participation  compared to the five years before participation. Figure 4 depicts the growth in  average annual earnings for these participants from $12,940 in the 5th  pre-program year to $26,203 in the 5th post-program year. It is noted that  average earnings were not adjusted for inflation using the Consumer Price Index  given the fact that the program start year varied between 2001 and 2007.
The average annual  proportion of participants employed decreased by 4 percentage points from 90%  to 86% from before to after participation.   This decline can be partially explained by retirement decisions given  the fact that 8% of participants were 45 years old and over at the start of  participation. As well, the average annual proportions of participants claiming  EI and social assistance benefits declined by 10 and 7 percentage points,  respectively, while the dependence on income support decreased by 6 percentage  points.
Figure 4. Average earnings for former claimants in Adult Learning and Training Supports (2001 to 2007)



Text description of Figure 4
Former claimants who started participation between 2006 and  2008 experienced similar trends to the 2001 to 2007 participants. They  experienced an increase in average annual earnings ($11,911), a decrease in the  average annual proportion of participants claiming EI and social assistance (16  and 6 percentage points respectively) between the pre- and post-program periods  and a decrease in the level of dependence on income support (7 percentage  points). Finally, former claimants experienced  a small decrease in the proportion employed (2 percentage points) but 93% of  them were employed annually during the post-program period.
Labour market  outcomes for sub-groups of interest were as follows:
Youth who started participation between 2001 and  2007 experienced a larger increase in the average annual earnings ($14,506)  from before to after participation. They also experienced decreases in the  average annual proportion of participants claiming EI and social assistance (9  and 5 percentage points respectively) between the pre- and post-program periods  and a decrease in the level of dependence on income support (5 percentage points).  The percentage of youth employed averaged 88% during the post-program period  with a 1 percentage point decrease.
Adults  who started participation between 2001 and 2007 experienced an increase  in the average annual earnings ($6,844) and decreases in the annual proportion  of adults claiming EI (9 percentage points) and social assistance (7 percentage  point). This was reflected by a 7  percentage points decrease in the dependence on income support. Finally, adults  experienced a decrease in the proportion employed (5 percentage points) but 85%  of them were employed annually during the post-program period.
Overall, there are clear  indications that former claimants who participated in Adult Learning and  Training Supports improved their labour market attachment mainly through  increases in earnings and reduction in EI and social assistance use. This  interpretation accounts for the unique labour market context in Nunavut and the  fact that the vast majority of participants are Aboriginals (mainly Inuit). As reported  in section 2.1, Inuit experience significantly high unemployment and lower  education levels compared to the total working age population of Nunavut.  As well, these numbers should be interpreted  taking into consideration the limited employment opportunities in Nunavut,  particularly in smaller communities.
2.2.6 Challenges and lessons learned about program design  and delivery
Based on a document  review and 4 key informant interviews completed in summer 2015
Key informants identified the following challenges in  relation to program design and delivery:
The perceived insufficient level for some  components of financial assistance.  
Monitoring participants can be a challenge  because it is difficult for Career Development Officers to maintain regular contact  with them.
Key informants also identified a number of lessons learned:
It is important to spend time on career  exploration with participants in order to ensure that they are choosing to  attend training programs that they are personally invested in.
Working as a team has helped with program  success. Multiple Career Development Officers review each application in order  to make sure that it is complete. 
Career Development Officers have the ability to  approve funding agreements up to $20,000 but this amount should be increased  because Adult Learning and Training Supports agreements are usually quite  expensive.  When participants must travel  to attend training, these costs can quickly rise.  Key informants said that this change would  speed up the processing time.
The training allowance should be increased to  help participants with families.  As  well, the level of support for transportation and childcare should be  increased.
It is important to ensure that front-line staff  are consulted on policy changes so that the changes reflect on-the-ground  delivery realities.
The need to incorporate more adult basic  education and life skills training into programming since these are common  challenges experienced by participants.  
Key informants identified that Career  Development Officers require additional time to work with participants who have  multiple barriers.  If there are literacy  issues, academic upgrading may be required before pursuing occupation-specific  training.  
Conducting learning disability assessments in  the initial stage would help to identify existing barriers.  Knowing participant barriers early in the  application process allows Career Development Officers to set-up accommodations  early.
Career Development Officers are increasingly  managing participants with disabilities and there is a need for additional  training on assisting these participants.
2.3  Adult  Learning and Training supports for Apprentices
2.3.1 Program description
Based on a document  review and 5 key informant interviews completed in summer 2015
The Skills Development - Apprentice program in Nunavut is  called Adult Learning and Training Supports for Apprentices. The objective of  the program is to provide supports for apprentices who are attending block  release training. The program is offered to all registered apprentices who are  eligible for EI. Apprentices register for technical training and complete the  program’s application package. As part of the application process, apprentices  must prove their apprentice status and identify the list of supports that they  require.
Career Development Officers will meet with most of the first  year apprentices to provide support on completing the paperwork. Apprentices  who participate in subsequent years are expected to complete the paperwork on their  own. Career Development Officers approve applications under $20,000. The budget  for the program fluctuates based on the demand by apprentices.
The program is not directed to specific occupations or  industries. Apprentices in any eligible trade program attending block release  training in Nunavut or in another province or territory (for example Alberta)  are eligible. The individuals are attached to employers in Nunavut and  therefore a link to labour market demand is ensured through this relationship.
In 2014, there was a change to the program’s delivery  process. Career Development Officers in the regions are now responsible for  delivering the program. This change included a structured approach detailing  each step of the program, accompanied by guidelines for the range of supports  provided.
Supports provided under the  program include:
Tools and equipment 
Living away from home allowance 
Childcare 
Transportation 
Books
Tutoring 
Tuition 
Living allowance 
Disability support
2.3.2  Program delivery
The program does not employ a  case management process.  Rather, Career  Development Officers receive updates from the Apprenticeship Unit at the  Department of Family Services if the apprentice misses class or is struggling.  Career Development Officers may follow-up and help the apprentice to access on  campus supports such as counselling or tutoring.
2.3.3 Challenges and lessons learned about program  design and delivery
Based on a document  review and 5 key informant interviews completed in summer 2015
Existing literature has shown that  there is a fairly high non-completion rate among apprentices in Canada (40 to 50%).  Furthermore, subject  matter literature revealed that despite the growth in apprenticeship  registrations in Canada, there has not been a corresponding increase in  completions. Key informants  interviewed in the evaluation identified reasons that could lead apprentices  from Nunavut to drop-out from the apprenticeship process. The reasons for this  include:
Relocating to a city can be challenging for an  individual from a very small community. There can also be social barriers and  family issues with having to relocate for training.  
The level of literacy, mathematics and science  skills may not be sufficient to allow apprentices to excel in trades education.  There is a lack of assessment of these essential skills prior to apprenticeship  training.
Financial pressures such as high cost of living and  food costs pose challenges. This cost of living varies significantly by  location.
Lack of available journeypersons to help train  the apprentices.
Lack of available work causing the apprentice to  interrupt progression in their apprenticeship.
Lack of housing.
There are delays in conducting exams at the end  of the training. Apprentices usually have to wait approximately one month for  the exam in Iqaluit.
Substance abuse challenges.
Key informants identified a number of challenges  associated with the design and delivery of the program, such as:
There is a need for extra financial support to  cover the high cost of living in Nunavut. As well, supports should consider the  costs associated with taking training in the Nunavut compared to the south.
The special equipment allowance and books  supports should be increased.
Apprentices relocating for training may have  difficulty paying rent and security deposits, so financial assistance for this  should be provided by the program. 
There is a need for information on  apprenticeships both online and in pamphlet form because of the high cost of  internet in Nunavut.
Pre-apprenticeship training is needed to help  ensure that apprentices have a sufficient level of essential skills to succeed  in training.  
It is necessary to provide mandatory counselling  to participants in order to help identify challenges and to address social  challenges.
Tutoring support is necessary because  apprentices may be shy and may have difficulty learning in large groups. Individuals  may not feel comfortable approaching staff for help when needed.
There are challenges in determining issues with  the essential skills of apprentices with multiple barriers. Career Development  Officers need to assess essential skills in mathematics, science and reading at  the beginning of the application process. Without essential skills training,  apprentices may struggle, fail their block release training or drop out of  their apprenticeship entirely.
Key informants identified a  number of lessons learned in the design and delivery of the program.
Apprentices who relocate to attend training are  more likely to succeed when they receive peer-support from an individual with a  similar background and location.
It is important to have conversations with  apprenticeship candidates about what to expect in terms of training and  financial costs such as student fees, rent deposits, etc. in order to help them  plan for these expenses.
Some employers provide extra financial support  (such as a completion bonus or per diem) to apprentices to help them while attending  block release training. This was identified as helping apprentices access and  complete their block release training.
There is flexibility with financial supports to  provide funds for the two-week EI waiting period under the program.
Recently, a trade school was opened locally  allowing some apprentices to remain at home while completing their training  rather than travelling to the south. This is beneficial because it allows  apprentices to continue to receive the support of their community and tuition  is lower.
The application process is relatively short.
2.4 Training on the Job
2.4.1 Program description
Based on a document  review and 4 key informant interviews completed in summer 2015
The Targeted Wage Subsidies program in Nunavut is called the  Training on the Job program. The objective of the program is to encourage  employers to hire unemployed EI-eligible individuals who they would not  normally hire, in order to help the individual gain work experience. In  addition, it was identified that the program is intended to provide an  incentive for employers to hire, train and even retain workers who need  experience and training, including pre-apprentice opportunities leading to  apprenticeship registration. With these objectives, the program provides a  subsidy to employers to cover a portion of the participant’s salary.  Individuals can be supported to gain training in full-time, part-time (minimum  of 20 hours per week) and seasonal jobs. Under the LMDA, the Training on the  Job program is provided to active and former EI claimants, including  apprentices.
The amount and duration of the subsidy are negotiated with  Career Development Officers. The maximum length of the subsidy is 52 weeks, but  may be considerably less where the training and skills requirements for  particular positions are low. The maximum amount of the subsidy provided is $15  per hour. Apprentices who participate in the program receive $15 per hour for  the first level, $12.50 per hour for the second level and $10 per hour for the  third level.  No additional  employment-related expenses are supported under the program.
2.4.2 Program delivery
Based on a document  review and 4 key informant interviews completed in summer 2015
The program is delivered by Career Development Officers.  Most key informants identified that the program is primarily  employer-driven.  Employers usually  initiate the application process for the program. According to some key  informants, applications take approximately one week to complete.
According to all key informants, Career Development Officers  make contact with participants at regular intervals during and after the wage  subsidy. During the subsidy, Career Development Officers ensure that the  participant is on track for their learning plan and that no new barriers have  arisen. Career Development Officers may provide support to participants when  required and may also encourage participants to call them to discuss any issues  that they may be facing, including personal or family issues, since these can  impact their work life.
Career Development Officers follow-up with participants and  employers at 3, 6 and 12 months. For participants who did not remain employed,  Career Development Officers re-assess participants and determine if job search  or other supports may be required.
According to key informants, the program is open to a  variety of occupations.  Examples of  recent occupations supported under the program include: hotel front desk staff,  stock persons, administrative assistants/receptionists, veterinary technicians  and by-law officers. For apprentices assisted by the program, key informants  identified that the most common occupations are carpenters, electricians, oil  mechanics and plumbers.
2.4.3 Profile of program participants
As shown in Table C1 in Appendix C,  former claimants who started participation in 2001 to 2007 were predominantly  male (71%), in the 25 to 34 age category (48%), and self-identified as  Aboriginal (69%). The  most common skill level required for the job held before participation was  on-the-job training (36%) followed by college or apprenticeship training (29%).  The small number of active EI claimants’ participants in Training on the Job  prevented an analysis of their data.
2.4.4 Outcomes
Former claimants
As shown in Table C2 in Appendix C, former claimants who started participation in  2001 to 2007 experienced an increase in average annual earnings ($15,404), a  decrease in the average annual proportion of participants claiming EI and  social assistance (16 and 5 percentage points respectively) between the pre-  and post-program periods and a decrease in the level of dependence on income  support (6 percentage points). Finally,  former claimants experienced a decrease in the proportion employed (6  percentage points or 6 participants) but 87% of them were employed annually  during the post-program period. A more detailed display of average earnings is  provided in Figure 5 below.
Figure 5. Average earnings for former claimants in Training on the Job (2001 to 2007)



Text description of Figure 5
Overall, there are clear  indications that former claimants who participated in Training on the Job  improved their labour market attachment mainly through increases in earnings  and reduction in EI and social assistance use. This interpretation accounts for  the unique labour market context in Nunavut and the fact that the vast majority  of participants are Aboriginals (mainly Inuit). As reported in section 2.1,  Inuit experience significantly high unemployment and lower education levels  compared to the total working age population of Nunavut.  As well, these numbers should be interpreted  taking into consideration the limited employment opportunities in Nunavut,  particularly in smaller communities.
2.4.5 Challenges and lessons learned about program  design and delivery
Based on a document  review and 4 key informant interviews completed in summer 2015
According to the Employment Insurance Monitoring and  Assessment Reports, the number of new interventions has decreased between 2005  to 2006 and 2013 to 2014. Key  informants identified the following reasons to explain the decline in the use  of the program:
The reporting burden can discourage employer  participation. Key informants identified that there is approximately 10 pages  of paperwork for the application (including the job description and training  plan, among other details).
Employers cannot access the program multiple  times.
The positions supported usually need to be new  jobs and this can be a challenge for some employers in Nunavut since there are  not many new jobs.
Almost all of the key  informants identified that most participants are retained by employers.  For participants who did not continue working  for the same employer, key informants provided a number of reasons, including  layoff due to lack of work, family issues or participants pursuing other  employment opportunities.
Key informants also identified a  number of challenges with the design and delivery of the program including:
The application length and amount of paperwork  can be a burden on employers.
The maximum amount of the subsidy is not high  enough to encourage some employers to participate.
Key informants identified a  number of lessons learned and best practices in the design and delivery of the  program:
Having Career Development Officers conduct  outreach activities and raise awareness about the program with employers.
Meeting with the employer and the participant at  the same time to explain the application and administrative processes ensures  that they have a common understanding of the requirements.
Conducting follow-up with both participants and  employers is beneficial. This can help to ensure that issues are addressed as  they arise. As well, encouraging Career Development Officers to conduct site  visits would help to ensure that participants are progressing well in their  training plan.
Career Development Officers may need to help  employers develop training plans and prepare their job descriptions. Key  informants identified that when developing training plans for apprentices,  looking at the skills that the apprentice must develop before their next  training period and encouraging the employer to incorporate that into the  training plan is beneficial.
2.5  Nunavut Entrepreneurship Incentive
2.5.1 Program  description
Based on information  available on the website of the Department of Family Services
The self-employment program  in Nunavut is called the Nunavut Entrepreneurship Incentive. The program  provides $5,000 ($2,500 in two installments) in financial support to new  entrepreneurs. Participants receive career counseling from Career Development  Officers and business start-up support from designated business development  partner consultants.
Eligible expenses under the  program include:
Licensed  child care costs for children under the age of six.
Business  telephone, rent or lease payments.
Fuel  costs for a vehicle related to the business.
Travel  costs to attend training related to the business.
Course  costs directly related to the business.
Purchase  of special equipment for the business.
2.5.2  Program delivery
Based on information  available on the website of the Department of Family Services
Candidates must complete an Employment Assistance Services  application with a Career Development Officer. They will then work through the  development of a business plan using the expertise of a business development  partner. The duration of this process varies and may take just a few weeks  or up to a few years to develop. Upon completion of the business plan, the  client will obtain a Nunavut business license.
Once a Business License is obtained, an application for the  Nunavut Entrepreneurship Incentive can be submitted to a Career Development  Officer and must be done within 12 months of receiving business plan approval.
Nunavut-based entrepreneurs  are eligible for the financial support if they:
Are  starting a new business
Are  18 years or older and either a Canadian citizen or permanent resident
Have  not received the Nunavut Entrepreneurship Incentive option in the past
Have  developed a viable business plan in collaboration with an eligible Nunavut  business development partner
Have  obtained a valid business license
Provide  a confirmation letter from an eligible business development consultant
Upon application approval, an initial payment of $2,500 will  be sent via direct deposit to the eligible participant. The participant must  account for all eligible expenses (that is retain receipts) for that amount  within six months. The Career Development Officer will verify the amounts and  reconcile the statements/invoices, then determine the issuance of the second  payment of $2,500. The client then has another six months to account for the  funding. Expenses related to the funding must match the initial application for  funding which states area of need.
Based on the EI Monitoring and Assessment Reports, there  were 2 Nunavut Entrepreneurship Incentive  participants in 2014 to 2015.
2.6 Employment Assistances  Services
2.6.1 Program description and delivery
Based on information  available on the website of the Department of Family Services
Employment Assistances Services connect participants with career  services such as labour market information, employment and career counseling,  career action planning, resume writing workshops and interview skills. To  benefit from these services, participants fill out an application and submit it  to the regional Career Development Officer for review.
2.6.2 Profile of EAS participants
As shown in Table D1 in Appendix D, active claimants who started an  intervention in 2001 to 2007 and 2006 to 2008 were mostly male (56% and 64%  respectively). For both cohorts, the most common age categories were 25 to 34 and 35 to 44  with about a third of participants in each. While Aboriginal was the most  common socio-demographic group, only 46% reported being an Aboriginal individual  in the 2001 to 2007 cohort, while 76% were reported in the 2006 to 2008 cohort.  For both cohorts, the most common skill level required for the job held before  participation was on-the-job training (around 40% of participants in both  cohorts).
Former claimants who started an intervention in  2001 to 2007 were mostly female (55%) while those who started an intervention  in 2006 to 2008 were mostly male (56%). Former claimants in both cohorts were  mainly aged between 35 and 44 years old (35% each). Participants in both  cohorts most often had jobs requiring secondary or occupational training (38%  and 31% respectively), on-the-job training (33% and 31% respectively) or  college or apprentice training (20% and 30% respectively) before participation.
Labour Market barriers faced by Employment Assistances Services  participants in general
Based on 81 key  informant interviews completed in 10 P/Ts in summer 2013
According to key  informants across Canada, the main labour market barriers faced by individuals  who access the program with or without participating in Employment Benefits  include:
Lack  of work experience or skills mismatches (9 P/Ts)
Low  essential and foundational skills (8 P/Ts)
Access  and affordability of transportation (8 P/Ts)
Access  and affordability of childcare (8 P/Ts)
Criminal  records and addictions (8 P/Ts)
Being  a person with a disability or having mental health issues (7 P/Ts)
Working  in temporary, seasonal or part-time employment (7 P/Ts)
Lack  of marketable skills (that is, outdated skills, inability to network) (7 P/Ts)
Employers’  perception toward individuals in some groups (visible minorities, persons with  disabilities, new immigrants, Aboriginal peoples, etc.) (7 P/Ts)
Lack  of employment opportunities, particularly in rural and remote areas (6 P/Ts)
Language  barriers (6 P/Ts)
Low  self-esteem, lack of motivation and negative attitude (6 P/Ts)
Lack  of job search or interview skills (5 P/Ts)
Homelessness  and lack of affordable housing (4 P/Ts)
2.6.3 Outcomes
Active claimants
Figures presented in  this sub-section should be interpreted with caution given the small number of  participants (52 participants for the 2001 to 2007 cohort and 42 for the 2006  to 2008 cohort)
As  shown in Table D2 in Appendix  D, active claimants who started an intervention between 2001 and 2007 earned,  on average, $2,528 more annually in the five years after participation compared  to the five years before participation. Figure 6 depicts the variation in  average annual earnings for these participants from $16,852 in the 5th  pre-program year to $23,871 in the 5th post-program year. It is noted that  average earnings were not adjusted for inflation using the Consumer Price Index  given the fact that the program start year varied between 2001 and 2007.
Figure 6. Average earnings for active claimants in Employment Assistances Services (2001 to 2007)



Text description of Figure 6
The  average annual proportion of participants employed decreased by 12 percentage  points (or 6 participants) between the pre-program (92%) and the post-program  (80%) periods. This can be partially explained by retirement decisions given  the fact that 13% or 7 participants were 55 years old or over at the start of  participation.
Finally, the average annual proportion of participants  claiming EI benefits increased slightly by 1 percentage point (or 0.9 week)  while the proportion of participants claiming social assistance benefits  remained unchanged at 16%. Overall, the average level of dependence on income  support increased by 6 percentage points, from 14% before participation to 20%  after participation.
Active claimants who started an intervention between 2006  and 2008 experienced an increase in average earnings ($9,507) while 39 of the  42 participants remained employed. As well, few participants collected more EI  and social assistance benefits in the post-program period.
Overall, between 80% and 93% of active claimants who  participated exclusively in Employment Assistance Services in 2001 to 2007 and  2006 to 2008 remained employed in the 5 years post-program participation.  Employment Assistance Services are relatively  modest activities and, by themselves, are not expected to lead to substantial  effects on labour market outcomes.  In  other words, Employment Assistance Services aim to support the return to work  of unemployed participants and not necessarily to secure a better paying job  than pre-participation. As well, these numbers should be interpreted taking  into consideration the limited employment opportunities in Nunavut,  particularly in smaller communities.
Former claimants
As shown in Table D3 in Appendix D, former claimants who started an intervention  between 2001 and 2007 did not experience a meaningful change in the average  annual earnings between the five years after participation ($13,634) compared  to the five years before participation ($13,695). Figure 7 depicts the  variation in average annual earnings for these participants from $13,952 in the  5th pre-program year to $16,068 in the 5th post-program year. It is noted that  average earnings were not adjusted for inflation using the Consumer Price Index  given the fact that the program start year varied between 2001 and 2007.
Figure 7. Average earnings for former claimants in Employment Assistances Services (2001 to 2007)



Text description of Figure 7
The average annual proportion of participants employed  decreased by 11 percentage points between the pre-program (85%) and the  post-program (74%) periods. This can be partially explained by retirement  decisions given the fact that 7% participants were 55 years old or over at the  start of participation.
Finally, the average annual proportion of participants  claiming EI benefits decreased by 19 percentage points (or 3.4 weeks) while the  proportion of participants claiming social assistance benefits remained unchanged  at 23%. Overall, the average level of dependence on income support decreased  slightly by 1 percentage point, from 22% before participation to 21% after  participation.
Former claimants who started an intervention between 2006  and 2008 experienced an increase in average earnings ($7,704). They also  experienced a decrease in the proportion of participants employed (4 percentage  points) and a decrease in the use of EI (15 percentage points). There was an  increase in the use of social assistance benefits (5 percentage points) while  the level of dependence on income support remained unchanged at 22%.
The majority of former claimants who started an intervention  in 2001 to 2007 were adults (30 years old and over) with only 24% aged below 30  years old (youth). Average outcomes for adults mirrored those of former  claimants in general. In contrast, youth experienced an increase in average  annual earnings.
Overall, between 74% and 91% of former claimants who  participated exclusively in Employment Assistance Services remained employed in  the 5 years post-program participation.   Employment Assistance Services are relatively modest activities and, by  themselves, are not expected to lead to substantial effects on labour market  outcomes.  In other words, Employment  Assistance Services aim to support the return to work of unemployed  participants and not necessarily to secure a better paying job than  pre-participation. As well, these numbers should be interpreted taking into  consideration the limited employment opportunities in Nunavut, particularly in  smaller communities.
2.6.4 Lessons learned about program design and delivery
Based on a document  review and 81 key informant interviews in 10 P/Ts completed in summer 2013
Managers  and caseworkers from 10 P/Ts involved in the delivery of Employment Assistance  Services were interviewed during the summer of 2013. These interviews, in  addition to document reviews, provided insight into the challenges and lessons  learned related to program design and delivery. National-level qualitative  findings are included in this report with the perspective of sharing lessons  learned and best practices with Nunavut.
Key informants identified the following challenges related  to program design and delivery:
Participants  in some regions face issues with limited access to services, mobility and  transportation (7 P/Ts).
There is a lack of awareness about the program  among potential participants (6 P/Ts).
The current budget allocation is not enough to  support the delivery of the program. This led some service providers to  eliminate services and reduce the number of participants served (5 P/Ts).
Service providers cannot necessarily provide all  the services required by participants facing multiple barriers to employment.  They have to refer these individuals to other organizations and sometimes, one  individual can be referred to more than one organization. This may lead some  participants to give up on their return-to-work process (5 P/Ts).
The current performance measurement strategy does  not capture the various outcomes achieved over time when assisting people with  multiple barriers to employment (3 P/Ts).
Service providers have difficulties in hiring  skilled and knowledgeable staff (2 P/Ts). As well, some service providers have  a high turn-over of staff and staff training is very costly (2 P/Ts).
Service providers lack capacity to follow up with  each participant in order to provide job maintenance support (2 P/Ts).
Key informants also provided examples of best  practices and lessons leared with respect to the program design and delivery.  These include:
It is important to case manage participants and  to provide a client-centered holistic approach through counselling, motivation,  building self-esteem and assisting them in choosing a career path (9 P/Ts).
It is important for service providers to be  engaged in their community and well connected to other service providers (for  information sharing and referral purposes), particularly for those dealing with  persons with disabilities and mental health issues. Partnerships and ongoing  communication with employers can also facilitate the labour market integration  of participants through job placements and subsidy (8 P/Ts). 
Since participants with multiple barriers to  employment often require more intensive interventions, it is important to  conduct a strong needs assessment in order to make the best training decision  (7 P/Ts). 
Having a one-stop shop for services and  streamlining services (co-location, no wrong-door approach, offering a  comprehensive suite of services from self-serve to workshops, employability  assessment, career orientation, need determination and ongoing case  management), as well as removing barriers to access and participation (7 P/Ts).
It is important to keep a long-term perspective  when assisting participants facing multiple barriers to employment (6 P/Ts).
Providing long-term follow-up with participants  for employment retention support is seen as a best practice (6 P/Ts).
Giving service providers increased flexibility  when assisting participants with multiple barriers to employment, particularly  in terms of the length  of services and the type of financial support that can be made available to  participants (6 P/Ts).
It is important for service providers to have  dedicated workers, specialized teams to deal with participants facing multiple  barriers to employment, and job coaches/developers that are dedicated and  committed to support these participants (6 P/Ts).
Service  providers need to make appropriate referrals, when available, to specialized  community organizations for participants dealing with disabilities, mental  health issues, addictions and criminal records (5 P/Ts). 
Providing participants with help to contact  employers (for example, assistance in handing out resumes) and networking  opportunities (5 P/Ts).
Providing participants with an opportunity to try  and test prospective jobs (5 P/Ts).
It is important for provincial/territorial  governments to have strong partnerships with third-party service providers and  employers in order to be able to mobilize the service delivery network in cases  of emerging labour market challenges (major lay-offs, downturn, etc.) and to  organize job fairs and joint group workshops (5 P/Ts).
There is a need to enhance the promotion of  programs and services (5 P/Ts).
There is a need to provide services in an  innovative way depending on local needs and reality (that is, online resources  and training) (3 P/Ts).
There  is a need to change the way success is measured under the program.  For example, the progress of a participant with multiple barriers to employment  should be measured through small steps from securing adequate housing to  dealing with addictions, improving life skills and integrating into the labour  market (3 P/Ts).
Service providers need additional resources in  order to maintain the level and quality of services and to train staff,  particularly those operating in rural areas (3 P/Ts).
3. Comparison  of key findings by program type
This section provides an  overview of the key findings from the analysis of labour market outcomes for  the participation in Adult Learning and Training Supports, Training on the Job,  and Employment Assistance Services for  both active and former EI claimant participants who started participation in  the 2001 to 2007 period.
Overall, labour market outcomes provide some indications  that LMDA-funded programs and services delivered in Nunavut are generally  helping participants to improve their labour market attachment after  participation.
With some exceptions, participants in LMDA programs and  services showed higher average earnings and lower average proportions on EI and  social assistance during the five years after program participation when  compared to five years prior.
Some participants do not appear to be securing employment  following their participation in LMDA programs and services, as reflected in  the general decrease in the proportion of participants employed in the  post-participation period compared to the pre-participation period. However,  employment outcomes should be interpreted with caution taking into  consideration the limited employment opportunities in Nunavut, particularly in  smaller communities.
Most program participants have higher  average earnings after program participation
As shown in Figure 8, active claimants who participated in Adult Learning and Training Supports and  Employment Assistance Services showed higher average employment during  the five years after their participation when compared to five years prior to  participation. As well, former claimants who participated in Adult Learning and Training Supports and  Training on the Job also showed higher average employment earnings after  participation compared to before participation.
Considering  the small number of active claimants who participated in Employment Assistance  Services (n=52), their figures should be interpreted with caution. As well,  Employment Assistance Services are relatively modest activities such as counselling,  job search assistance and case management. By themselves, they are not expected  to lead to substantial effects on labour market outcomes.
Figure 8. Change in average earnings of participants 5 years pre- and post-participation in LMDA programs and services



Text description of Figure 8
Note: outcomes for active  participants in Employment Assistance Services should be interpreted with  caution given the small number of participants (n=52).
The average proportion of  participants on Employment Insurance and social assistance is generally lower  after program participation when compared to before program participation
As shown in Figures 9 and  10, overall, the average proportion of  participants who use EI and social assistance is shown to be lower in the  post-participation period for active and former claimants of Adult  Learning and Training Supports as well as former claimants of Training on the  Job. In addition, the average  proportion of former claimants who use EI is also shown to be lower in the  five years after program participation for those who participated in Employment  Assistance Services (when compared to five years prior).
Figure 9. Change in average proportion of active claimant participants on Employment Insurance and Social Assistance 5 years pre- and post-participation in LMDA programs 
and services
  



Text description of Figure 9
Note: outcomes for active  participants in Employment Assistance Services should be interpreted with  caution given the small number of participants (n=52 participants).
Figure 10. Change in average proportion of former claimant participants on Employment Insurance and Social Assistance 5 years pre- and post-participation in LMDA programs 
and services
  



Text description of Figure 10
The average proportion of participants  employed is generally lower after program participation when compared to the  before program participation
As shown in Figure 11, active EI claimants of Adult Learning and  Training Supports were the only participants who showed an increase in the  proportion employed between the pre- and post-participation periods.  Participants of the other programs and services displayed decreases in the  proportion of participants employed in the post-participation period compared  to the pre-participation period. These decreases can be partially explained by  the high unemployment levels in Nunavut and the limited employment  opportunities, particularly in smaller communities.
Figure 11. Change in average proportion of participants employed 5 years pre- and 
post-participation in LMDA programs and services




Text description of Figure 11
Note: outcomes for active  participants in Employment Assistance Services should be interpreted with  caution given the small number of participants (n=52).
4. Conclusions
Evaluation  evidence presented and discussed in this report provided indications that programs  and services designed and delivered by Nunavut under the LMDA are generally  helping participants to improve their labour market experience after  participation. Programs and services contribute to achieving the Government of  Nunavut’s priority of self-reliance and optimism through education and  training, fulfilling the objective of the Nunavut Adult Learning Strategy and  to fulfilling the mandate of the Career Development division of the Department  of Family Services to provide services to the public in order to link people  with jobs.
With some exceptions, the labour market outcomes demonstrate  that participants in LMDA programs and services showed higher average earnings  and lower average proportions on EI and social assistance during the five years  after program participation when compared to five years prior.
Some participants do  not appear to be securing employment following their participation in LMDA  programs and services, as reflected in the general decrease in the proportion  of participants employed in the post-participation period compared to the  pre-participation period. However, employment outcomes should be interpreted  with caution taking into consideration the limited employment opportunities in  Nunavut, particularly in smaller communities.
Key informants’ interviews with program managers and career  development officers as well as the documents reviewed and the questionnaires  filled by Nunavut representatives identified challenges and lessons learned in  program design and delivery:
Adult Learning and Training Supports
To collect labour market  information, representatives from the Department of Family Services  regularly attend trade shows, mining symposiums and holding meetings with  industry in the area to determine the local labour market demand. The  Department also examines what programs, offered by the Nunavut Arctic College,  correspond to labour market demand.  Program participants are  expected to do further research on training options and local labour  market demand as part of the application process. This may contribute to  program effectiveness.
According to Career Development Officers  and managers interviewed as part of the evaluation, the main challenges related  to program design and delivery included:
The perceived insufficient level of some  components of financial assistance. 
Maintaining regular contact with participants  for monitoring purposes can be difficult for Career Development Officers.
Adult Learning and Training Supports  for Apprentices
Existing Canadian literature showed that there is a fairly  high non-completion rate among apprentices (40 to 50%).  Furthermore, subject matter literature revealed that despite the growth in  apprenticeship registrations in Canada, there has not been a corresponding  increase in completions.  According to Career Development Officers and  managers involved in apprenticeship delivery drop-out can be is due to factors  such as:
The difficulty associated withrelocation for training purposes
Low level of essential skills, lack of training  and job opportunities 
Financial difficulties
Lack of housing
Family issues
Substance abuse
Delays in conducting exams following the end of  training
Career Development Officers and managers indicated that  apprentices can benefit from counselling, tutoring support, and  pre-apprenticeship training.
Training on the Job
According to the EI Monitoring and Assessment Reports, the  number of new interventions has decreased between 2005 to 2006 and 2013 to 2014.  According to Career  Development Officers and managers,  factors affecting take-up included:
The reporting burden to employers  
Employers cannot access the program multiple  times
Level of funding is insufficient to encourage  employers to participate
The positions supported usually need to be new  jobs
Career Development Officers and managers indicated that  outreach activities can improve employer participation.
5.  Recommendations
A total of 6  recommendations emerged from the evaluation findings. They are as follows:
The report presents challenges experienced by Adult Learning and Training  Supports (including the Apprentice component) participants in general.  These challenges are centered on the low levels of literacy and essential  skills, low education, lack of work related skills and perceived insufficient  level of financial support. As well, labour market statistics demonstrate that  Inuit experience significantly higher unemployment rates and lower levels of  education compared to the average rates in the territory.
Recommendation 1: The provision of literacy and essential skills training is important in the  Nunavut context to support individuals to prepare for vocational training and  to reintegrate into the labour market. These measures should be reported  separately from other Adult  Learning and Training Supports interventions given their unique  objectives.
Recommendation 2: Consideration should be given to examine to what extent the level of financial  supports provided under the program are sufficient.
Recommendation 3: Consideration should be given to examine to what extent Career Development  Officers can increase monitoring and provide additional supports to  apprentices.
Outcome analysis results show that the Training on the Job  program is improving the earnings of participants and reducing their use of EI  and social assistance as well as the dependence on government income support.  However, the number of interventions declined between 2005 to 2006 and 2013 to 2014. According to key  informants, this is due to the reporting burden on employers, the limitation on  using the program multiple times and employers’ capacity to create a new  position.
Recommendation 4: Depending on labour market priorities and budget allocation across the various  EBSMs, Nunavut may wish to explore ways of removing barriers to employer  participation in Training on the Job.
A study carried out across Canada regarding the timing of  participation in Employment Assistance Services showed that receiving  assistance early after starting an EI claim can lead to better labour market  impacts.
Recommendation 5: Consideration should be given by Nunavut to request timely access to data on  new EI recipients for targeting purposes, especially if awareness about  Employment Assistance Services is also an issue in the territory.
The LMDA evaluation was only able to produce labour market  outcomes, given the small number of participants. Labour market outcomes were  produced over five years and for the entire population of participants using  rich data on EI claimants, EBSM participation data and Canada Revenue Agency  taxation files. Some data gaps were identified in order to support future  evaluation activities.
Recommendation 6: Improvements in the data collection process are recommended to address key  program and policy questions of interest to Canada and Nunavut. Specifically:
Collect data on whether participants are members  of designated groups including Inuit and persons with disabilities.
Collect data on the type of training funded  under Adult Learning  and Training Supports and the type of assistance provided under  Employment Assistance Services. Nunavut, ESDC and other P/Ts should work  together to define common categories for both EBSMs.
Collect detailed data on the cost of EBSM  interventions.
ESDC and Nunavut should carry out a data  assessment regarding the integrity of data uploads and the standardization  process of Nunavut data within ESDC.
References
Canada Employment Insurance  Commission. Employment Insurance Monitoring and Assessment Reports. 2003 to  2004 to 2013 to 2014.
Coe, Patrick. “Apprenticeship programme requirements and  apprenticeship completion rates in Canada.” Journal of Vocational Education and  Training. 2013. 65(4): 575 to 605.
Conference Board of Canada. Territorial Outlook. Summer 2016.
Conference  Board of Canada. Education and Skills in the  Territories. September 2014.
Employment and Social  Development Canada. Analysis of EBSM Profile and Outcomes for 2006 to 2008  Participants in Nunavut . Evaluation Directorate.  March 2015
Employment and Social  Development Canada. Profile, Outcomes and Net Impacts of EBSM Participants in  Nunavut . Evaluation Directorate.  March  2014
Employment and Social Development Canada. Analysis of EBSMs  Profile and Outcomes for EI Claimants Category “Long-Tenured Workers” in  Nunavut. Evaluation Directorate. April 2016.
Employment and Social Development Canada. Study on the Adult  Learning and Training Supports (ALTS) for Apprentices in Nunavut . Evaluation  Directorate. June 2016.
Employment and Social Development Canada. Study on the Adult  Learning and Training Supports (ALTS) Program in Nunavut. Evaluation  Directorate. April 2016.
Employment and Social Development Canada. Study of the Training on  the Job Program: Nunavut. Evaluation Directorate. February 2016.
Government of Canada. Agreement  to amend the Canada-Nunavut Labour Market Development Agreement. September  13, 2016. Accessed January 17, 2017.
Natural Resources Canada,  GeoAccess Division. Land and freshwater area, by province and territory. Accessed February 15  2017.
Nunavut Bureau of Statistics. Nunavut Quick Facts.  Accessed February 15 2017.
Nunavut Department of Family  Services. Career  Development. Accessed January 17, 2017.
Nunavut Department of Family  Services. Employment  Assistance Services.  Accessed  February 6 2017.
Nunavut Department of Family  Services. Nunavut  Entrepreneurship Incentive program. Accessed February 6 2017.
Government of Nunavut. Sivumut  Abluqta: Stepping Forward Together 2014 to 2018. 2014
LaRochelle-Côté, Sébastien and  Sharanjit Uppal, "The Financial Well-Being of the Self-Employed,"  Perspectives on Labour and Income, vol. 23, no. 4, Winter 2011
Red Seal. Apprenticeship Completion, Certification and  Outcomes. Ottawa: Red Seal, 2014.
Acronyms
EBSM Employment Benefits and Support  Measures
EI Employment Insurance
ESDC Employment and Social Development Canada
LMDA Labour Market Development Agreements
P/T Province/Territory
Appendix A - Methodology
Qualitative  data
Qualitative data reported in the Adult Learning and Training  Supports (ALTS), Adult Learning and Training Supports for Apprentices (ALTSA),  Training on the Job (TOJ) and Employment Assistances Services (EAS) studies  were collected from key informant interviews with managers and Career  Development Officers and a document/literature review. As well, questionnaires  were completed by territorial representatives for the ALTS, ALTSA and TOJ  studies. Table A1 below provides the number of key informants interviewed.
Key informant interviews for ALTS, ALTSA and TOJ studies  were conducted in 2015.
Quantitative methods
All quantitative analyses were conducted using linked  administrative data from EI Part I (EI claim), EI Part II (EBSM participation  data) and T1 and T4 taxation files on up to 100% of participants in Nunavut.
All outcome analyses were conducted using a unit of analysis  called the Action Plan Equivalent, which combines all EBSMs given to an  individual within no more than six months of each other. For reporting  purposes, outcomes were attributed to the longest intervention of the Action  Plan Equivalent when ALTS, ALTSA or TOJ was the longest intervention. Impacts  for EAS were calculated for Action Plan Equivalent that contained only EAS with  no Employment Benefits.
Outcomes were measured for the  following indicators:
Employment/self-employment  earnings represent the total earnings an individual had  from paid employment and/or self-employment.   (This information is available by calendar year and is obtained from T1  and T4 tax return records.) 
Proportion  employed/self-employed represents the percentage of participants that  have earnings from employment and/or self-employment. 
Amount  of EI benefits received  represent the average amount of EI benefits received.
Weeks in receipt of EI benefits represent  the average number of weeks during which EI benefits were received. 
Social Assistance benefits represent  the average amount of social assistance benefits received. (This information is  available by calendar year and is obtained from T1 tax return records.) 
Dependence  on income support represents the ratio of participant’s income  that came from EI and social assistance benefits (that is, EI benefits + social  assistance benefits / (EI benefits + social assistance benefits + earnings from  employment/self/employment)).
In addition to all active and  all former claimants, outcomes were examined for the following sub-groups of  participants:
Adult  workers: individuals 30 years old and older. 
Youth:  individuals below 30 years old.
Strengths and limitations from the studies
Overall, the number of key informants interviewed was  relatively small in some studies.  The  key informants’ responses were representative of their own experience and their  own region or community but it is unclear if they were fully representative of  the entire territory.
The outcome analysis provides an assessment of how the  labour market experience of participants evolved over time but does not allow  an assessment of the extent to which those changes were due to EBSM  participation. For example, increases in employment earnings over the period  examined could be partly due to inflation or normal wage increase associated  with experience. With that respect, the outcome results should not be  interpreted as a direct measure of program effectiveness.
Appendix B - Detailed results Adult Learning  and Training Supports
Note: Proportions may not add up    to 100% due to rounding.
*Status self-reported by participants.
Skill level    corresponds to the type and/or amount of training or education typically    required to work in  last occupation    participants had just prior to opening the last EI claim they had before    participating in EBSMs:
-Managerial:    Management occupations
-University:    Occupations usually requiring university education (that is, University    degree at the bachelor's, master's or doctorate level)
-College or    apprenticeship training: Occupations usually requiring college or vocational    education or apprenticeship training such as 2 to 3 years of post-secondary    education at a community college, institute of technology or CEGEP or 2 to 5 years of apprenticeship    training or 3 to 4 years of    secondary school and more than 2 years of on-the-job training, specialized    training courses or specific work experience and/or occupations with    supervisory responsibilities and occupations with significant health and    safety responsibilities, such as firefighters, police officers and registered    nursing assistants.
- Secondary    school or occupational training: Occupations usually requiring secondary    school and/or occupation-specific training such as one to four years of    secondary school education or up    to 2 years of on-the-job training specialized training courses or specific    work experience.
-On-the-job    training: On-the-job training is usually provided for occupations (that is,    short work demonstration or on-the-job training or no formal educational requirements).
Average    earnings for all participants including those who reported $0 earnings    during that year.
Earnings    have been adjusted according to the Consumer Price Index (CPI), published by    Statistics Canada, to the 2000 base year.
Average annual outcome pre-:    Represents the average annual outcomes over the pre-participation period
Average annual outcome post-:    Represents the average annual outcomes over the post-participation period
Change between pre- and post-:    Represents the difference between the average annual outcome calculated over    the pre-participation period and the average annual outcome calculated over    the post-participation period.
Earnings outcome for all individuals    covered by the study.
Earnings outcomes excluding    individuals who reported no earnings in a given year.
pp =    percentage points.
Average annual outcome pre-:    Represents the average annual outcomes over the pre-participation period
Average annual outcome post-:    Represents the average annual outcomes over the post-participation period
Change between pre- and post-:    Represents the difference between the average annual outcome calculated over    the pre-participation period and the average annual outcome calculated over    the post-participation period.
Earnings    outcome for all individuals covered by the study.
Earnings outcomes excluding    individuals who reported no earnings in a given year.
pp =    percentage points.
Appendix C  - Detailed results Training on the Job
Proportions    may not add up to 100% due to rounding
*Status    self-reported by participants.
Skill level corresponds to the type    and/or amount of training or education typically required to work in the last    occupation participants had before opening the last EI claim they had before    participating in EBSMs. A detailed definition is provided in Table B1.
Excluding individuals who have no    link with CRA taxation information.
Average earnings for all    participants including those who reported $0 earnings during that year.
Average annual outcome pre-:    Represents the average annual outcomes over the pre-participation period
Average annual outcome post-:    Represents the average annual outcomes over the post-participation period
Change between pre- and post-:    Represents the difference between the average annual outcome calculated over    the pre-participation period and the average annual outcome calculated over    the post-participation period.
Earnings    outcome for all individuals covered by the study.
Earnings outcomes excluding    individuals who reported no earnings in a given year.
pp =    percentage points.
Appendix D - Detailed results Employment  Assistance Services
Proportions may not add up to 100%  due to rounding
*Status    self-reported by participants.
Skill level corresponds to the type    and/or amount of training or education typically required to work in the last    occupation participants had before opening the last EI claim they had before    participating in EBSMs. A detailed description can be found in Table B1.
Excluding individuals who have no    link with CRA taxation information.
Average earnings for all    participants including those who reported $0 earnings during that year.
Average annual outcome pre-:    Represents the average annual outcomes over the pre-participation period
Average annual outcome post-:    Represents the average annual outcomes over the post-participation period
Change between pre- and post-:    Represents the difference between the average annual outcome calculated over    the pre-participation period and the average annual outcome calculated over    the post-participation period.
Earnings outcome for all individuals    covered by the study.
Earnings outcomes excluding    individuals who reported no earnings in a given year.
pp =    percentage points.
Average annual outcome pre-:    Represents the average annual outcomes over the pre-participation period
Average annual outcome post-:    Represents the average annual outcomes over the post-participation period
Change between pre- and post-:    Represents the difference between the average annual outcome calculated over    the pre-participation period and the average annual outcome calculated over    the post-participation period.
Earnings outcome for all individuals    covered by the study.
Earnings outcomes excluding    individuals who reported no earnings in a given year.
pp =    percentage points.
Appendix E - List of five studies included in this  synthesis report
Page details
Report a problem on this page







Date modified:
2022-04-27
