Acronyms
CDEM
Conseil de développement économique des municipalités bilingues du Manitoba
CDETNO
Conseil de développement économique des Territoires du Nord-Ouest
CEDEC
Community Economic Development and Employability Corporation
ESDC
Employment and Social Development Canada
NWT
Northwest Territories
OLMC
Official Language Minority Communities
PEI
Prince Edward Island
RDEE
Réseau de développement économique et d’employabilité
Executive summary
The Enabling Fund for Official Language Minority Communities aims to enhance the development and vitality of these communities by strengthening community capacity and promoting partnerships in the areas of human resources and community economic development.
Previous evaluation activities demonstrated strong program relevance particularly in relation to meeting Employment and Social Development Canada’s legal obligations under the Official Language Act and being a component of the Roadmap for Canada's Official Languages 2013 to 2018: education, immigration, communities. The program is credited with establishing a pan-Canadian network capable of carrying out human resources, community economic development and capacity building activities. Activities carried out by contribution agreement signatories are aligned with program objectives and lead to positive leveraging effects.
Building on lessons learned from previous evaluations and taking into consideration the difficulty in evaluating the impact and effectiveness of the program, the 2016 to 2017 evaluation of the Enabling Fund relied exclusively on a document review and focused on confirming that activities carried out by contribution agreement signatories continue to be aligned with the Enabling Fund’s objectives and eligible activities. Compared to previous evaluations of the Enabling Fund, the added value of this evaluation is to demonstrate that the program data collection instruments are capable of providing sufficient evidence to confirm that the program is achieving its intended objectives.
A preliminary document review of activity reports carried out in summer 2016 confirmed the capacity to carry out an evaluation of the Enabling Fund relying solely on a document review. The evaluation also aims to report on the extent to which implemented activities and reported results make a direct contribution to enhancing the development and vitality of Official Language Minority Communities.
Evaluation findings demonstrated that objectives and activities pursued and implemented by contribution agreement signatories in 2014 to 2015 and 2015 to 2016 continue to be aligned with the Enabling Fund objectives and eligible activities. As well, implemented activities and reported results contribute to enhancing human resources development, community economic development, community capacity building and to strengthening partnerships. Activities ensure that individuals, employers and organizations involved in these activities are better informed, skilled, resourced and served. Finally, within existing limitations, the Enabling Fund does contribute to enhancing the development and vitality of Official Language Minority Communities. These limitations are related to the enabling nature of activities and to the existence of important external factors.
Recommendations that arose from the document review are as follows:
Recommendation 1: It is important for Employment and Social Development Canada to consider reducing the reporting burden on contribution agreement signatories by balancing the needs between the management of contribution agreements and reporting requirements. 
Recommendation 2: It is recommended that program officials continue to be involved in validating the relevance of activities carried out by contribution agreement signatories. Program officials should continue to encourage the sharing of lessons learned between all contribution agreement signatories regarding the type of activities and delivery approach. 
Recommendation 3: It is recommended that program officials continue to carry out an annual validation exercise with contribution agreement signatories regarding their implemented activities and reported results. This is particularly important for verifying the number of participants and employers served, the number of individuals assisted in securing employment, contributions made to business and job creation, investments leveraged and clarifying the role played by the organizations in achieving the implementation of reported activities and results. Common definitions for outcomes of interest should be used.
Management response
The Skills and Employment Branch of Employment and Social Development Canada is pleased to note that the evaluation of the Enabling Fund for Official Language Minority Communities (OLMC) confirmed continued strong program relevance and an important contribution to the establishment of a pan-Canadian network capable of carrying out human resources development, community economic development, community capacity building and to strengthening partnerships in communities.
The Skills and Employment Branch was particularly pleased that the program was found to have made progress with data collection and that instruments are now capable of providing sufficient evidence to confirm that the program is meeting its intended objectives. Making improvements in this area has been a priority for the program since the last evaluation identified room for improvement in this regard.  Since that time, the Enabling Fund developed a new Performance Measurement Strategy. In addition, the program is piloting the use of a software-based outcomes and impact measurement system that will allow for better impact measurement and provides a practical solution for storing and analyzing program performance data. Through these tools, an evidence-base is beginning to emerge allowing for the assessment of whether activities are responding to OLMC local economic and human resources’ needs.
The Skills and Employment Branch agrees with the evaluation recommendations and is pleased to submit this management response.
Detailed responses to the evaluation recommendations
Recommendation 1: It is important for ESDC to consider reducing the reporting burden on contribution agreement signatories by balancing the needs between the management of contribution agreements and reporting requirements.
Management continues to make efforts to refine processes and develop tools with a view to reduce the reporting burden on organization. The program agrees that there remains room for improvement and commits to working with the relevant units within the department.
Recommendation 2: It is recommended that program officials continue to be involved in validating the relevance of activities carried out by contribution agreement signatories. Program officials should continue to encourage the sharing of lessons learned between all contribution agreement signatories regarding the type of activities and delivery approach.
Validating relevance of activities
ESDC currently provides oversight and ongoing validation of activities through the review of quarterly activity reports and through periodic monitoring discussions on programmatic milestones.  The department will continue to conduct this oversight and will increase the regularity of bilateral meetings with recipient organizations. More regular discussions will allow for input to be received from the local organizations and program officials will have opportunities to seek clarification where required. This will allow for re-evaluation and re-validation of activities to ensure they align with Enabling Fund terms and conditions and are meeting the needs of communities.
While critical review of the relevance of activities is important for sound programmatic management, methods of validation need to consider local conditions and capabilities. The sustained investment in community capacity through the Enabling Fund has helped develop OLMC economic and workforce development leaders and professional technical staff with knowledge and networks to promote economic growth in a systematic and organized manner at the local level. As such there may be more value in engaging with Enabling Fund stakeholders at the level of strategy and not only at the level of individual activities. This will help ensure that validation and decisions are guided by a strategy allowing program officials to assess the larger initiative and the likelihood that individual activities will produce concrete results and contribute to broader objectives. As such, the validation process will include engagement with Enabling Fund organizations on their strategic plans to ensure there is an understanding of the areas of economic opportunity and obstacles to overcome and what will guide the direction of initiatives and potential activities.
Sharing lessons learned
As a matter of practice, the Enabling Fund for OLMC creates a supportive environment to ensure the successful sharing of lessons learned and best practices. The program has a good track record of coordination, integration and information exchange. It does this through a range of processes and tools designed to share knowledge such as newsletters, reports and meetings. Sharing best practices is a good way to improve the performance of the Enabling Fund by replicating successes throughout the network and scaling promising approaches where appropriate. Other benefits include avoiding the duplication of effort and increasingly both efficiency and impact of initiatives.
The Economic Action Network for OLMC, that the Enabling Fund supports through Secretariat Services, brings Enabling Fund signatory organizations, economic development stakeholders and government officials together to identify problems, develop solutions and exchange with a view to learn from one another and collaborate.
Recipient organizations are also increasingly working across jurisdictions in a network-wide manner on common projects and in the sharing of resources and services. A number of bottom-up approaches have been put in place to encourage more learning within the network. For example, the implementation of pan-Canadian thematic expert groups on priority issues where technical staff have regular opportunities for exchange.  Increasingly the network has developed systematic processes to share lessons and good practices which are more effective.
The program will continue to help build capacity in communities in this regard and will look for ways to create tools and incentives for organizations to share. This will include reciprocal commitments to take the time needed to identify, document and share lessons learned and best practices.
Recommendation 3: It is recommended that program officials continue to carry out an annual validation exercise with contribution agreement signatories regarding their implemented activities and reported results. This is particularly important regarding verifying the number of participants and employers served, the number of individuals assisted in securing employment, contributions made to business and job creation, investments leveraged and clarifying the role played by the organizations in achieving the implementation of reported activities and results. Common definitions for outcomes of interest should be used.
As efforts in this evaluation have demonstrated, there are ongoing challenges with attributing reported outputs and outcomes solely to activities carried out by contribution agreement signatories with funding provided solely through the Enabling Fund. This is described as common given the program’s enabling nature and the diverse number of activities and initiatives undertaken with involvement from other stakeholders.
In considering this recommendation, program officials have had to consider the dearth of data generally and the variability among Enabling Fund organizations, services, and systems. It has been difficult to find reasonable and appropriate ways to impose a common methodology when each organization has its own assumptions and preferred ways of tracking results. Despite the challenges, the program agrees that there are many reasons why it is important to create common definitions for outcomes of interest to the Enabling Fund and to create more standardized reporting on key indicators.  This is not to say that organizations will be required to have the same culture or undertake the same activities but the program will need to find ways to better understand and accommodate differences among them while developing more compatible results measures.
Over the next twelve months, the Enabling Fund will work in collaboration with signatory organizations in the design of a framework that will allow for a common method for collecting data on key indicators as well as a common methodology for analyzing and interpreting results and impacts.
The program wishes to implement an outcome-based framework with clear definitions in order to measure the aggregate performance of the Enabling Fund while continuing to provide flexibility to organizations so that they can measure what is meaningful in their respective communities.
1.  Introduction
This report presents the findings and conclusions from a limited-scope evaluation of the Enabling Fund for Official Language Minority Communities (OLMC) of Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC). The report is organized as follows:
Section two presents an overview of the program
Section three describes the evaluation scope and methodology
Section four summarizes the evaluation findings
Section five summarizes the key conclusions
Section six outlines the recommendations
2.  Program description
The Enabling Fund for OLMC aims to enhance the development and vitality of these communities by strengthening their capacity in the areas of human resources and community economic development, and by promoting partnerships at all levels, including federal partners, in order to consolidate resources and take concerted action . The program is a component of the Government of Canada’s strategy for official languages as expressed in the Roadmap for Canada's Official Languages 2013 to 2018: Education, Immigration, Communities.
The Enabling Fund and its predecessor program, the 1999 to 2005 Support Fund, represent ESDC’s key instrument to meet its legal and mandated obligations under Section 41 of the Official Language Act. Pursuant to subsection 41(1) of the Official Languages Act, the “Government of Canada is committed to enhancing the vitality of the English and French linguistic minority communities in Canada and supporting and assisting their development; and fostering the full recognition and use of both English and French in Canadian society.” Subsection 41(2) requires that positive measures be taken for the implementation of these commitments.
The Enabling Fund represents an investment of $69M over 5 years. An annual budget of $12M is allocated through contribution agreements to 14 organizations with more than 100 employees working in 50 different locations across the country. An annual operational fund of $1.8M is managed by ESDC.
Contribution agreements signatories are expected to carry out activities related to:
Community Economic Development: Promoting businesses (for example trade missions, supporting development of supply-chains), promoting the communities as tourist destination, holding events to recruit workers, implementing revenue-generating events (for example tourism products).
Human Resources Development: Developing learning tools, facilitating learning events (for example, workshops, training sessions, camps), and providing guidance and support to jobseekers and assistance to employers in meeting their skill needs (for example job fairs, matching services).
Community capacity: Leading processes to encourage community participation (for example community economic planning, leveraging stakeholders’ efforts and priority setting), providing business-networking opportunities, assessing local needs, and planning/sustaining development activities.
The Enabling Fund also supports the Economic Action Network. The Network is the result of collaborative work between the Enabling Fund staff and representatives from the Francophone and English-speaking minority community organizations who are contribution agreement signatories under the Enabling Fund. It brings together federal and community representatives with economic and human resource development mandates to discuss cooperation mechanisms and initiatives aimed at improving the vitality and economic development of OLMC.
The Economic Action Network also allows for collaboration on joint projects known as Signature Projects that are expected to:
Expand on existing projects (for example best practices) or bridge a gap between existing projects.
Have national, regional or multiregional scope and/or impact.
Support the development and/or deepening of co-operation and partnership across sectors.
Help identify and test better ways of helping persons prepare for, return to or keep employment and be productive participants in the labour force.
Have significant learning implications for multiple stakeholders.
Appendix A presents the logic model for the Enabling Fund and Appendix B provides the list of contribution agreements signatories.
3.  Evaluation approach and methodology
3.1  Evaluation scope and methodology
Evaluation scope
Influenced by a number of key factors and considerations described in section 3.2 below, the 2016 to 2017 evaluation of the Enabling Fund is of limited scope, based solely on a document review and focused on addressing the following three questions:
As established in previous evaluations, do objectives and activities carried out by contribution agreement signatories in 2014 to 2015 and 2015 to 2016 continue to be aligned with the Enabling Fund’s objectives and eligible activities?
Do reported results demonstrate the extent to which contribution agreement signatories implemented their activities?
Do implemented activities and reported results make a direct contribution to enhancing the development and vitality of OLMC?
As well, the evaluation intends to report on the quality and integrity of the data collection and reporting instruments.
Compared to previous evaluations of the Enabling Fund, the added value of this evaluation is to demonstrate that the program data collection instruments are capable of providing sufficient evidence to confirm that the program is achieving its intended objectives.
Evaluation methodology
The evaluation relied exclusively on a document review in the following five of fourteen contribution agreement signatories.
Community Economic Development and Employability Corporation (CEDEC). 
Réseau de développement économique et d’employabilité (RDEE) de l’Île du Prince Édouard.
RDEE Ontario.
Conseil de développement économique des municipalités bilingues du Manitoba (CDEM).
Conseil de développement économique des Territoires du Nord-Ouest (CDETNO).
The organizations managing the contribution agreements in Prince Edward Island (PEI) and Northwest Territories (NWT) were randomly selected among the eastern and northern organizations. The organization in Ontario was selected given the size of the francophone community it serves and the organization in Quebec was selected because it is the only one serving Anglophones in Quebec.
The documentation reviewed included:
The 2014 to 2017 contribution agreements signed with the five organizations.
Eight quarterly activity reports per organization covering fiscal years 2014 to 2015 and 2015 to 2016 for a total of 40 quarterly reports.
One annual report produced by each organization for fiscal year 2014 to 2015, for a total of 5 annual reports.
Results (outputs and outcomes) reported in the activity reports and annual reports were classified in relation to each objective and planned activities outlined in the 2014 to 2017 contribution agreements. From these quarterly reports, detailed matrices were produced summarizing all the reported results for 2014 to 2015 and 2015 to 2016. Results reported for 2014 to 2015 were compared and complemented with information provided in the 2014 to 2015 annual reports. Appendix C provides a summary of all objectives, activities and reported results for each organization for 2014 to 2015 and 2015 to 2016.
3.2  Evaluation strenghts, weaknesses and limitations
The Enabling Fund was the subject of significant evaluation activities since its inception in 1999 with three evaluation reports published in 2004, 2010 and 2013. Lessons learned from these evaluations informed the design of the 2016 to 2017 evaluation of the Enabling Fund. Previous evaluations have confirmed:
Strong program relevance: The Enabling Fund is ESDC’s main program to meet its legal obligations under the Official Language Act. As well, ESDC funding for the Enabling Fund is considered part of the 2013 to 2018 Roadmap on Official Languages. Finally, community consultations ensure the relevance of activities to local needs. 
Program is credited with establishing a pan-Canadian network of 14 organizations capable of carrying out human resources, community economic development and capacity building activities. 
Program objectives, delivery approach and activities carried out by contribution agreement signatories have remained stable over time and focused on supporting human resources and community economic development as well as building community capacity and strengthening partnerships.
Activities carried out by contribution agreement signatories are aligned with program objectives and lead to positive leveraging effects.
A preliminary document review of activity reports carried out in summer 2016 confirmed the capacity to carry out an evaluation of the Enabling Fund relying solely on a document review.
Lessons learned from previous evaluations and the preliminary document review confirmed that:
There are ongoing challenges with attributing reported outputs and outcomes solely to activities carried out by contribution agreement signatories. This issue is not uncommon given the enabling nature of the program and the context in which contribution agreement signatories operate. They lead or participate in a large and diverse number of activities and initiatives with involvement from other stakeholders.
The Enabling Fund is a program that does not lend itself to an impact evaluation given particularly the difficulty in identifying a counterfactual. At the same time, designing an evaluation with the perspective of validating that all results have been achieved and that they make a direct contribution to meeting the program objectives may not be the most cost-effective approach, considering the number and nature of wide range activities, and importantly the existence of significant external factors that can influence the development and vitality of OLMC. External factors are over and beyond the control of contribution agreement signatories.
4.  Evaluation findings
4.1  Alignement of objectives and activities
The first evaluation question aimed to confirm whether objectives and activities carried out by contribution agreement signatories in 2014 to 2015 and 2015 to 2016 continue to be aligned with the Enabling Fund’s objectives and eligible activities.
Figure 1 demonstrates that the stated objectives of the five selected organizations, outlined in their 2014 to 2017 contribution agreements, are aligned with the objectives of the Enabling Fund. These objectives are centered on capacity building, community economic development and human resources development.
Figure 1: Enabling Fund Objectives Compared to those of the Five Selected Organizations


Text description of Figure 1
Figure 1 presents the objective of the Enabling Fund program and the objectives of each contribution agreement signatory.
There are six boxes that present these objectives. The first box presents the objective of the Enabling Fund program, the second box presents the three objectives of CDEM Manitoba, the third box presents the six objectives of CDETNO Northwest Territories, the fourth box presents the four objectives of RDEE Prince Edward Island, the fifth box presents the three objectives of RDEE Ontario and the sixth box presents the four objectives of CEDEC Quebec.
Enabling Fund objectives:
Enhancing the development and vitality of OLMC by strengthening community capacity and promoting partnerships in the areas of human resources and community economic development.
CDEM Manitoba:

Improve the required skills of OLMC in order to address the needs of the labour market in Manitoba.
Improve community economic development capacity by developing and implementing planning and priority setting processes as well as economically viable projects.
Stimulate the economic vitality of OLMC through entrepreneurship.

RDEE Prince Edward Island:

Offer new employment opportunities and sensitization to the labour market while enabling employers to find qualified human resources that meet labour market requirements for those under 40 years old.
Sensitize the Acadian and Francophone community in PEI of the possibility to develop new tourism products and reinforce existing products.
Sensitize employers and the francophone community on the importance of francophone immigration to PEI while strengthening the professional capacity of new French-speaking arrivals.
Improve the economic foundation of the Acadian and Francophone community in PEI.

CDETNO Northwest Territories:

Enhance the skills and capabilities of francophone organizations and entrepreneurs in terms of community economic development, human resources development, and planning.
Increase the recruitment and retention of the workforce and stimulate the creation of jobs.
Increase the skills and knowledge of job seekers, including immigrants and youth, for the local labour market and support their process so they quickly find a job and better integrate economically.
Attract businesses and investors to collaborate with the territorial government and expand the pool of potential sources for investors, entrepreneurs and skilled workers by recruiting and integrating francophone people to the NWT.
Maximize our ties as a member of RDEE Canada and develop inter-jurisdictional initiatives.
Develop and maintain effective communications in promoting activities, services and initiatives to the francophone community in the NWT, CDETNO members and partners and the business community and also strengthen the organizational structure.

RDEE Ontario:

Understanding the challenges and opportunities related to employability and economic development in OLMC. 
Fill the gaps in employability and economic development through a plan and services to satisfy supply and demand, and by equipping and improving the performance of organizations, businesses and entrepreneurs, while reducing the gap between them and the opportunities.
Building trust and collaboration among organizations, businesses, governments, and the community to foster the inclusion of all in the growth of communities.

CEDEC Quebec:

Revitalize local economies through community-based planning and project development.
Stimulate and support small business development for Quebec’s OLMC.
Strengthen and promote Quebec’s OLMC workforce to improve labour market competitiveness.
Increase CEDEC capacity to lead community economic development and human resource development in Quebec’s OLMC.
Table 1 provides an overview of key activities planned and implemented by contribution agreement signatories in relation to Enabling Fund objectives and activities that are eligible for funding. The information provided in Table 1 confirms that planned and implemented activities are aligned with the activities that are eligible for funding under the Enabling Fund. The five selected organizations did:
Contribute to human resources development in OLMC by: 

Providing training and workshops to persons with disabilities, youth and newcomers in support of labour market integration.
Gathered relevant labour market information on jobs and businesses to guide their activities.
Promoted local job openings to youth and immigrants to support retention or recruitment. 
Participated in job fairs and hosted networking events between employers and job seekers.
Encouraged and sensitized employers to hire youth and francophone immigrants.
Provided entrepreneurial training.

Contribute to community economic development by:

Supporting cooperative development and projects.
Promoting tourism projects and activities, and developing tourism products.
Promoting entrepreneurship.
Providing services to employers: business plans, marketing, recruitment, human resources tools, access to capital.
Organizing events for employers to facilitate networking. 

Contribute to community capacity building by:

Supporting the development of community plans and projects.
Supporting community organizations to build their capacity and to apply for funding.
Deliver community self-evaluations.
Developing strategic and operational plans for businesses and projects. 
Developing and managing social enterprises.
Organizations various networking events.

Maintain and develop partnerships with local economic development organizations, municipalities, federal and provincial departments, youth organizations, schools and universities as well as chambers of commerce.
4.2  Implementation of planned activities
Each contribution agreement signatory identified in its contribution agreement a list of objectives and related activities and sub-activities that were planned for the 2014 to 2017 period. In the quarterly activity reports and annual reports, organizations reported results (outputs and outcomes) by objective and activity/sub-activity identified in the contribution agreement or in a subsequent amendment. Annex C provides detailed summary tables outlining what results were reported as being achieved by contribution agreement signatories in 2014 to 2015 and 2015 to 2016.
Overall, the five organizations devoted efforts to implement the vast majority of their planned activities. Some activities were dropped or failed often due to lack of funding while others were added as opportunities arose. It is noted that some activities are:
Implemented on an ongoing basis such as services to employers and employability services provided through an entity managed by the organization itself.
Related to an event or activity carried out annually while others are related to specific events or projects.
4.3  Contribution to enhancing the development and vitality of communities
The evidence summarized in Table 1 and documented in Annex C demonstrates that activities carried out by the 5 selected organizations contribute to enhancing human resources development, community economic development, community capacity building and to strengthening partnerships.
Activities and reported results demonstrate that the contribution agreement signatories have delivered on expected outputs as outlined in the Enabling Fund logic model (see Appendix A). Consequently, contribution agreement signatories have contributed to ensure that individuals, employers and organizations involved in these activities are better informed, skilled, resourced and served as expected in the program’s immediate outcome.
Within existing limitations, there is a plausible link between the Enabling Fund activities and reported results that contribute to enhancing the development and vitality of OLMC. These limitations are related to the enabling nature of activities, the existence of important external factors and the attribution of reported results solely to efforts devoted by contribution agreement signatories:
Contribution agreement signatories were expected to diversify their funding sources so that they can carry out a wide range of diverse and relevant activities that may not be supported under the Enabling Fund. Table 2 provides an overview of the level of funding received by the five selected organizations from the Enabling Fund in comparison to all other sources. Despite being very relevant to community development and vitality, some activities reported by the selected organizations are not directly funded by the Enabling Fund (for example, integration of immigrants). 
The enabling nature of activities carried out by contribution agreement signatories requires that communities undertake further or complementary actions in order to harvest the full benefits of these activities and interventions. This is reflected in the short, medium and long term outcomes of the Enabling Fund that are presented in its logic model:

Immediate outcome: Communities are better informed, skilled, resourced and served.
Intermediate outcome: Communities make use of this increased capacity to strengthen their communities by shaping their Community Economic Development and Human Resources Development.
Ultimate outcome: Communities have sustainable economic and human resource development which contribute to inclusive local labour markets and enhanced community vitality.

External factors can also influence the development and vitality of these communities and can be over and beyond the control of contribution agreement signatories. These factors can include the economic cycle, the level of community infrastructure, socio-economic trends such as youth exodus as well as geographic location of OLMC (rural versus urban).
The document review confirmed that there are ongoing challenges with attributing reported results solely to activities carried out by contribution agreement signatories, especially since they participate in a large and diverse number of activities and initiatives with involvement from other stakeholders.
Table 2. Funding Sources for the five selected contribution agreement signatories
Sources: Audited Financial Statements submitted by the five selected contribution agreement signatories.
5.  Conclusions
The evaluation evidence presented and discussed in this report demonstrated that objectives and activities pursued and implemented by contribution agreement signatories continue to be aligned with the Enabling Fund objectives and eligible activities.
As well, implemented activities and reported results achieved by contribution agreement signatories contribute to enhancing human resources development, community economic development, community capacity building and to strengthening partnerships. Activities provided do ensure that individuals, employers and organizations involved in these activities are better informed, skilled, resourced and served.
Within existing limitations, the Enabling Fund does contribute to enhancing the development and vitality of OLMC. These limitations are related to the enabling nature of activities and to the existence of important external factors.
6.  Recommendations
A total of three recommendations emerge from the evaluation findings. They are as follows:
The quarterly activity reports are required by ESDC for the management of Grants and Contributions and allow ESDC to issue payments over the fiscal year. These activity reports can also be used to inform the extent to which contribution agreement signatories implemented planned activities. Considering the frequency of reporting, there is little added value in terms of reported results (outputs and outcomes). Annual reports can be sufficient to inform performance measurement, program reporting and evaluation activities as long as the reporting of activities and results are validated with contribution agreement signatories. Evaluation staff had to carry out additional research activities in order to understand and fully appreciate the relevance of reported activities and how they are delivered.

Recommendation 1: It is important for ESDC to consider reducing the reporting burden on contribution agreement signatories by balancing the needs between the management of contribution agreements and reporting requirements.
Recommendation 2:  It is recommended that program officials continue to carry out an annual validation exercise with contribution agreement signatories regarding their implemented activities and reported results. This is particularly important regarding verifying the number of participants and employers served, the number of individuals assisted in securing an employment, contribution to business and job creation, leveraging investments and clarifying the role played by the organizations in achieving the implementation of reported activities and results. Common definitions for outcomes of interest should be used. 

The document review confirmed that objectives and activities pursued and carried out by contribution agreement signatories continue to be aligned with the Enabling Fund objectives and activities that are eligible for funding. This is achieved by design since objectives and activities are validated by program officials at the stage of reviewing the request for funding under the Enabling Fund. The evaluation did not intend to examine the relevance of activities planned and carried out by contribution agreement signatories. However, it was difficult to understand and fully appreciate the relevance and the theory behind the provisions of some activities such engaging youth as young as 8 years old in activities such as business start-up and raising their awareness about entrepreneurship. 

Recommendation 3: It is recommended that program official continue to be involved in validating the relevance of activities carried out by contribution agreement signatories. As well, program officials should continue to encourage the sharing of lessons between all contribution agreement signatories regarding the type of activities and delivery approach.
References
Community Economic Development and Employability Corporation. Activity Reports: April-June 2014, July-September 2014, October-December 2014, January-March 2015, April-June 2015, July-September 2015, October-December 2015 and January-March 2016.
Community Economic Development and Employability Corporation. Annual Activity Report 2014 to 2015.
Conseil de développement économique des municipalités bilingues du Manitoba. Activity Reports: April-June 2014, July-September 2014, October-December 2014, January-March 2015, April-June 2015, July-September 2015, October-December 2015 and January-March 2016.
Conseil de développement économique des municipalités bilingues du Manitoba. Annual Activity Report 2014 to 2015.
Conseil de développement économique des Territoires du Nord-Ouest. Activity Reports: April-June 2014, July-September 2014, October-December 2014, January-March 2015, April-June 2015, July-September 2015, October-December 2015 and January-March 2016.
Conseil de développement économique des Territoires du Nord-Ouest. Annual Activity Report 2014 to 2015.
Employment and Social Development Canada. Enabling Fund for Official Language Minority Communities Funding Agreement with Community Economic Development and Employability Corporation: 2014 to 2017. April 2014.
Employment and Social Development Canada. Enabling Fund for Official Language Minority Communities Funding Agreement with Conseil de développement économique des municipalités bilingues du Manitoba: 2014 to 2017. April 2014.
Employment and Social Development Canada. Enabling Fund for Official Language Minority Communities Funding Agreement with Conseil de développement économique des Territoires du Nord-Ouest: 2014 to 2017. April 2014.
Employment and Social Development Canada. Enabling Fund for Official Language Minority Communities Funding Agreement with RDEE Ontario: 2014 to 2017. April 2014.
Employment and Social Development Canada. Enabling Fund for Official Language Minority Communities Funding Agreement with RDEE Île-du-Prince-Édouard: 2014 to 2017. April 2014.
Employment and Social Development Canada. Enabling Fund Performance Measurement Strategy, Skills and Employment Branch. October 2014.
RDEE Île-du-Prince-Édouard. Activity Reports: April-June 2014, July-September 2014, October-December 2014, January-March 2015, April-June 2015, July-September 2015, October-December 2015 and January-March 2016.
RDEE Île-du-Prince-Édouard. Annual Activity Report 2014 to 2015.
RDEE Ontario. Activity Reports: April-June 2014, July-September 2014, October-December 2014, January-March 2015, April-June 2015, July-September 2015, October-December 2015 and January-March 2016.
RDEE Ontario. Annual Activity Report 2014 to 2015.
Appendix A – Logic model
Figure 2: Logic model


Text description of Figure 2
Appendix A includes a flow chart that illustrates the logic model of the Enabling Fund program.
There are seven rows. From top to bottom, the first row presents inputs, the second row presents activities of contribution agreement signatories and the third row presents the three outputs of the contribution agreement signatories (products, engagement and services). The fourth row presents the immediate outcome, the fifth row presents the intermediate outcome, the sixth row presents the ultimate outcome and seventh row presents the ESDC strategic outcome.
Inputs
Enabling Fund resources made available to support recipient organization’s activities: Contribution funding; Secretariat services for the Network for Economic Action; and expertise in Community Economic Development and Human Resources Development.
Contribution agreements signatories' activities and outputs
Recipient organizations lead, coordinate and/or support community economic development and human resource development in-line with Official Language Minority Communities priorities.
Products (plans, reports, studies, tools)
Engagement (committees, meetings, learning events)
Services (guidance, expertise, training, supports to job seekers)
Immediate outcome
Communities are better informed, skilled, resourced and served.
Intermediate outcome
Communities make use of this increased capacity to strengthen their communities by shaping their Community Economic Development and Human Resources Development.
Ultimate outcome
Communities have sustainable economic and human resource development which contribute to inclusive local labour markets and enhanced community vitality.
ESDC strategic outcome
A skilled, adaptable, inclusive labour force and an efficient labour market.
Appendix B – List of contribution agreements signatories
Appendix C – Objectives, activities and reported results for 2014 to 2015, and 2015 to 2016
