List of abbreviations
CAG

Canada Access  Grant

CESP

Canada  Education Savings Program

CMSF

Canada  Millennium Scholarship Foundation

CSG 

Canada  Student Grant

CSG-FTDEP

Canada  Student Grant for Full-Time Students with Dependents

CSG-LI

Canada  Student Grant for Students from Low-Income Families

CSG-MI

Canada  Student Grant for Students from Middle-Income Families

CSG-PD

Canada Student  Grant for Students with Permanent Disabilities

CSG-PT

Canada Student Grant for Part-Time Studies

CSG-PTDEP

Canada  Student Grant for Part-Time Students with Dependents

CSG-PDSE

Canada  Student Grant for Services and Equipment for Students with Permanent Disabilities

CSGP

Canada  Student Grant Program

CSLP

Canada  Student Loans Program

DRR

Debt  Reduction in Repayment 

ESDC

Employment  and Social Development Canada

IR

Interest  Relief 

LAD

Longitudinal  Administrative Databank

NSLSC

National  Student Loans Service Centre

PSE

Post-Secondary  Education

RAP

Repayment  Assistance Plan

RESP

Registered  Education Savings Plan
Executive summary
This  summative evaluation examines the effectiveness of the Canada Student Loans  Program (CSLP) enhancements introduced in Budget 2008 – specifically the new  consolidated Canada Student Grant Program (CSGP), the Repayment Assistance Plan  (or RAP – which replaced repayment assistance offered under the previous  Interest Relief and Debt Reduction in Repayment provisions), and enhancements  to loan access for part-time and married/common-law students.    The CSLP was  created in 1964 to promote access to post-secondary education (PSE) and is  financed and administered by the Government of Canada. The mandate of the CSLP is to promote  accessibility to post-secondary education for students with demonstrated  financial need.  The CSLP lowers  financial barriers through the provision of loans and grants which help ensure  that Canadians have an opportunity to develop their knowledge and skills to  participate in the economy and in society.   Student loans are provided directly by the federal government with a  60/40 federal/provincial cost-sharing arrangement with participating provinces.
This report  summarizes the evidence collected from eleven studies prepared specifically for  this evaluation (see Appendix 2).  Many  other studies were also used to complement these findings (see Appendix 3).  Preliminary findings from an interim  evaluation related to the implementation of the enhancements were published in  2015.
It is  important to emphasize that the full impacts of the RAP require a longer  timeframe to evaluate, as a student can receive assistance under the RAP for up  to 15 years.  Thus, the findings  presented in this report can only provide preliminary evidence.
Main findings
Enhancements relevance
To what extent are the CSLP  enhancements responsive to the needs of students?
Focus group  participants aware of the CSLP enhancements introduced in Budget 2008 for  part-time/married students perceived the enhancements to be valuable.  Similarly, those who were aware of the RAP  (the new repayment assistance measures) perceived it as being easier to apply  for and more flexible than the previous provisions.
Regarding the  CSGP, key informants in general agreed that it is important to offer grants  alongside student loans.  Grants help  make PSE more accessible for disadvantaged students such as students from lower  income families, students with children and those with disabilities.  The literature suggested a need exists to  help students overcome financial barriers, to help debt-averse students, for  equity/societal reasons, and because they may be more effective than  tax-related measures.  Further, a survey  of grant recipients indicated that 17.6% would not have continued with their  studies if student grants were eliminated immediately and replaced by student  loans, with lower income students being more likely not to continue.
CSGP disbursement and costs
What are the annual program costs and  administrative costs of the CSGP?
After the  introduction of the CSGP in the 2008-09 loan year, annual program costs (as  measured by the total amount disbursed through grants and bursaries – including  those under the former Canada Millennium Scholarship Foundation (CMSF))  increased from $421.2 million to $593.4 million in 2009-10, and to $715.3  million in 2013-14.  The number of grants  and bursaries disbursed increased almost every year between 2000-01 and  2013-14, with a major increase of roughly 180,000 after the implementation of  the CSGP.
Administrative  costs (including those related to the CMSF) increased from $42.8 million in  2008-09 to $53.0 million in 2013-14.  As  a percentage of annual program costs, administrative costs dropped from 10.0%  to 7.3% over this period.
Impact of CSGP on CSLP
What has been the impact of the CSGP  on student needs for the CSLP?
The  introduction of the CSGP was expected to lower loan disbursements by $213.4  million between 2008-09 and 2009-10.   However, little change in loan disbursements was seen ($2.08 billion in  both 2008-09 and 2009-10), but the number of students accessing student loans  increased by over 36,000.  This increase  could have been driven by a number of factors, including the introduction of  the CSGP and/or the 2008 financial crisis, the latter of which may have  compelled some to return to school – increasing the need for student  loans.  Given that for most students the  CSGP grant amounts reduce the portion of financial assessed need covered by  loans, it was estimated that the reduction in student loan amounts due to the  CSGP was in the range of 11.5% to 17.0%.   Further, statistical estimation analyses showed that student loan  indebtedness levels at consolidation (the sum of all federal loan  disbursements) were lower after the introduction of the CSGP.  In the future, it is expected that the  increasing use of Registered Education Savings Plans (RESPs) will also lead to  lower student loan indebtedness levels.
Impact of CSGP on PSE access and persistence
Has the CSGP led to an increase in PSE  access rates or in PSE persistence rates for the targeted groups?
Evidence  collected for the CSG for students from low-income families and the CSG for  students from middle-income families did not reveal an impact on PSE  participation of either grant.  However,  from a more personal perspective, a survey of grant recipients suggested that  those in receipt of the low-income grant were more likely to indicate that they  would not have continued with their studies in the absence of the grant.  One possible factor related to the lack of  impact on PSE participation was the corresponding reduction in student loan  amounts caused by the grant amounts and, hence, overall student financial aid  remaining constant in most cases.  Other  potential factors that could have contributed to the lack of impact are the  size of the grants relative to PSE costs and/or awareness issues.  Further, the literature review suggested that  if an existing student aid program switches from providing primarily loans to  providing primarily grants or a combination of loans and grants, then there  appears to be no statistically significant enrolment response except among  low-income students.  This last point  could be an indication that the CSGP is an appropriate means for assisting  Canadian families who struggle with the cost of higher education.
Although the  literature indicated mixed effects of grants on PSE persistence, no strong  evidence was found of a correlation between CSGP eligibility (for the two  grants noted above) and a student remaining in school longer.  It was again suggested that this finding was  due to total student financial aid remaining constant (i.e. in most cases,  little to no increase in overall financial liquidity).
Loan access – Part-time and married/common-law students
To what extent has there been an  improvement in loan access for part-time students and for married students or  students in common-law relationships?
Budget 2008  increased the maximum annual part-time student loan from $4,000 to  $10,000.  Following this change, there  was a significant annual increase in the number of part-time student loan  borrowers (rising from 1,425 in 2008-09 to 11,254 in 2013-14).  It was estimated that 80.2% of the increase  was related to the Budget 2008 change.   Nevertheless, only about 1% of all part-time students access student  loans.
Budget 2008  also announced a reduction in spousal contributions (from 80% to 70% of a  spouse’s/partner’s disposable in-study income) to narrow the gap between  contributions from spouses and parents of students.  Although there was a 35% increase between  2008-09 and 2013-14 in the number of married/common-law student loan borrowers,  this increase was identical to that for single students and was correlated with  other factors such as the overall increase in the number of full-time  married/common-law PSE students.  Many  key informants indicated that the decrease was insufficient.
Repayment Assistance Plan (RAP)
To what extent has the RAP made it  easier for students to manage their loan debt?
The RAP was  perceived by key informants and some focus group participants as a positive  change, with the number of borrowers benefitting from repayment assistance  measures increasing from 132,574 in 2008-09 to 160,572 in 2009-10 after the  introduction of the RAP.  Although the  new parameters (e.g. affordable payments) can explain a portion of the increase  in the number of beneficiaries, the impact of the 2008 financial crisis and  resulting recession cannot be underestimated, as it negatively impacted  employment outcomes for youth, making it more difficult for them to repay their  student loans.  The cost of loan  repayment assistance decreased from $97.3 million in 2008-09 to $73.1 million  in 2009-10, but eventually increased to $167.5 million in 2013-14.
Overall, the  introduction of the RAP showed little impact on the repayment of loans compared  to repayment under the old provisions.   However, the full impact of the RAP had not yet been fully realized by  2013-14, and it is important to note that the recession likely had a tangible  impact on loan repayment.
Awareness
To what extent are eligible students  aware of the different measures?
Focus  groups participants indicated that the canlearn.ca website has had minimal  impact on their awareness of the RAP, since there was confusion between the  canlearn.ca website and the National Student Loans Service Centre (NSLSC) website.  However, among those who used the canlearn.ca  website, there was a strong appreciation of the tools and a deeper  understanding of the RAP than those who had not visited the website.
The CSGP  survey conducted for the evaluation indicated that 39% of grant recipients were  aware that they would qualify for a grant at the time of applying for a student  loan and 30% knew of the variety of grants available when they first  applied.  Among those who were aware that  they would qualify for a grant, 72% found that the eligibility criteria were  clear at the time they applied for a loan.
Recommendations
Consider  revising the formula used to calculate student loan repayment (e.g. basing  repayment on net income instead of gross income) so that it is equitable for  students in different circumstances.   However, further analysis of the RAP may be required before implementing  any major changes, given that the RAP has not yet fully matured.
Continue  to use the CSGP to target disadvantaged students and consider increasing the  CSG amount and expanding CSG eligibility for lower income students to help  reduce debt and provide extra liquidity to improve their PSE access and  persistence.
Further  improve student loan access for married and common-law students, as the Budget  2008 changes were noted to have been insufficient and were shown to have not  had any impact on loan access.
Promote  awareness of the information on the canlearn.ca website, as those who used the  site found it to be of great benefit.  In  doing so, further awareness and understanding of the CSGP would also be  enhanced for prospective PSE students.
Management response
Introduction
The  Government of Canada is committed to enabling Canadians’ access to  post-secondary education (PSE).  Through  the Canada Student Loans Program (CSLP), loans and grants are provided to  eligible Canadians pursuing a post-secondary degree, diploma or certificate  program at a designated educational institution.
The CSLP  works in partnership with ten participating provincial and territorial  governments and a third party service provider to deliver student financial  assistance across the country.  Within  this extensive and complex operating environment, the Program and its partners  have developed a successful relationship underpinned by a joint commitment to  providing student financial assistance.
Announced in  Budget 2008, the Government of Canada has taken action to increase the  financial resources available to Canadian students and their families through  three measures:
The  Canada Student Grants Program (CGSP), which provides low- and middle-income  students with consistent and up-front funding to help pay for PSE
The  Repayment Assistance Plan (RAP), which assists borrowers who are having  difficulty repaying their loans in managing their debt by paying back what they  can reasonably afford; and 
The  Repayment Assistance Plan for Borrowers with a Permanent Disability (RAP-PD),  which assists borrowers who are having difficulty repaying their loans by  making it easier to manage their debt by paying back what they can reasonably  afford
The Program  is currently in the process of negotiating a new service provider contract to  provide financial and related administrative services for the CSLP, as the  current one is set to expire in March 2018.   This new contract includes the requirement for a dynamic service  delivery model which utilizes a client-centric, modern, technologically  advanced solution to ensure client satisfaction by providing clients and  stakeholders with user-friendly access to services through online delivery  channels and using streamlined paperless processes.
Moving  forward, Budget 2016 proposes a package of reforms to the CSLP that will make  PSE more affordable for students from low- and middle-income families and  ensure that student debt loads are manageable.   These measures will also simplify the application process for student  financial assistance, making the CSLP more transparent and predictable.
Recommendations
The  CSLP has considered the main findings of this evaluation and is pleased to  present the following management response to the specific recommendations in  the report.  The CSLP within the Learning  Branch of ESDC has responsibility for the proposed actions.
Recommendation 1
Consider  revising the formula used to calculate student loan repayment (e.g. basing  repayment on net income instead of gross income) so that it is equitable for  students in different circumstances.   However, it is understood that further evaluation of the RAP is required  before implementing any major changes.
As part of  Budget 2016, changes will be made to the RAP income thresholds to ensure that  no borrower with student loans will be required to make any repayment until  they are earning at least $25,000 per year (beginning in 2016-2017).  This change will make student debt more  manageable.  The Program is mindful of  the recommendation to consider basing repayment on net income instead of gross  income so that it is equitable for students in different circumstances;  however, such major changes to the program design elements need to be informed  by further evidence in order to ensure a balance of program design with costs  and simplicity of program operations.   The CSLP strives to ensure the equitability and simplicity of use of the  RAP and will continue to monitor uptake to ensure this debt management benefit  fulfills its purpose.
With respect  to fluctuating wages, it is the Program’s view that the RAP is sufficiently  responsive to a borrower’s changing financial situation.  RAP eligibility is assessed based on the  applicant’s most recent monthly income.   If an applicant is assessed as being able to make an Affordable Payment,  and their income drops during their six-month RAP term, the applicant can ask  for a re-assessment of their RAP application.   This re-assessment would take the new income into account, and if  eligible, the borrower’s Affordable Payment would be adjusted.  Furthermore, if a borrower is ineligible for  the RAP when they apply, but their financial situation changes in the future,  they can re-apply and have their eligibility re-assessed.  In lieu of revising the formula to account  for fluctuating wages, steps could be taken to better inform applicants about  the re-assessment process within the RAP.
Recommendation  2
Continue to  use the CSGP to target disadvantaged students and consider increasing the CSG  amount and expanding CSG eligibility for lower income students to help reduce  debt and provide extra liquidity to improve their PSE access and persistence.
Canada  Student Grants provide targeted, up-front, non-repayable financial assistance  to PSE students from low- and middle-income families, students with dependants  and students with disabilities.  The  grants are flat amounts that count towards the assessed need of students.  Therefore, depending upon a student’s level  of assessed need, the grants can contribute to the reduction of loan  disbursement and amount of repayable student debt; it may also provide extra  financial liquidity to the student.
As part of  Budget 2016, grant amounts will be increased by 50% for the 2016-2017 academic  year to ensure that students receive help that reflects the rising costs of  PSE.  Additionally, the Program will work  with the provinces and territories to expand eligibility thresholds for grants  starting in 2017-2018, so that even more students can receive non-repayable  assistance.
The Program  agrees with the report’s conclusion that the CSGP leads to a lower debt  amount.  This is consistent with the  policy intent of the CSGP.  Although  currently there is no evidence to indicate that the CSGP has a positive impact  on PSE access, this could be due to the fact that the amount of the grants (up  to $2,000 for CSG-LI recipients) may still not be sufficient to create a  financial incentive for under-represented groups to overcome the barriers to  PSE participation.  It is the Program’s  view that enhancing grants could further improve PSE access.  The recommendations from this evaluation will  serve to inform the changes in CSGs.
Recommendation  3
Further  improve student loan access for married and common-law students, as the Budget  2008 changes were noted to have been insufficient and were shown to have not  had any impact on loan access.
Currently,  students and parents are expected to contribute to the student’s education from  income earned during their study periods.   Parental contributions are assessed by determining the amount of  discretionary income by subtracting the Moderate Standard Of Living cost from  after-tax income.  For married and  common-law students, the spouses and partners are also expected to make a  contribution.  As part of Budget 2008,  the requirement for spousal contributions was reduced from 80% to 70% of a  spouse’s/partner’s disposable in-study income to narrow the gap between  contributions from spouses and parents of students.  Contributions for all groups of students are  comparable to an objective standard rather than to each other.
Budget 2016  proposes to introduce a flat-rate student contribution to determine eligibility  for Canada Student Loans and Grants to replace the current system of assessing  student income and financial assets.   This change would allow students to work and gain valuable labour market  experience without having to worry about a reduction in their level of  financial assistance.  It would also  benefit adult learners, many of whom may work while studying or have significant  financial assets. The Program will be working collaboratively with provinces  and territories to finalize the flat-rate contribution model for 2017–2018  academic year.
The Program  recognizes that more could be done to improve access for married and common-law  students.  Treatment of married and  common-law students and spousal income within the flat-rate design will be a  focal point for discussions with provincial/territorial partners, to ensure the  eligibility assessment remains transparent and predictable for all borrowers.
Recommendation  4
Promote  awareness of the canlearn.ca website, as those who used it found it to be of  great benefit.  In doing so, further  awareness and understanding of the CSGP would also be enhanced for prospective  PSE students.
The program  recognizes that the content of canlearn.ca proved valuable to those who use it  and wants to find ways to make it more accessible for students.  All correspondence to borrowers from the  National Student Loan Service Centre (NSLSC) referred to canlearn.ca for  further information on student loans and grants.  Additionally, web searches for the NSLSC  website automatically directed individuals to canlearn.ca.  As of January 18, 2016, the content of  canlearn.ca has migrated to Canada.ca. This content currently offers a number of interactive tools that help  students save, plan, and pay for PSE.   The CSLP will continue to work with partners to promote and increase use  of the content, which can now be found on Canada.ca.  As part of the transition to the new service  provider contract, the Program is looking at ways to enhance borrower  communications and promote awareness of program offerings.  The new communication strategy will also  include references to the content formerly found on canlearn.ca.
Conclusion
ESDC  is committed to ensuring that the CSLP is fully responsive to the needs of  Canada's post-secondary students, and will continue to explore ways to improve  and enhance the design and delivery of the Program in collaboration with  partners and stakeholders.  The findings  and recommendations of this evaluation will inform and support that work and  contribute to a more effective and efficient program for the future.
1. Introduction
Budget  2008 included a number of enhancements to the Canada Student Loans Program  (CSLP) and a new consolidated Canada Student Grant Program (CSGP).  Among the CSLP enhancements were new measures  to enhance student loan access for married/common-law and part-time students;  improving the responsiveness of student loan repayment via the new Repayment  Assistance Plan (RAP); and modernizing service delivery through improved online  services, simplified application and repayment processes, and improved  communications with students.
Although the  intention was to have the majority of these CSLP enhancements and the CSGP  implemented shortly on or after August 1, 2009, there were initial  (intentional) delays in implementing the service delivery vision.  A 2014 evaluation examined these delays and  reported on the implementation status of the different enhancements, with a  focus on the modernization of service delivery.
This  evaluation report focuses on the extent to which the CSGP has increased  post-secondary education (PSE) access and persistence and also examines various  evaluation questions (see Appendix 1) surrounding the RAP and student loan  access for married/common-law and part-time students.  Ten separate lines of evidence were developed  specifically for this evaluation (see Appendix 2).
1.1 Methodology and limitations
An  evaluation framework for the Summative  Evaluation of the Budget 2008 CSLP Enhancements was developed and it  defines the scope of the overall evaluation of the new measures.  A methodology document was also developed and  provides details of the evaluation questions and the lines of evidence used to  address them (see Appendix 2).  It should  be noted that the structure of the evaluation questions was based on the April  2009 Treasury Board Secretariat Policy on Evaluation.
Furthermore,  an Evaluability Assessment report for the Summative  Evaluation of the Budget 2008 CSLP Enhancements was also developed to  ensure that the evaluation questions could be answered with the proposed  methodology.  The Evaluability Assessment  determined that there were three key risks for the summative evaluation:
(i)  slow implementation of the CSLP enhancements that would prohibit a thorough  evaluation of their impacts by the completed evaluation deadline of March 2016
(ii) gaining access to a linked Longitudinal Administrative Databank (LAD),  Canada Education Savings Program (CESP) and CSLP file from Statistics Canada in  a timely manner; and 
(iii) having an appropriate methodology in place for  measuring the impact of the CSGP on post-secondary education (PSE) access and  persistence that is suitable for the available data
The first and  third potential risks identified above have been addressed and are no longer  outstanding risks.  However, the second  risk (i.e. gaining access to a linked LAD-CESP-CSLP file) did in fact occur and  the evaluation was not able to access an income-based file (including an  attempt to access a linked file containing Canada Revenue Agency T1 income tax  data and CSLP administrative data).  As a  result, the analyses pertaining to the impact of the CSGP on PSE access and  persistence had to rely on an unlinked LAD file which used a proxy for receipt  of the Canada Student Grant (CSG).  This  represents a major limitation of this evaluation.
Another  limitation is the absence of reliable microdata on Canada Study Grants prior to  2009-10, which has affected the ability to precisely determine the impact of  the CSGP on indebtedness levels compared to the impact of grants and bursaries  available prior to 2009-10.
Finally, to  adequately measure the full impact of the RAP on student loan repayment  requires additional years of data, as a student can receive assistance under  the RAP for up to 15 years.  Thus, the  analysis presented here only provides evidence on the early impacts of the RAP.
2. Background
This  section describes the rationale behind the Budget 2008 changes and details the  specific CSLP enhancements that were announced. The overall rationale for the changes introduced in 2008 stems from Advantage  Canada, where the government committed to making federal student financial assistance  more effective. As  noted on page 113 in Budget 2008, “The  combination of the new Canada Student Grant Program and measures to streamline  and modernize the Canada Student Loans program will contribute to Canada’s  Knowledge Advantage by helping to develop a highly-educated workforce  well-equipped to take on the challenges of a fast-paced global economy.”
2.1 Budget 2008 CSLP enhancements
Budget  2008 committed $123 million over four years (starting in 2009) to streamline  and modernize the CSLP.  The new  investments included the following three enhancements:
$23  million over four years for a new service delivery vision to expand online  services and enable students to manage their loans online from the point of  applying through to repayment.

$26  million over four years to narrow the gap between contributions from spouses  and parents of students by reducing the expected spousal contributions (from  80% to 70% of a spouse’s/partner’s disposable income while in study), and to  make federal student loans more attractive to part-time students.  The specific measures that were implemented  for part-time students included the ability to defer payments on the loan  principal and accumulated interest until six months after studies are completed  and an increase in the maximum loan amount available (from $4,000 to $10,000).
$74  million over four years to make the CSLP more responsive to the economic  circumstances of borrowers, including those with permanent disabilities, by  providing greater assistance for those experiencing difficulty in repaying  their loans – known as the Repayment Assistance Plan or RAP.
RAP  eligibility is based on a student loan borrower’s family income, family size,  and outstanding loan balance.  Borrowers  are approved for a period of six months and have the option to re-apply at the  end of each six-month period.
The RAP  consists of two stages.  During Stage 1,  student loan borrowers who qualify make affordable payments (which may be zero  payment for some borrowers) toward their loan principal.  Paying the loan principal first reduces the  total debt.  The government covers the  interest amount owing that the borrower’s calculated affordable payment does  not cover and borrower payments do not exceed 20% of personal income.
If a borrower  requires further assistance after having received 60 months of RAP assistance  during Stage 1, or has been in repayment for 10 years, the borrower may qualify  for Stage 2, where the government continues to cover interest payments and  begins to also cover the principal of the loan not met by the borrower’s  affordable payment.  The balance of the  loan is gradually paid off so that no student loan debt remains after 15 years.
There is also  a feature in the RAP for student loan borrowers with a permanent  disability.  In order to qualify,  borrowers have to meet the eligibility criteria which are based on family  income, family size, permanent disability status, disability-related expenses,  and outstanding student loan balance.   For this group, assistance with loan repayment ensures that no student  loan debt remains after 10 years.
2.2 Canada Student Grant Program
In  addition to the above enhancements, the federal government announced that “all  federal grants will be integrated into one program that will provide more  effective support to more students for more years of study, assisting Canadian  families who struggle with the cost of higher education.” Therefore,  the CSGP replaces Canada Study Grants, Canada Access Grants and  grants/bursaries previously offered by the Canada Millennium Scholarship  Foundation (CMSF).
It was noted  that “Budget 2008 invests $350 million in 2009–10, rising to $400 million in  2010–11, $415 million in 2011–12 and $430 million in 2012–13.  The Canada Student Grant Program will  consolidate this funding with approximately $138 million in annual investments  currently provided through the patchwork of existing federal grants that go to  students eligible for Canada Student Loans.”
The CSGP is  aimed at increasing PSE participation and completion rates – particularly of  under-represented groups (e.g. students from lower-income families, students  with permanent disabilities, and students with dependents) – so that much needed  talent and energy can be engaged in Canada’s future.  The CSGP was designed so that students know  up front how much money they will receive and when they will receive payments –  a significant departure from the previous, less predictable granting system.  The eligibility criteria for the new grants  better reflects the particular financial circumstances facing the borrower  (i.e. family income, months of study, number of dependants under the age of 12,  etc.).  Students’ eligibility for a CSG  is assessed at the time the student applies for student financial assistance  using the same application.  To be  eligible for a grant, a student must have at least $1 of assessed need.  If an individual is eligible for more than  one grant, he/she can receive more than one grant at the same time.
Canada  Student Grants for full-time students
Grant  for Students from Low-Income Families (CSG-LI): if a student is from a  low-income family and qualifies for a full-time Canada Student Loan, he/she may  qualify to receive $250/month (half at the start of the year and half midway  through).  This grant is available for  all years of undergraduate university, college or trade school programs,  provided the entire program is a minimum of 60 weeks in length.
Grant  for Students from Middle-Income Families (CSG-MI): if a student is from a  middle-income family and qualifies for a full-time Canada Student Loan, he/she  may qualify to receive $100 per month of study.   This grant is available for all years of undergraduate university, college  or trade school programs, provided the entire program is a minimum of 60 weeks  in length.
Grant  for Full-Time Students with Dependants (CSG-FTDEP): if a student is from a  low-income family, qualifies for a full-time Canada Student Loan, and has  children under the age of 12 as of the start of the study period, he/she may be  eligible to receive $200 per month for each child.
Grant  for Students with Permanent Disabilities (CSG-PD): if a student has a permanent  disability as defined in the Student Financial Aid regulations and qualifies  for a full- or part-time Canada Student Loan, he/she may receive $2,000 per  academic year to help cover the costs of accommodation, tuition and books.
Grant  for Services and Equipment for Students with Permanent Disabilities (CSG-PDSE):  if a student is eligible for the CSG-PD and has a permanent disability which  requires exceptional education-related costs for things such as tutors,  note-takers, interpreters, brail assistance or technical aids, he/she may  receive up to $8,000 per academic year to help pay for these expenses.
Canada  Student Grants for part-time students
Grant  for Part-Time Studies (CSG-PT): if a student is a part-time student, qualifies  for a part-time Canada Student Loan and is from a low-income family, he/she may  be eligible for up to $1,200 per academic year.
Grant  for Part-Time Students with Dependants (CSG-PTDEP): if a student qualifies for  a CSG-PT and has up to two children under the age of 12 as of the start of the  study period, he/she may be eligible for $40 per week of study ($60 per week  for those with three or more children under the age of 12).
Furthermore,  following the introduction of the CSGP and the announcement that the “CMSF would close at the end of the 2008-2009  loan year”, transition  grants were also introduced for bursary and award recipients to ensure that  each student continued to receive the same level of funding for the duration of  their current PSE program as was the case under the CMSF.
3. Relevance of CSLP  enhancements and Canada Student Grant Program
In order to  address the relevance of the CSLP enhancements and CSGP, the following  evaluation questions are addressed in this section:
To  what extent are the CSLP enhancements responsive to the needs of students?
Is  there a need to offer student grants alongside student loans?
Do  the objectives of the different measures align with federal government and  Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC) priorities?
What  is the role and responsibility for the federal government in delivering the  CSLP/CSGP?
3.1 Responsiveness of CSLP enhancements
Most  focus group participants indicated that they would not have been able to afford  tuition and/or student living expenses without the CSLP, showing the importance  of the program.  Those aware of the CSLP  enhancements introduced in Budget 2008 for part-time/married students perceived  them as valuable, although awareness was not very widespread.  Further, with regard to the expansion of  online services, most believed the website canlearn.ca duplicated information  already available from other sources, namely provincial student loan websites  (e.g. Ontario Student Assistance Program).   However, a small number of focus group participants found the  canlearn.ca website to be valuable in terms of student loan management.
In general,  focus group participants indicated that repayment assistance measures are  helpful and some said they would have defaulted without them.  Among focus group participants who were aware  of the RAP (the new repayment assistance measures), the RAP was perceived as  being easier to apply for and was considered to be more flexible than the  previous programs (Interest Relief – IR and Debt Reduction in Repayment –  DRR).  Similarly, most key informants  perceived the RAP as being a positive change for students, with several  indicating that the RAP was a good program and/or a significant improvement  over the IR and DRR provisions.
Nevertheless,  most focus group participants felt that the formula used to calculate repayment  assistance eligibility (based on gross income) should be based on net income,  as some face automatic deductions from their gross income (e.g. union dues,  health insurance, pension contributions, etc.) that others do not face.  As well, some participants felt that the  repayment system was not responsive to those with fluctuating wages, due to a  requirement to estimate wages for the next three months (which also affects  borrowers who are paid every two weeks).   However, borrowers who experienced a job loss or more extreme situations  (e.g. car accident) found the RAP responsive to their needs.
3.2 Need for Student Grants
Key  informants in general agreed that it is important to offer student grants  alongside student loans because grants help make PSE more accessible for disadvantaged  students such as students from lower income families and those with  disabilities.  The literature suggests a  need exists for the Canadian government to offer student grants alongside  student loans to help students overcome financial barriers; to help debt-averse students (particularly lower income students); for  equity reasons (e.g. for low-income students or those with disabilities); for  societal reasons (e.g. return to society from education is higher than it is  for individuals); and because they may be more effective than current tax-related measures, which  tend to mainly benefit higher income families.
The CSGP  survey indicated that 17.6% of CSG recipients would not have continued with  their studies if student grants were eliminated immediately and replaced by  student loans.  Of the 82.4% who would  have continued, approximately 20% would have changed at least one of their  enrolment decisions. For example, some said that they would have worked while in school and/or worked  more hours, while others would have taken fewer courses and/or enrolled  part-time instead of full-time.  A  statistical analysis indicated that those receiving the CSG-LI were more likely  to indicate that they would not have continued with their studies if it were  not for the financial assistance received from the CSG-LI.
3.3 Alignment with federal government priorities
The  CSLP enhancements and the CSGP are clearly aligned with federal government and  ESDC priorities.  Federal budgets and  public statements made since Budget 2008 indicate they remain priorities, as  additional enhancements continue to be made:
Budget  2011 announced a number of changes, including:

Helping  full-time students to earn more money by doubling the in-study income exemption  from $50 per week to $100 per week
Allowing  part-time students to have higher family incomes without affecting their  eligibility for a student loan
Increasing  the income eligibility threshold for part-time students used to determine  eligibility for the CSG to align it with the threshold for full-time students  from low-income families
Reducing  the in-study interest rate for part-time students from prime plus 2.5 per cent  to zero, bringing them in line with full-time students
Starting  in 2012-13, forgiving a portion of the federal component of Canada Student  Loans for new family physicians, nurses and nurse practitioners who agree to  work in under-served rural and remote communities



Budget  2014 eliminated the value of student-owned vehicles from the needs assessment  process.  More than 19,000 student loan  borrowers who own vehicles will benefit from higher loan disbursements, for an  estimated annual cost of $7.8 million
The 2015  Mandate Letter of the Minister of Employment, Workforce Development and Labour  further noted that working with provinces and territories to make PSE more  affordable for students from low- and middle-income families was a top  priority.  This included expanding the  CSG-LI and increasing the income threshold for eligibility and making changes  to the income thresholds in the RAP (the new repayment assistance measures) to  ensure that no graduate with student loans will be required to make any  repayment until they are earning at least $25,000 per year.  Further, the 2015 Mandate Letter of the  Minister of Finance indicated a top priority of supporting the Minister of  Employment, Workforce Development and Labour in delivering on the plan to make  PSE more affordable for students from low- and middle-income families.
Finally, ESDC  reiterated the importance of the CSLP/CSGP on page 66 in the 2015-16 Report on  Plans and Priorities, specifically that the learning program (which includes  the CSLP and CSGP), “…helps Canadians  participate in post-secondary education to acquire the skills and credentials  that enable them to improve their labour market outcomes and adapt to changing  labour market conditions.  It reduces  barriers to education by providing financial assistance to students…”
3.4 Delivering the CSLP/CSGP
The  Government of Canada works in partnership with participating provincial and  territorial governments to deliver student financial assistance to Canadian  students. Applicants for federal and provincial loans  and grants are assessed through a single application process.  For students receiving loan funding for  full-time studies, roughly 60% is funded by the CSLP and 40% by  provincial or territorial student loan programs. Based on evidence collected for the 2011 CSLP  summative evaluation, it was clearly demonstrated that there was a need for a  federal program designed to facilitate equality in PSE access across the  country.
Furthermore,  the Government of Canada and five participating provinces have signed  integration agreements (covering more than 80% of student loan borrowers) to  ensure that the federal and provincial student loan programs operate with a  common set of rules, principles and assistance measures, so that students  receive financial assistance as a single loan product.
The CSLP  contracts a private-sector Service Provider to manage borrower accounts, which  operates under the name “National Student Loans Service Centre” or NSLSC.  The NSLSC is the main point of contact for  borrowers in managing their loans and it serves them throughout each phase of  the loan cycle, from loan disbursement to repayment and repayment  assistance.  Borrowers in integrated  provinces deal with the NSLSC as a single point of contact for their federal  and provincial student loans.
The CSLP’s  main information dissemination tool is the canlearn.ca website, which is the  Government of Canada’s online source for information to help Canadians save,  plan and pay for their PSE.  Canlearn.ca  also links to the NSLSC website, which allows borrowers to view and monitor  details of their loans.
3.5 Summary of key findings
The CSLP enhancements were generally seen as being responsive to the needs of  students
There are  numerous reasons which justify the need to offer student grants alongside  student loans
The  Government of Canada works with provincial/territorial governments to deliver  the CSLP/CSGP and contracts a private-sector Service Provider to manage  borrower accounts
4. Canada Student Grant Program
Evaluation  questions pertaining to the CSGP are examined in this section, focussing on  three specific areas:
(i) program and administrative costs
(ii) the impact of  the CSGP on student loans and student loan debt; and 
(iii) the impact of the  CSGP on PSE access and persistence
4.1 Program and administrative costs
This  sub-section details CSGP activity and compares it with pre-CSGP financial  support (i.e. the Canada Access Grant (CAG), Canada Study Grant and CMSF).  The main questions addressed include the  following:
What  are the annual program costs of the CSGP?        
What  is the breakdown between the different grants?
How  does this compare to the annual program costs under the CAG, Canada Study Grant  and CMSF?


How  many different students received a transition grant?        
What  was the overall dollar value of all transition grants disbursed?
What  are the administrative costs for the CSGP?


What  are the administrative costs for the CSGP and how do they compare to the  administrative costs under the CAG, Canada Study Grant and CMSF?
4.1.1 Total disbursements
Table  1 compares annual CSGP costs to those under the CAG, Canada Study Grant and  CMSF.  In 2000-01, the number of  CSLP-related grants combined with CMSF grants and bursaries totalled 125,192  and amounted to $290.0 million, eventually rising to 186,604 and $421.2  million, respectively, by 2008-09. Both figures continued to increase following  CSGP implementation in 2009, with 425,860 grants and $715.3 million disbursed  in 2013-14.  It is noteworthy that there  was a particularly sizeable jump in 2009-10, coinciding with the first full  year under the CSGP.
The average  grant amount declined from $2,257 in 2008-09 to $1,616 in 2009-10, mostly due  to the more generous CMSF awards/bursaries (which averaged about $3,000 per  year) ceasing to be offered after 2008-09.   Note that since a student can receive more than one type of grant, award  or bursary at the same time, the average amount received per grant/award/bursary recipient will be higher than the average  grant amount presented in Table 1.  Using  the number of unique grant recipients provided in the CSLP Annual Reports,  Evaluation calculated that the average grant amount per grant recipient declined since the implementation of the CSGP,  from $2,010 in 2009-10 to $1,946 in 2013-14. Thus, these results confirm that the average  grant amount received per grant recipient has declined since the introduction of the CSGP.
Source: CSLP Annual Reports from 2000-01 to 2013-14 and Millennium Scholarship Annual  Reports from 2000 to 2009.   Excludes CMSF Awards and bursaries disbursed in non-CSLP  participating provinces and territories.  A loan year is equivalent  to an academic year (i.e. from August 1 to July 31).
By type of  grant delivered under the CSGP, Table A-4 in Appendix 4 indicates that three  grants started under the Canada Study Grant (the grants for Students with  Dependents, for the Accommodation of Students with Permanent Disabilities, and  for High-Need Part-Time Students) and one grant started under the CAG (the  grant for Permanent Disability) and that these continue to be provided.  Since 2009-10, the number of grants and the  amount disbursed for the CSG-FTDEP, CSG-PD, and CSG-PT have increased  significantly, mainly due to the change in eligibility parameters and the maximum  amount available per grant, while the number of grants for the CSG-PDSE has  remained relatively constant.
The CAG-LI  that was targeting first-year students from low-income families was eliminated  in 2009-10 and a new CSG-LI was introduced, which provided 238,513 grants to  students from low-income families in 2013-14 (amounting to $455.0 million)  including grants to non-first-year students.   The CSG-MI was also introduced in 2009-10, and provided 95,493 grants to  students from middle-income families in 2013-14 (amounting to $72.3 million).
The total  amount disbursed in transition grants was $52.1 million in 2009-10 (35,089  grants), $24.0 million in 2010-11 (15,884 grants), and $6.2 million in 2011-12  (4,365 grants) – the last year that transition grants were disbursed, as these  grants were only introduced “to ensure  that students would not be impacted negatively by the CMSF’s closure”, as explained in Section 2.2.
4.1.2 Administrative costs
To  examine the administrative costs of disbursing grants before and after the  CSGP, it is necessary to look at the different types of administrative costs  (i.e. the statutory administrative cost of the grants, their operating costs,  and the CMSF costs) to estimate total administrative costs over time.
Since no specific  information on the administrative costs of the Canada Study Grant, CAG and CSGP  exists, Evaluation pro-rated grant disbursements based on total CSLP  disbursements in order to determine the portion of administrative costs  attributable to grants. The technical evaluation report  related to CSGP costs estimated that statutory administrative costs (i.e.  administration fees to provinces and territories and service provider costs)  attributable to grants were $5.2 million 2008-09, rose to $14.7 million in the  year after, and increased to $19.0 million in 2013-14 (as shown in Table 2).
To calculate  the grant operating budget the Treasury Board Main Estimates (Part II) were  used.  These estimates provide  information on operating expenses based on the departmental strategic outcome  of “Learning”.  Given that the CSLP and  the related grants are part of “Learning”, Evaluation estimated the grant  operating budget assuming that the same level of dollar effort is needed to operate  all of the Learning programs.
Using the  above assumption, the estimated costs for operating the grants are estimated to  have been $4.3 million in 2004-05 and $34.0 million in 2013-14, with a  significant increase between 2008-09 and 2009-10 (as shown in Table 2).  Further, factoring in CMSF administrative  costs, Table 2 shows that total administrative costs to deliver all grants and  CMSF awards and bursaries rose from $27.6 million in 2004-05 to $53.0 million  in 2013-14, although it is important to remember that the CMSF was not administered  by the CSLP.  Total administrative costs  as a share of grant/CMSF expenditures rose from 7.4% in 2004-05 to 10.0% in  2008-09, but fell back to 7.3% by 2013-14.
Since the  CSLP is delivered through the NSLSC, meaningful delivery cost comparisons with other  ESDC programs that are not delivered by a third party are more problematic. Nonetheless, the technical evaluation  report concluded that the costs for delivering the CSGP and the other types of  non-repayable student aid were not out of line compared to other ESDC programs,  especially given the variance in the estimates for different ESDC programs.
Sources: CMSF Annual Reports  from 2000 to 2009, CSLP Annual Reports from 2000-01 to 2013-14, and Main  Estimates, Part II, Treasury Board, from 2004-05 to 2013-14.  Assumes CMSF payments were disbursed between  January and March of each year.
4.2 Impact  of CSGP on student  loans
This  section attempts to answer the following two evaluation questions:
What  has been the impact of the CSGP on student needs for the CSLP?
To  what extent has the CSGP impacted students’ overall student debt levels?
Although the  introduction of the CSGP has led to a government expenditure increase, the Main  Estimates indicated in 2009-10 that “…with  the coming into force of the new Canada Student Grant Program, it is expected  that loans disbursed will decrease by $213.4 million…” between 2008-09 and  2009-10. This point was reiterated in the 2010  CSLP Actuarial Report, which indicated that “…the percentage of students at the loan limit is projected to decrease  from 37% in 2008-09 to 33% in 2009-10 due to the new CSGP”. The reason for these projections is  that the grant amount is first applied against the assessed need, and the  remaining assessed need (if any) is covered by the loan amount, except when the  grant amount entirely covers the assessed need amount.
Looking at  the effect of the CSGP on total student loan disbursements, Table 3 indicates  that loans remained essentially unchanged at $2.08 billion between 2008-09 and  2009-2010 (contradicting the Main Estimates expected impact of a decrease of  $213.4 million).  However, the actual  number of loans disbursed increased by roughly 10% between these two years,  increasing from 365,363 to 401,734 loans disbursed.
This 10%  increase could have been driven by a number of factors.  Evidence collected in a technical report suggests that this increase was only  marginally related to an increase in the number of full-time PSE students, as  the number of full-time PSE students grew at a slower pace than the number of  student loan borrowers.  However, a  correlation was confirmed between the introduction of the CSGP and an increase  in the proportion of PSE students receiving student loans.  It is possible that the CSGP improved the  attractiveness of student loans by providing more grants for students from low-  and middle-income families.  Another  potential factor was the 2008 financial crisis, as some students may have had  to rely more on student loans than they otherwise would have due to the  contraction in the labour market and, subsequently, the inability to find a  part- or full-time job.
Source: CSLP Annual Reports from 2000-01 to 2013-14 and Statistics Canada (2013), “Tuition and Living Accommodation Costs for  Full-Time Students at Canadian Degree-Granting Institutions Survey”.
Note: * Estimates from  the CSLP administrative database for 2013-14 academic year.   ** For full-time domestic undergraduate university students in  Canada.  A loan year is equivalent to an academic year (i.e. from  August 1 to July 31).
Table 3 also  indicates that the average student loan amount (in nominal and 2008 dollars)  for full-time borrowers declined significantly after the introduction of the  CSGP and remained below pre-CSGP levels through 2013-14.  Further analyses in a technical report confirmed this by showing that most of  the increase in the number of loans disbursed was due to a large increase in  the number of small loans disbursed.  As  Table 4 shows, the number of loans disbursed with a loan amount of $2,500 or  less increased by at least 64%, while the number of loans disbursed with a loan  amount of over $5,000 declined by more than 4% between 2008-09 and  2009-10.  This effect is likely related  to the CSGP, as grant amounts reduce the need for larger loan amounts, by  reducing the portion of financial assessed need covered by loans.  Other contributing factors may have been the  outreach activities for the new CSGP and the 2008 financial crisis.  Using statistical analyses, it was estimated  that the reduction in student loan amounts due to the CSGP was in the range of  11.5% to 17.0%.
Source: CSLP administrative data.
Given  the decline in average student loan amounts, it is not surprising that the  average student loan balance at consolidation (in nominal and 2008 dollars)  declined in 2010-11 and 2011-12 (as Table 3 showed), suggesting an impact of  the CSGP. Table 3 also indicated that the  decline in average student loan amounts and student loan balances at  consolidation occurred while tuition fees continued to increase, providing  supplementary evidence that the introduction of the CSGP reduced student loan debt.
To determine  whether or not the CSGP did in fact have an impact on student loan debt,  statistical estimation analyses were completed.   Accounting for socio-demographic factors and inflation, statistical  analyses estimated that student loan indebtedness at consolidation fell by  between 4.9% and 7.0% from 2010-11 to 2013-14. This may have been partly due to the CSGP, but it is likely that other  factors (including the increased use of Registered Education Savings Plans) may have also played a role.  The statistical models also confirmed that  the increase in student loan borrowing limits in 2005-06 (from $165 to $210 per  week of study) led to an increase in debt levels at consolidation (as was  evident in Table 3).
A survey of  CSGP grant recipients conducted for the evaluation revealed that 82% of  respondents reported student loan debt (including provincial student loans)  averaging $19,521 (15% did not know how much student loan debt they had  accumulated and 3% reported no debt).   The survey also indicated that 76% did not currently owe anything in  other forms of debt (including loans from banking institutions) that were  strictly related to their studies.  Among  the other 24% the average amount owing was $3,569.
4.3 Impact  of CSGP on PSE participation  and persistence
As  noted in Section 2.2, the objective of the CSGP is to increase PSE  participation and completion rates.  To  measure whether or not this objective is being achieved, this section addresses  the following evaluation questions:
Are  grants a better way of dealing with access and persistence issues than loans  for certain types of students?
Has  the CSGP led to an increase in PSE access rates for the targeted groups?
Has  the CSGP led to an increase in PSE completion rates for the targeted groups?
How  much additional grant funding is needed in order to increase PSE  participation/completion rates by 1%?
4.3.1 PSE participation
Although  evidence collected from key informant interviews with federal/provincial  student loan representatives and academics did not suggest an optimal  combination of grants and loans for dealing with PSE access and persistence,  grants were identified as more effective in assisting low-income students.  Nevertheless, the literature review completed  for the 2011 CSLP Summative Evaluation suggested that multiple forms of student financial assistance are critical to  increasing PSE enrolment levels.
The  literature review completed specifically for this evaluation indicates that  budget/liquidity constraints impact PSE participation, especially in the  U.S.  For instance, it was determined  that increasing liquidity through student financial aid or reducing budget  constraints by $1,000 led to an increase in PSE participation rates of 3 to 4  percentage points, as noted in Dynarski (2000) and Dynarski (2003). The literature review also suggested  that if an existing student aid program switches from providing primarily loans  to providing primarily grants or a combination of loans and grants, then there  appears to be no statistically significant enrolment response except among  low-income students.  This last point  could be an indication that the CSGP is an appropriate means for assisting “Canadian families who struggle with the  cost of higher education.”
Related to this,  three studies developed for the 2011 CSLP Summative Evaluation demonstrated  that each additional $1,000 in loans increases the enrolment of students from  low-income families by a range of 0.4 to 1.0 percentage points.  It should be noted that one of the studies  did not find any grant effect on PSE participation.  However, the study indicated that “the smaller impact of grants than loans is  counter-intuitive.  It probably reflects  the fact… that in many provinces grants are subtracted from need and reduce the  amount of loans”, thereby corroborating U.S. results that switching from  loans to grants without increasing liquidity has limited impacts.
A more recent  study (Frenette 2011) estimated the impact of prospective debt load on the  probability of PSE attendance among youth using data on the CAG for low-income  youth and the Millennium Access Bursaries.  The study found no evidence that the grants helped raise PSE  enrolment.  Frenette (2012) focused on  estimating the cost reducing ability of the CSG‐LI and CSG‐MI. Unlike their predecessor (the CAG for  youth from low‐income  families) and the concurrent Millennium Access Bursaries – both of which  offered loan remissions but no additional liquidity, the CSG‐LI and CSG‐MI offer both loan remissions and  additional liquidity.  Findings indicated  that the CSG‐LI was  successful in reducing direct costs of students but had no impact on  out-of-pocket costs (the study found no impacts of the CSG-MI on either direct  costs or out-of-pocket costs). A technical report by Frenette (2015) that was developed for this  evaluation provided little to no evidence of a statistical association between  CSGP grant eligibility and PSE access.
Using a  combination of several databases aggregated at the provincial level, two models  were developed to capture the effect of loans and grants on PSE enrolment. One model indicated a statistically  significant positive effect of the total loan amount disbursed on the PSE  participation rate, showing that an increase of 1% in the total amount of loans  disbursed leads to an increase in PSE participation of between 0.119% and  0.135%.  The other model that included  total financial aid (loans and grants disbursed grouped together) suggested a  similar impact on enrolment rates, showing that an increase of 1% in total  financial aid leads to an increase of between 0.104% and 0.119% in the PSE  participation rate.  However, neither  model showed a significant impact of grants on their own, corroborating results  from previous studies.
In dollar  terms, this implies that an additional loan disbursement or total financial aid  increase of between $143 million and $162 million would lead to a 1% increase  in PSE participation, assuming an average annual loan amount disbursement equal  to the average loan disbursement between 2000-01 and 2012-13 ($1.93 billion)  and holding other factors constant.
4.3.2 PSE persistence
In  addition to the impact of the CSGP on PSE participation, the degree to which  the presence of student financial aid contributes to students remaining in  school and completing their studies is also important.  The literature review noted that students  whose financial aid package was not adequate to cover the actual cost of  studying or who accumulated high levels of debt were less likely to complete  their studies, suggesting that within a financial aid package, the non-repayable  grant component can be a key component to encourage PSE persistence.  A U.S. study showed that “need-based aid  improves retention, but that its level of effectiveness varies with need.  Specifically, grants… increase the retention  probability by 1.3 percent per $1,000, whereas subsidized loans increase the  retention probability by 4.3 percent per $1,000”.
Two other  U.S. studies (Dynarski (2008) and Scott-Clayton (2011)) found that scholarships  had a large impact on college completion. In a more recent study, Castleman and Long (2013) found that an additional  $1,000 in grant aid eligibility was associated with a 3.5 percentage point  increase in the probability of earning a bachelor’s degree within six years. As  pointed out by Frenette (2015), the grant in the Castleman and Long study did  not reduce the loan amount and, therefore, led to an increase in budget  liquidity.
Similarly, in  Canada, the study The Price of Knowledge (2009) indicated that receiving need-based student assistance in the form of  loans or grants can improve PSE persistence. Findings from another study related to the CMSF suggested that higher levels of  persistence were positively correlated with low student loan debt levels and  financial aid received in the form of grants. However, two additional studies pertaining to  the CMSF found no evidence of an increase in persistence after 2000, following  the introduction of the CSMF.
The CSGP  survey indicated that 67% of survey respondents would have continued with their  studies without any changes even if student grants no longer existed.  Another 15% would have changed an aspect of  their enrolment decision such as working while studying, studying part-time,  registering in a different program or in a different institution, and another  18% indicated they would not have continued with their studies, mainly due to  having to borrow too much money.  CSG-LI  recipients were more likely to indicate that they would not have continued with  their studies, perhaps reflecting the greater importance of grants for students  from low-income families.
Frenette  (2015) did not find any strong evidence that CSGP eligibility was related to  PSE persistence.  Evaluation also developed  several models to estimate the impact of student grants and loans on the  graduation rate. In all models, the statistical estimation analyses indicated that student  loans, grants, and total financial aid were not significantly correlated with  graduation rates.  Even when Evaluation  measured the cumulative effect of several years of financial aid receipt on  graduation rates, results again indicated no evidence of a strong correlation  between financial aid and a change in graduation rates.
4.4 Summary  of key  findings
The number and dollar value of grants disbursed increased substantially  following the introduction of the CSGP, although the average grant amount  declined
Administrative costs for delivering the CSGP appear to be in line with other  ESDC programs
The  average student loan amount for full-time borrowers declined significantly  after the introduction of the CSGP, suggesting a positive CSGP impact
Average  student loan balances at consolidation fell by between 4.9% and 7.0% between  2010-11 and 2013-14 due to the CSGP
There was  little evidence to suggest that the CSG-LI or CSG-MI led to higher PSE access  or persistence rates
5. Enhancements related to student loans
Along  with the introduction of the CSGP, the government improved the attractiveness  of student loans for married/common-law students and part-time students and  also introduced the RAP (the new repayment assistance measures) to facilitate  repayment for students facing financial hardship.  This section presents findings on loan access  for the two aforementioned groups and then examines the early effects of the  RAP on student loan repayment.
5.1 Loan access – Part-time and married/common-law students
In  this section, the following evaluation questions are addressed:
To  what extent has there been an improvement in loan access for part-time  students?
To  what extent has there been an improvement in loan access for married students  or students in common-law relationships?
Budget 2008  announced that the loan amount part-time students are eligible to receive  increased from $4,000 to $10,000 and that they no longer have to justify the  reason(s) for studying part-time.   Part-time students are also able to defer loan re-payments and  accumulated interest until after they have completed their studies. Many  of the key informants indicated that the changes made through Budget 2008 have  improved loan access for part-time students and that it has brought the  part-time program more in line with the full-time program.
As shown in  Figure 1, during the 2000-01 to 2008-09 loan years the number of part-time  student loan borrowers declined by more than 50% (from 2,867 to 1,425).  Following the implementation of Budget 2008,  the number of part-time borrowers increased significantly each year thereafter,  eventually rising to 11,254 in 2013-14.   Consequently, it is likely that the large increase in the number of  part-time student loan borrowers after 2008 can be attributed to the Budget 2008  enhancement for part-time borrowers.  A  technical report estimated  that the 2008 enhancement accounted for 80.2% of the increase in the number of  part-time borrowers.
The average  student loan amount for part-time borrowers decreased after 2008.  ESDC (2012A) showed that although close to  10% of part-time borrowers received a student loan of between $4,000 and  $10,000 after 2008, close to 50% received less than $1,000 (compared to 23%  before 2008).
Figure 1 – Number of part-time PSE students, part-time student loan borrowers and the average student loan amount from 2000-01 to 2013-14



Text description of Figure 1 – Number of part-time PSE students, part-time student loan borrowers and the average student loan amount from 2000-01 to 2013-14

Figure 1 provides a line graph which includes the number of part-time post-secondary education students, part-time student loan borrowers, and the average student loan amount from 2000-01 to 2013-14.  The data sources are the Canada Student Loans Program administrative data and Labour Force Survey data.”
Source: CSLP administrative data and Labour Force Survey data (tabulation ESDC).
Although key  informants generally had a positive view of the enhancement for part-time  students, opinion was divided on the change introduced for married/common-law  students.  Some key informants welcomed  the 10% reduction in the in-study spouse/partner contribution from 80% to 70%,  while others indicated that the 10% decrease was insufficient.
The technical  analyses presented in ESDC (2012A) showed an increase of 35% in the number of  married/common-law student loan borrowers following the enhancements, but this  increase was identical to that for single students.  Consequently, it is difficult to conclude  that the changes in 2008 led to a relative improvement in loan access for  married/common-law student loan borrowers compared to single borrowers.  The analyses indicated that the increase in  the number of married/common-law student loan borrowers was correlated with an  increase in the number of full-time married/common-law PSE students.  Also, it is quite likely that the  implementation of the CSGP and other factors were important in explaining the 35%  increase.
5.2 Repayment Assistance Plan
This  sub-section starts by comparing the cost of the RAP with the cost of the  Interest Relief (IR) and Debt Reduction in Repayment (DRR) provisions (which  were replaced by the RAP).  Then, the  early impact of the RAP on three debt repayment indicators (the percentage of a  loan repaid, the number of loans being fully re-paid, and the default rate) is  examined.
The following  evaluation questions are addressed:
To  what extent have loan repayment assistance costs changed as a result of the  RAP?
To  what extent has the RAP made it easier for students to manage their loan debt?
To  what extent are students making use of the RAP?
How  does the use of the RAP compare to that of previous measures in place?
What  has the impact of the RAP been on students with disabilities?
Has  there been an impact on the number of loans being re-paid?
Has  there been an impact on student loan default rates?
5.2.1 Repayment Assistance Plan use and costs
Prior  to the introduction of the RAP, borrowers who faced repayment difficulties  received on average $100 million in loan repayment assistance per year through  the IR and DRR provisions (see Table 5 below).   After the introduction of the RAP, loan repayment assistance decreased  from $97.3 million in 2008-09 to $73.1 million in 2009-10, but had increased to  $167.5 million by 2013-14.  Even after  accounting for inflation, the cost of the RAP in 2013-14 was significantly  higher than the costs of IR/DRR in any given year.  The annual cost of the RAP should continue to  increase based on projections contained in the 2014 CSLP Actuarial Report.
The number of  borrowers who benefited from loan repayment assistance increased from 132,574  in 2008-09 to 160,572 in 2009-10, and to 233,864 by 2013-14.  The average amount of loan repayment  assistance per student loan borrower dropped from $734 in 2008-09 to $455 in  2009-10, and reached $716 in 2013-14.
It should  again be reminded that the RAP was introduced shortly after the 2008 financial  crisis.  The unemployment rate of those  aged 15-24 rose from 11.4% in 2007-08, to 13.5% in 2008-09, and to 15.2% in  2009-10, while the average weekly wage rate fell slightly (by 0.7%) between  2008-09 and 2009-10, possibly making student loan repayment more difficult for  borrowers just entering the labour force. On this regard, Oreopoulos et al. (2012) showed that “young graduates  entering the labor market in a recession suffer significant initial earnings  losses that eventually fade, but after 8 to 10 years”. This suggests that the large increase  in the number of borrowers requesting loan repayment assistance in 2009-10 and  in subsequence years might be partially correlated with the 2008-2009 recession.
As indicated  in Section 3.1, the RAP was perceived by key informants and some focus group  participants as a positive change compared to the IR/DRR provisions.  An international comparison revealed that  Canada provides greater assistance to borrowers in repayment facing financial  hardship than most of the countries examined in the report.
Source: CSLP Annual Reports from 2000-01 to  2013-14 and CSLP Actuarial Reports from 2001 to 2014 by the Office of the  Superintendent of Financial Institutions (OSFI).
Note:
 A loan year is equivalent to an  academic year (i.e. from August 1 to July 31).  Note that RAP  disbursements in 2009-10 included $15.8 million in Interest Relief payments and  $2.3 million in DRR payments approved before August 2009.
The vast  majority of early RAP participants received RAP-Stage 1, where affordable  payments are made by the student towards the loan principal while the  government pays a portion (or all) of the  interest on the student  loan.  In 2009-10, 89.6% of all cases  involved the government paying the entire portion of interest (87% in  2013-14).
Although the  number of borrowers benefitting from RAP-Stage 2 more than doubled between  2009-10 and 2010-11 (see Table 6 below), the average amount students benefitted  from decreased significantly (from $1,563 to $963).  This was likely due to the inclusion of $2.3  million in DRR payments approved before August 2009 but paid in 2009-10 (mostly  in August 2009) as indicated in the 2010 CSLP Actuarial Report.  Since 2010-11, the number of RAP-Stage 2  beneficiaries and total costs has increased steadily, with the average payment  per beneficiary increasing from $963 in 2010-11 to $1,549 in 2013-14.
In the case  of the RAP for those with a permanent disability (RAP-PD), the number of  borrowers and the amount of repayment assistance disbursed increased  substantially following 2009-10.  The  focus groups revealed that the RAP-PD had a positive impact on students with  disabilities as it helped offset expenses related to their disability, thereby  freeing up additional resources for educational expenses.
Source: CSLP Annual Reports from 2009-10 to 2013-14 and CSLP Actuarial Reports  from 2010, 2011 and 2014.
Note:
 A loan year is equivalent to an academic year (i.e. from August 1 to July 31).  Includes $15.8 million in Interest Relief payments  approved before August 2009.  Includes $2.3 million in  DRR payments approved before August 2009.
5.2.2 Impact of RAP on student loan repayment
Table  7 indicates that average student loan debt at consolidation increased steadily  from 2005-06 ($11,323) to 2009-10 ($13,404), decreased for two years, and then  increased again in 2012-13 ($13,250) and 2013-14 ($13,536). A higher percentage of borrowers used loan repayment assistance measures  in 2008-09 and 2009-10 compared to 2007-08, regardless of the number of years  after consolidation, corroborating the results from Table 5.  However, this increase also happens to  coincide with the 2008-09 recession, perhaps indicative that some borrowers  experienced difficulties securing stable employment after their studies ended  and needed help with paying their student loans.
Source: CSLP administrative database  (tabulation ESDC).  * RA stands for  Repayment Assistance which includes IR/DRR and RAP.
Note: Borrowers consolidate their student loan(s) six months after completing their  post-secondary studies (or ending full-time studies).  Repayment begins once they have consolidated  their loans.
Table 7 also  reveals that there may have been a slight reduction in the percentage of  borrowers who have repaid their loan in full since the introduction of the RAP,  although it appears that this trend may have started before the RAP was  implemented.  This could again be a  by-product of the recession in 2008-09.   Nonetheless, from 2009-10 onwards, around 9% of borrowers paid off their  loan one year after consolidation, 27% two years after consolidation, and over  35% three years after consolidation.
Finally, the  percentage of student loan debt remaining to be paid was relatively stable  during the period, particularly since 2008-09, at roughly 89% after one year,  59% after two years, and 46% after three years.   This reduction in the percentage of student loan debt remaining to be  paid confirms that borrowers continued to repay a portion of their debt every  year. A technical report revealed that there has been a  significant increase in the percentage of debt remaining to be paid by RAP  users and non-RAP users compared to under the IR/DRR provisions.  The technical report also confirmed a decrease  in the likelihood of having entirely repaid a student loan by these two groups  over the period.  This may be due to  changes in RAP eligibility criteria (more recipients) combined with the effect  of being able to make affordable payments under the RAP.  It is possible that some borrowers were “forced”  to make full payment on their loan (to avoid default) during the years of IR  due to their ineligibility for IR, while similar borrowers became eligible for  the RAP and were able to avoid this situation.   Nevertheless, a longer period of data would be needed to clarify the  impact since the results are based on only a few years of data.
Borrowers who  face financial hardship can decide to apply for the RAP instead of going into  default. Table 7 shows that borrowers who have ever received repayment assistance  had a significantly lower default rate than those who have never received  repayment assistance.  For instance, the  former group had a default rate of around 4.5% two years after consolidation  compared to about 16% for the latter group.   Table 7 also reveals that, although default rates increased between  2008-09 and 2009-10 for both groups, default rates went down steadily after  2009-10.  As mentioned previously, it is  still too early to measure the full impact of the RAP.
5.3 Summary of key findings
The number of part-time student loan borrowers in 2013-14 increased almost  ten-fold from 2008-09, suggesting a significant impact of the Budget 2008  enhancement for part-time students on loan access
There was  little evidence to suggest an improvement in loan access for married students  or students in common-law relationships following the Budget 2008 enhancement  for this group
Loan  repayment assistance costs increased following the introduction of the RAP, but  the average cost per borrower in 2013-14 was below that of 2008-09
There was  a steady increase in the share of student loan borrowers using repayment  assistance, although this trend began well before the implementation of the  RAP
It may be  too early to conclusively determine the full impact of the RAP on the number of loans being paid off and on student loan default rates.  Estimation is further complicated by the  impacts of the 2008 financial crisis
6. Program delivery and awareness
An  interim evaluation report on the implementation status of the various Budget  2008 measures was published in June 2014 using evidence gathered from two  reports based on key informant interviews. Findings indicated that a new internal  delivery system of federal grants was implemented, as was a more nuanced system  for loan repayment assistance (including changes related to the service  delivery vision and loan access for married and part-time students).  Nevertheless, the changes involving  cooperation with other organizations and other levels of government experienced  some difficulties, but only a minimal number of students were ultimately  impacted.  The report concluded that  efforts should continue in making the RAP application (for the new repayment  assistance measures), application process and canlearn.ca website more  user-friendly, as numerous issues were raised by the key informants.
Focus group  participants indicated that the canlearn.ca website has had minimal impact on  awareness of the RAP, especially since there was confusion among participants  between the canlearn.ca website and the NSLSC website.  However, among the small minority who used  the site, there was strong appreciation of the tools offered to them and they  demonstrated far deeper understanding of the RAP than those who had not visited  the website.
In terms of  CSGP awareness, findings from the CSGP survey conducted for the evaluation  indicated that a minority of CSG recipients (39%) were aware that they would  qualify for a grant at the time of applying for a student loan, and even less  (30%) knew of the variety of grants available when they first applied.  Of note, those who had RESP savings were more  likely to be aware of the CSGP, perhaps indicating that they may be more  financially literate than those without RESP savings.  Among the 39% who were aware that they would  qualify for a grant, 72% found the eligibility criteria were clear at the time  they applied for a loan.
Among those  who were aware that they would qualify for a grant and could recall the grant  amount, half of CSG recipients indicated that the amount was about what they  expected, while roughly 25% felt that the amount received was higher than  expected and 25% lower than expected.
Further survey  findings showed that among CSG recipients who were aware that they would  qualify for a grant, most recalled that it took 2-4 weeks from when they  applied for a student loan until they found out if they were eligible for a  grant, corroborating results from the key informant interviews.
7. Conclusions, recommendations and future work
Overall, the CSLP enhancements and the  CSGP, both introduced in Budget 2008, are perceived to have been positive  changes.  The government continues to  make student loans and grants a high priority.
After the introduction of the CSGP,  the total amount and number of grants disbursed increased significantly, while  administrative costs (in terms of the percentage of total grant and bursary  payments made) remained stable.  Overall,  the introduction of the CSGP coincided with a slight increase in total loan  disbursements.  Nonetheless, average loan  disbursements fell by between 11.5% and 17.0% and student loan indebtedness  levels at consolidation by between 4.9% and 7.0% after the implementation of  the CSGP.  However, evidence suggests  that there was no CSGP impact on PSE participation or PSE persistence, likely  due to there being little change in overall student financial aid available (a  result corroborated by many findings in the literature).
The CSLP enhancements for part-time  students announced in Budget 2008 improved loan access for them, but the  changes introduced for married and common-law students did not have any impact.
In general, the RAP (the new repayment  assistance measures) was perceived by key informants and some focus group  participants as a positive change compared to the provisions under the previous  regime.  The number of borrowers  benefitting from repayment assistance measures and the associated costs  increased significantly.  Nevertheless,  the full impact of the RAP had not yet been fully realized by 2013-14 (the last  year for which data was available).   Although the canlearn.ca website has had minimal impact on awareness of  the RAP, those who used the site demonstrated a far deeper understanding of the  RAP than those who had not visited the website.
7.1 Recommendations
Consider revising the formula used to  calculate student loan repayment (e.g. basing repayment on net income instead  of gross income) so that it is equitable for students in different  circumstances.  However, further analysis  of the RAP may be required before implementing any major changes, given that  the RAP has not yet fully matured.
Continue to use the CSGP to target  disadvantaged students and consider increasing the CSG amount and expanding CSG  eligibility for lower income students to help reduce debt and provide extra  liquidity to improve their PSE access and persistence
Further improve student loan access  for married and common-law students, as the Budget 2008 changes were noted to  have been insufficient and were shown to have not had any impact on loan  access
Promote awareness of the information  on the canlearn.ca website, as those who used the site found it to be of great  benefit.  In doing so, further awareness  and understanding of the CSGP would also be enhanced for prospective PSE  students
7.2 Future work
Future  evaluation work could include an examination of provincial and territorial loan  programs and whether or not PSE access is equal across Canada.
As well,  future work should include, contingent upon obtaining the necessary approvals,  the merging and analyses of income tax data and CSLP administrative data, to  better understand the differences in student loan repayment pre- and post-2009.
Appendix 1 – Evaluation questions
Source Documents (Technical Reports):
    ADD1=Administrative Data Analysis (RAP)    ADD2=Administrative Data Analysis (Loan Access)    ADD3=Administrative Data Analysis (Interaction between    CSGP/CSLP)    ADD4=Administrative Data Analysis (CSGP)    FG=Focus Groups (conducted in November 2012)     FLR=File/Literature Review    KI1=Key Informant Interviews (conducted in    January/February 2011)    KI2=Key Informant Interviews (conducted in October/November    2012)    LAD=Longitudinal Administrative Databank Analysis    (Frenette 2015)    Survey=CSGP Survey (conducted in September/October    2013)
Appendix 2 – Summary of studies conducted in support of the summative evaluation
Centre for Public Management Inc.  (2011), “Key Informant Interviews for the Evaluation of the Canada Student Grants Program and for the Evaluation of Increased CSLP Activities Related to  Budget 2008”, Prepared for ESDC
This  technical report summarizes the findings and key messages from interviews  conducted in January and February 2011 regarding the CSGP and the increased  CSLP activities related to the 2008 Federal Budget.  Forty-five (45) interviews were conducted to  solicit feedback on the programs’ relevance, efficiency, and general  effectiveness with federal and provincial CSGP and CSLP representatives, and  leading academics in the field of post-secondary education.
ESDC (2012), “Literature/File for the  Summative Evaluation of the Budget 2008 CSLP Enhancements”
The purpose  of the literature and file review was to provide an overview of the information  already available in the public domain and internal ESDC documents, completed  surveys and research papers, and then compile the information (from over 40  documents) in order to provide evidence for a series of evaluation  questions.  This review demonstrated that  much information was already available in the literature.
Cathexis Consulting (2013), “Mid-Stage  Key Informant Interviews for the Summative Evaluation of the Budget 2008 Canada  Student Loans Program Enhancements”, Prepared for ESDC
The purpose  of this project was to conduct mid-evaluation key informant interviews with 32  federal and provincial officials involved in the delivery of the CSLP/CSGP in  an effort to gain an understanding of the extent to which the different  measures announced in Budget 2008 have been implemented, reasons for delays in  implementation, actions that have been taken, and any potential impacts on the  timing of the availability of relevant administrative data.  The results from the interviews (conducted  from September 2012 to November 2012) serve as a follow-up to the interviews  conducted in January and February 2011.
R. A. Malatest and Associates Ltd.  (2013), “Focus Groups for the Summative Evaluation of the Budget 2008 Canada  Student Loans Program Enhancements”, Prepared for ESDC
This  technical report summarizes findings from eight focus group sessions (two focus  group sessions were conducted in Calgary, Winnipeg, Ottawa and Halifax in the  fall of 2012).  The focus groups involved  a qualitative exploration of the impact of the CSLP enhancements based on borrower  experiences.  It reviewed how the  enhancements addressed students’ needs and how the RAP assisted them in  managing their student loan.   Additionally, the research explored the perceived differences between  the RAP and Interest Relief/Debt Reduction in Repayment, the two financial  assistance programs that pre-dated the RAP.   The exploration of this topic was only possible with students who had  taken out loans and applied for assistance prior to the 2009 introduction of  the RAP.  A final topic explored in the  research was the degree to which students’ awareness of the RAP could be  attributed to the canlearn.ca website.
Ekos Research Associates Inc. (2014),  “Survey of Canada Student Grants Program (CSGP) Recipients”, Prepared for ESDC
This study  involved a hybrid telephone/online survey of 2,654 students who received a  Canada Student Grant between August 2012 and July 2013.  The purpose of this survey was to assess the  impact of Canada Student Grants on overall student debt levels, student loan  use, access to PSE, and to assess any program delivery issues.
ESDC (2014), “Additional Statistical  Analysis of the Survey of Canada Student Grants Program (CSGP) Recipients – Supplementary  Technical Report”
The purpose  of this technical report was to provide a more in-depth analysis of the CSGP  survey report, based on comments received by an external peer reviewer.  This additional report provided detailed  multivariate analyses to supplement the results presented in the main survey  report.
ESDC (2015a), “Impacts of the Canada  Student Grants Program (CSGP) on Program Costs”
This report  used a series of administrative data files and information contained in  publicly-available documents and covered the period starting with the  introduction of the direct loan regime in 2000-01 and ending in 2013-14.  The report examined and compared annual grant  costs (including administrative costs) after the implementation of the CSGP and  prior to 2009 (under the previous regime) – during the period of the Canada  Access Grant (CAG), Canada Study Grant (CSG) and Canada Millennium Scholarship  Foundation (CMSF).  It also examined the  transition grants, as they were part of the mandate of the summative  evaluation, as well as socio-demographic factors correlated with receiving the  different types of CSGP grants.
ESDC (2015b), “Interaction between the  Canada Student Grants Program (CSGP) and the Canada Student Loans Program  (CSLP)”
This report  used a series of administrative data files, the Labour Force Survey (LFS) of  Statistics Canada, and other information contained in publicly-available  documents to measure the impact of the CSGP on the need for student loans.  The report also examined the impact of the  CSGP on student indebtedness levels at loan consolidation time and attempted to  determine how much spending is required to increase overall post-secondary  education (PSE) participation levels by 1% (as well as graduation rates) and  whether it is more expensive to achieve this through grants or loans.  The period covered by the analysis started  with the introduction of the direct loan regime in 2000-01 and ended in  2013-14.
ESDC (2015c), “Impacts of the 2008  CSLP Enhancements on Loan Access for Part-Time and Married/Common-Law Students”
This report  examined the extent to which there was an improvement in loan access for  part-time and married/common-law students following the enhancements to the  Canada Student Loans Program (CSLP) in 2008.   Using administrative data and the Labour Force Survey (LFS) of Statistics  Canada, the report provided detailed information on the loans received by  married/common-law student borrowers and part-time borrowers.  Socio-demographic characteristics of the two  groups were presented in the report and compared with their respective  populations of post-secondary education (PSE) students.  As well, models were developed in an attempt  to capture the effects of the CSLP enhancements on loan access for these  groups.  Another series of models attempted  to measure the impact of the 2008 enhancements on the average loan amounts  received.
ESDC (2015d), “Impacts of the  Repayment Assistance Plan (RAP)”
This report  used a series of administrative data files and information contained in the  CSLP Annual Reports to analyze the RAP by targeted group.  The period covered started with the  introduction of the direct loan regime in 2000-01 and ended in 2011-12.  The report first examined the cost of the RAP  compared to the cost of the previous measures (Interest Relief and Debt  Reduction in Repayment).  Then, the  report provided the socio-economic profile of students who benefitted from the  RAP compared to the profile of those who benefited from Interest Relief and  Debt Reduction in Repayment.  Further,  analysis attempted to measure the impact of the RAP on three repayment  indicators: the percentage of outstanding loans remaining to be repaid, the  percentage of loans fully repaid, and the percentage of loans in default.  Finally, the report examined similar  repayment programs existing in other countries.
Frenette (2015), “Post-Secondary  Attendance and the Canada Student Grants Program”, Prepared for ESDC by  Statistics Canada
This study  used a regression discontinuity approach applied to longitudinal administrative  data to estimate the relationship between CSG eligibility and post-secondary  access at age 18 and persistence.  As  well, this study included a literature review on student financial assistance  and its impact on PS attendance, and an overview of the key features of the  CSGP and how its objective of raising access to post-secondary can be met from  a conceptual point of view.
Appendix 3 – References
Berger, J., Motte A. and Parkin A. (2009), “The Price of Knowledge: Access and Student  Finance in Canada”, Fourth Edition, Canada Millennium Scholarship  Foundation.
Canada Millennium  Scholarship Foundation, “Millennium  Scholarship Annual Reports” 1999 to 2009.
Castleman and Long (2013),  “Looking Beyond Enrolment: The Causal  Effect of Need-Based Grants on College Access, Persistence, and Graduation”,  National Bureau of Economic Research Paper, No. 19306.
Dynarski,  S.M. (2000), “Hope for Whom? Financial  Aid for the Middle Class and Its Impact on College Attendance” National Tax  Journal. 53, 3 (Part 2): 629-661.
Dynarski,  S.M. (2003), “Does Aid Matter? Measuring  the Effect of Student Aid on College Attendance and Completion” American  Economic Review”, 93, 1: 279-288.
Dynarski (2008), “Building the Stock of College-Educated Labor”, Journal of Human  Resources, 43, 3.
ESDC  (2014), “Canada Student Loans Program  (CSLP): Budget 2008 Implementation Review Evaluation”.
ESDC  (2000 to 2014), “CSLP Annual Reports”.
ESDC  (2015), “2015-16 Report on Plans and  Priorities”.
Finance  Canada (2008), “Budget 2008: Responsible  Leadership for Uncertain Times”.
Finance  Canada (2011), “The Next Phase of  Canada’s Economic Action Plan: A Low-Tax Plan for Jobs and Growth”
Finance  Canada (2014), “The Road to Balance:  creating Jobs and Opportunities”.
Finance Canada  (2015), “Strong Leadership – a Balanced  Budget, Low-Tax Plan for Jobs, Growth and Security”.
Finnie, R., Usher, A.  & Vossensteyn, H. (2004), “Meeting  the Need: A New Architecture for Canada’s Student Aid System”, Institute  for Research on Public Policy.
Finnie,  R. (2005), “A Simple Model of Access and  Capacity for Post-Secondary Schooling in Canada”, Queen’s University School  of Policy Studies Working Paper Number 40.
Frenette (2011), “Is Debt Relief as Good as Liquidity? The  Impact of Prospective Student Debt on Post-Secondary Attendance among  Low-income Youth”, Social Research and Demonstration Corporation.
Frenette  (2012), “Assessing the Impacts of the New  Canada Student Grants Program: Final Report”, done for HRSDC.
HRSDC (2008), “Post-Secondary Access and Student Financial  Aid: A Historical Overview and Literature Review”, technical report.
HRSDC  (2010), “A Discussion of the Rationale of  the Canadian Student Loans Program”, Internal Draft.
HRSDC,  2011, “Summative Evaluation of the Canada  Student Loans Program”.
HRSDC,  2012a “Evaluation Framework for the  Summative Evaluation of the Budget 2008 CSLP Enhancements and Other CSLP  Evaluative Work”.
HRSDC,  2012b, “Evaluation Methodology for the  Summative Evaluation of the Budget 2008 CSLP Enhancements”.
Junor, S. and Usher, A. (2004), “The Price of Knowledge 2004: Access and  Student Finance in Canada”, Canada Millennium Scholarship Foundation.
Lavallée, L. and  Backus J. (2007), “Impact of Canada  Millennium Scholarship Foundation Bursaries on Postsecondary Education”.
McElroy (2005), “Student Aid and University Persistence: Does  Debt Matter?”
Neil, C. (2007), “Can We Say Whether the Canada Millennium  Scholarship Bursaries have Affected Post-Secondary Enrolments?”, Ontario,  Wilfrid Laurier University.
Office of the  Superintendent of Financial Institutions Canada (2011), “Actuarial Report on the Canada Student Loans Program as at 31 July 2011”.
Singell Jr., L. D. (2001), “Come and Stay a While: Does Financial Aid  Affect Enrolment and Retention at a Large Public University?”, Department  of Economics, University of Oregon.
Treasury Board  Secretariat,” Estimates, Parts I and II,  The Government Expense Plan And The Main Estimates”, 2004-05 to 2014-15.
Appendix 4 – Detailed program disbursement
Source: CSLP Annual Reports from 2000-01 to  2013-14.
Note: The 2000-01 to 2008-09 represents the CSG  period, while the period beginning with 2009-10 represents the CSGP period.  Although the parameters of the grants for students with dependents have changed  with the CSGP, the grants still target the same two groups (full-time and  part-time students with dependents).  Under the CSGP, this grant is called the “Canada Student Grant for services and  equipment for persons with permanent disabilities”.  Under the  CSGP, this grant is called the “Canada Student Grant for part-time  studies”.  This table includes part- and  full-time grants.  Under the  CSGP, this grant is called the “Canada Student Grant for persons with permanent  disabilities”.  Excluding  CMSF Excellence Awards disbursed by CSLP in 2009-10 ($0.2 million), 2010-11  ($6.5 million), 2011-12 ($4.0 million), 2012-13 ($1.4 million), and 2013-14  ($0.1 million).  Shaded cells represent  the period covered by the CSGP.
