Executive summary
Introduction
Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC) worked  jointly with New Brunswick and 11 other Provinces and Territories (P/Ts) to  undertake the 2012 to 2017 second cycle of the Labour Market Development  Agreement (LMDA) evaluation. The first cycle of the LMDA evaluation was carried  out between 1998 and 2012 and involved conducting bilateral formative and  summative evaluations in all P/Ts. Under the second cycle, the evaluation work  consisted of conducting two to three studies per year on the Employment  Benefits and Support Measures (EBSMs) similar programming delivered under these  agreements. The studies generated evaluation evidence on the effectiveness,  efficiency and design/delivery of EBSMs for Canada, for New Brunswick and for  11 other P/Ts that opted for a joint evaluation process with Canada.
Under LMDAs, Canada transfers $2.14B in Employment Insurance  (EI) Part II funds to P/Ts for the design and delivery of programs and services  to help unemployed individuals, mainly eligible under EI, to find and maintain  employment.
Programs and services delivered by New Brunswick have to  correspond to the EBSM categories defined under the Employment Insurance Act.  The following is a short description of the four programs and services examined  in the evaluation:
Training  and Skills Development (including Apprenticeships) helps participants  obtain employment skills by giving them financial assistance in order to attend  classroom training.
Targeted  Wage Subsidies (Employer Wage Subsidy) help participants obtain on-the-job  work experience by providing employers with a wage subsidy. 
Self-Employment provides financial assistance and business planning advice to participants to  help them start their own business. 
Employment  Assistance Services such as counselling, job search skills, job placement  services, provision of labour market information and case management.
Four additional programs and services are available under  the LMDA and they are: Job Creation Partnerships, Labour Market Partnerships,  Research and Innovation and Targeted Earnings Supplements. They were not  evaluated as part of this evaluation. The Job Creation Partnerships and  Targeted Earnings Supplements programs were not used in New Brunswick while  Labour Market Partnerships and Research and Innovation will be evaluated at a  later date.
Table 1 provides an overview of the share of funding  allocated to the five EBSMs examined under the second cycle for LMDA evaluation  and the average costs per participant.
* Other programs and services account for 9% of LMDA  investments.
Sources: EI Monitoring and Assessment Reports 2002-2003 to  2014-2015.
This report presents a summary of the findings from nine  studies produced on the New Brunswick LMDA interventions. Results are presented  for active and former EI claimants, and for long-tenured workers,  youth (under 30 years old) and older workers (55 years old and over) when the  number of participants was sufficient to conduct quantitative analyses. Active  EI claimants were receiving EI benefits at the time of their EBSM  participation. Former EI claimants received EI up to three years before  starting their EBSM participation.
Key findings
Effectiveness and efficiency of EBSMs
Incremental impacts and cost-benefit analyses addressed EBSM  effectiveness and efficiency. Overall, incremental impacts demonstrate that  LMDA programs and services are improving the labour market attachment of active  and former EI claimant Participants, including youth and older workers. As  well, social benefits of participation exceeded the cost of investments for  most interventions over time. Finally, providing Employment Assistance Services  interventions earlier during an EI claim (first four weeks) produced larger  impacts on earnings and employment and facilitated an earlier return to work.  This demonstrated the importance of targeting early participation of EI active  claimants.
Figure i presents the incremental impacts on the incidence  of employment for active and former claimants by type of program. The estimates  can be interpreted as a change in the probability of being employed following  participation. For example, participation in Training and Skills Development  increases the probability of being employed by 4.7 percentage points for active  EI claimants relative to unemployed non-participants.
Figure i. Change in probability of being employed in participants relative to non-participants



Text description of Figure i
Figure ii presents the cumulative increase in employment  earnings for active and former claimants over the 5 years post-participation.  It is noted that Employment Assistance Services are relatively modest  activities and, by themselves, are not expected to lead to substantial effects  on labour market outcomes. In other words, these services aim to support the  return to work of unemployed participants and not necessarily to secure a  better paying job than pre-participation. However, as demonstrated later in the  report, providing Employment Assistance Services earlier during the EI claim  (first 4 weeks) produced larger impacts on earnings and employment and  facilitated earlier returns to work.
Figure ii. Increased cumulative earnings of participants relative to non-participants



Text description of Figure ii
Table 2 presents the number of years required for the social  benefits to exceed the program costs. Social benefits to participation exceeded  investment costs in a period ranging between the 2nd year of program  participation to just over 6 years after participation.
Main challenges about EBSM design and delivery
Key informant interviews with service providers and program  managers as well as reviewed documents and questionnaires completed by New  Brunswick representatives also generated a few challenges about program design  and delivery:
Training and Skills Development
The Training and Skills Development application  process aims to ensure that prospective participants are choosing a trade that  will meet labour market demand. 
New Brunswick plans their training investment to  target labour market trends which may contribute to Training and Skills  Development effectiveness. 
According to the interviewed service providers  and managers, the main challenges related to Training and Skills Development  design and delivery included:
    
The eligibility criteria exclude some  individuals who could benefit from training and upskilling. 
The financial assistance for tuition is too  limited in some situations. 


Barriers to employment or to accessing and  completing training under Training and Skills Development included:
    
Financial hardship;
Access to childcare and transportation;
Learning, mental or physical disabilities;
Language barriers;
Low education, literacy levels and lack of work  experience;
Having to complete high school upgrading to take  training; and,
Personal issues such as a criminal record.
Training and Skills Development for Apprentices
Existing literature showed that there is a  fairly high non-completion rate among apprentices in Canada (40 to 50%).  Furthermore, subject matter literature revealed that despite the growth in  apprenticeship registrations in Canada, there has not been a corresponding  increase in completion rates.  While it is not possible with available data to generate a reliable estimation  of the completion rate of Training and Skills Development-Apprentices  participants in New Brunswick, key informants involved in apprenticeship  delivery confirmed the stagnation in completion rates.
According to key informants, apprenticeship  drop-out is due to factors such as lack of incentive to complete the training; a  learning disability; lack of essential skills; and living a long distance away  from the location of the training.
Other challenges noted by key informants  regarding the design and delivery of Skills Development-Apprentices included a  lack of awareness about how the apprenticeship system works; lack of electronic  application and funding supports system; delays in reimbursing the tuition  rebate; and the level of funding is perceived to be insufficient, particularly  the level of financial support for childcare and transportation.
Employer Wage Subsidy
While evaluation results have demonstrated the  effectiveness of Employer Wage Subsidy, its use has been falling in recent years.  According to EI Monitoring and Assessment reports, the number of new  interventions decreased from 3,109 in 2004 to 2005 to 1,632 in 2014 to 2015.  According to key informants, the reasons for the decline included: 
Changes to the eligibility criteria reduced the  number of participants who can benefit from the program.

Significant outmigration of potential workers to  Western Canada. 
Local economic conditions as some regions of New  Brunswick have a high unemployment rate and the number of employers is decreasing.
Employment Assistance Services
Key informants confirmed the need for labour  market information to support the program. However, they pointed out that  labour market information was often out-of-date, inconsistent, and not specific  or timely.
Challenges with the design and delivery of  Employment Assistance Services included: 

Access to services due to a lack of  transportation and a lack of telephones.
Service delivery has a substantial  administrative burden.
Lack of awareness about services.
Recommendations
A total of six recommendations emerge from the evaluation  findings. They are as follows:
The study on the timing of Employment Assistance Services  participation showed that receiving assistance early after starting an  employment insurance claim can lead to better labour market impacts. However,  key informants reported a lack of awareness about the program.
Recommendation 1: Consideration should be given to providing New Brunswick with timely access to  data on new EI recipients to support targeting and increase awareness.
Key informants reported that low education, learning  disabilities and literacy issues may be barriers to accessing and completing  training.
Recommendation 2: Consideration should be given to removing barriers to accessing and completing  training such as literacy/essential skills training and learning disability  assessments. These measures would help individuals with multiple barriers  prepare for vocational training and to integrate into the labour market. These  measures should be reported separately from other Skills Development  interventions given their unique objectives.
Incremental impacts showed improvements in participant’s  earnings and employment in the Employer Wage Subsidy program although its use  has been declining in recent years. According to key informants, the decline  may be related to the changes in the program’s eligibility criteria,  outmigration of workers, lack of vacant positions and a decrease in potential  employers.
Recommendation 3: New Brunswick should explore ways of removing barriers to employer  participation in the Employer Wage Subsidy program.
Key informants interviewed in the evaluation confirmed the  necessity of having labour market information to support the delivery of  Training and Skills Development and Employment Assistance Services. They,  however, pointed out that labour market information was often out-of-date,  inconsistent, and not specific or timely.
Recommendation 4: Consideration should be given to strengthening the production and availability  of local labour market information to support program delivery.
The evaluation was not able to produce a conclusive  assessment of the Self-Employment Benefit effectiveness and efficiency since  the data used to assess impacts on earnings may not be the best source of  information available to reflect the financial wellbeing of the participants.  As well, it is not clear whether the participant’s success in improving their  labour market attachment through self-employment is more closely associated with  their business idea and their entrepreneurship skills than the assistance  provided under the Self-Employment Benefit.
Recommendation 5: Consideration should be given to examine in more detail the design and delivery  of the Self-Employment Benefit and whether the performance indicators for this  program are appropriate.
Overall, the LMDA evaluation was able to produce a sound  assessment of EBSM effectiveness and efficiency because the team had access to  rich data on EI claimants, EBSM participation data and Canada Revenue Agency  taxation files. However, some data gaps limited the evaluation’s ability to  assess how EBSMs operate.
Recommendation 6: Improvements in data collection is recommended to address key program and  policy questions of interest to the federal and provincial/territorial  governments. Specifically:
Collect data on whether participants are members of  designated groups including Indigenous peoples, persons with disabilities and  recent immigrants.
Collect data on the type of training funded under Training  and Skills Development and the type of assistance provided under Employment  Assistance Services. New Brunswick, ESDC and other P/Ts should work together to  define common categories for both EBSMs.
Collect detailed data on the cost of interventions.
Management response
The Department of Post-Secondary Education, Training and  Labour accepts the evaluation recommendations and has responded to the  following actions in relation to the conclusions of the evaluation:
Recommendation 1: Consideration should be given to providing New Brunswick with timely access to  data on new EI recipients to support targeting and increase awareness.
Response: New  Brunswick is open to targeting and referral of new EI recipients based on a  recent signing of an information sharing agreement which occurred on February  21, 2017.  We are currently working  toward the creation of an implementation plan.
Recommendation 2: Consideration should be given to removing barriers to accessing and completing  training such as literacy/essential skills training and learning disability  assessments. These measures would help individuals with multiple barriers  prepare for vocational training and integrate into the labour market. These  measures should be reported separately from other Skills Development  interventions given their unique objectives.
Response:  New Brunswick provides a variety of program  and services designed to help adults acquire literacy and essential skills  training.  We are currently involved in  discussions with the Forum of Labour Market Ministers as part of ongoing work  for the Performance Measurement Strategy for the new Labour Market Transfer  Agreements. If it is determined that these interventions are to be reported  separately from other Skills Development interventions, New Brunswick will  explore options for implementation.
Recommendation 3: New Brunswick should explore ways of removing barriers to employer participation  in the Employer Wage Subsidy program.
Response:  New Brunswick will commit to work with  employers to reduce barriers to employer participation in our Employer Wage  Subsidy programs.
Recommendation 4: Consideration should be given to strengthening the production and availability  of local Labour Market Information to support program delivery.
Response:  New Brunswick is working closely with the  Forum of Labour Market Ministers on the creation of a Labour Market Information  Council.  At the local level (regional  offices across the province), Employment and Continuous Learning Services is  exploring a process to gather and interpret local labour market knowledge to  inform New Brunswick’s labour force needs.
Recommendation 5: Consideration should be given to examine in more detail the design and delivery  of the Self-Employment Benefit and whether the performance indicators for this  program are appropriate.
Response:  New Brunswick would agree to fully  participate in discussions on the design of performance indicators.
Recommendation 6: Improvements in data collection is recommended to address key program and  policy questions of interest to the federal and provincial/territorial  governments. Specifically:
Collect data on whether participants are members of  designated groups including Indigenous peoples, persons with disabilities and  recent immigrants.
Response:  Currently, the collection of designated group  data is done through self-identification.   This relates to a broader legal and privacy issue both at the provincial  level. We are currently involved in discussions with the Forum of Labour Market  Ministers as part of ongoing work for the Performance Measurement Strategy for  the new Labour Market Transfer Agreements. If it is determined that this reporting  is mandatory New Brunswick will explore solutions to the privacy and legal  concerns and explore options for implementation.
Collect data on the type of training funded under Training  and Skills Development and the type of assistance provided under Employment  Assistance Services. New Brunswick, ESDC and other provinces and territories  should work together to define common categories for both EBSMs.
Response:  New Brunswick would collaborate on defining  common categories for EBSMs.
Collect detailed data on the cost of EBSM interventions.
Response:  Currently, New Brunswick is not in a position  to provide detailed data on the cost of EBSM interventions. We are currently  involved in discussions with the Forum of Labour Market Ministers as part of  ongoing work for the Performance Measurement Strategy for the new Labour Market  Transfer Agreements. If it is determined that a more detailed cost breakdown is  required we will explore options to implement these changes on annual audited  financial statements.
1. Introduction
Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC) worked  jointly with New Brunswick and 11 provinces and territories to undertake the  2012 to 2017 second cycle of the Labour Market Development Agreement (LMDA)  evaluations. The first cycle of LMDA evaluation was carried out between 1998  and 2012 and involved the conduct of bilateral formative and summative  evaluations in all provinces and territories. Under the second cycle, the  evaluation work consisted of conducting two to three studies per year on the  Employment Benefits and Support Measures (EBSMs) similar programming delivered  under these agreements. The studies generated evaluation evidence on the  effectiveness, efficiency and design/delivery of EBSMs for Canada, New  Brunswick and for the 11 provinces/territories that opted for a joint  evaluation process with the Government of Canada.
This report presents a summary of the findings from studies  conducted for New Brunswick. The report is organised as follows:
Introduction with an overview of the studies  summarized in this report including their scope, methodology, and contextual  information on the LMDAs. 
Findings section with a discussion around the  rationale for investing in labour market programming.
Conclusions and lessons learned. 
Recommendations that emerge from the evaluation  findings.
1.1 Labour Market Development  Agreement background
LMDAs are bilateral agreements between Canada and each  province/territory and were established under Part II of the 1996 Employment  Insurance Act. As part of these agreements, Canada transfers $2.14B annually in  EI Part II funding to the provinces and territories to design and deliver  programs and services to assist individuals prepare for, obtain and maintain  employment. Specifically, New Brunswick receives approximately $90M in EBSM  funding each year.
The Canada-New Brunswick LMDA was signed on December 13,  1996. The agreement transferred responsibility for the design and delivery of  the program and services classified under two categories: 1) Employment  Benefits and 2) Support Measures to New Brunswick.
Employment Benefits
Employment Benefits funded under the LMDAs are offered to  unemployed individuals who 1) are actively on EI (active claimants); 2) ended  their benefit period within three years before participating (former  claimants); or 3) established a claim for maternity or parental benefits within  the past five years and are returning to the labour force for the first time  (former claimants).  Employment benefits include the following  categories:
Skills  Development (Training and Skills Development, including apprenticeship) helps participants obtain employment skills by giving them financial assistance  to enable them to select, arrange and pay for classroom training.
Targeted  Wage Subsidies (Employer Wage Subsidy) help participants obtain on-the-job  work experience by providing employers with financial assistance to help with  the wages of participants. 
Self-Employment  (Self-Employment Benefit) provides financial assistance and business  planning advice to EI-eligible participants to help them start their own  business. This financial assistance is intended to cover personal living  expenses and other expenses during the initial stages of the business.
Job  Creation Partnerships provides participants with opportunities to gain work  experience that will lead to ongoing employment. Employment opportunities are  provided by projects that contribute to developing the community and the local  economy. The program is not offered in New Brunswick.
Targeted  Earnings Supplements encourage unemployed persons to accept employment by  offering them financial incentives. This program was not covered by the  evaluation.
Support measures
Support Measures are available to all unemployed individuals  including those not eligible to receive EI and include:
Employment  Assistance Services such as individual counselling, action planning, help  with job search skills, job-finding clubs, job placement services, the  provision of Labour Market Information, case management and follow-up.
Labour  Market Partnerships provide funding to help employers, employee and  employer associations, and communities improve their capacity to deal with  human resource requirements and implement labour force adjustments. These  partnerships involve developing plans and strategies, and implementing labour  force adjustment measures. This support measure was not covered by the  evaluation.
Research  and Innovation supports activities that identify better ways of helping  people prepare for or keep employment and be productive participants in the  labour force. Funds are provided to eligible recipients to enable them to carry  out demonstration projects and research for this purpose. This support measure  was not covered by the evaluation.
Table 3 provides an overview of the share of funding  allocated to the five programs and services examined under the second cycle for  LMDA evaluation and the average cost per participant. It is noted that the  average cost per participant was calculated based on the 2002to 2005 data from  the EI Monitoring and Assessment Reports. The 2002 to 2005 period corresponds to  the cohort of participants selected for incremental impacts and cost-benefit  analysis in the LMDA evaluation.
Sources: EI Monitoring and Assessment Reports 2002-2003 to  2014-2015.
  *Other programs and services account for 9% of LMDA  investments.
1.2 Methodology
This section presents key aspects of the quantitative  analyses carried out as part of the LMDA studies, while a more detailed  description of the methodology is provided in Appendix  A.
All quantitative analyses were based on administrative data  from the EI Part I (EI claim data) and Part II (EBSM participation data) linked  to the T1 and T4 taxation files from the Canada Revenue Agency. Incremental  impact analyses and the cost-benefit analyses were based on up to 100% of  participants in the reference period selected.
Incremental impacts analysis
Five studies assessed program effectiveness by estimating  incremental impacts from EBSM participation on participants’ labour market  experience (for example, earnings from  employment/self-employment, incidence of  employment, use of EI or Social  Assistance and dependence on income  support) after participation. The role of the incremental impact analysis  is to isolate the effects of participation from other factors such as the  economic cycle. In order to achieve this, the incremental impact analysis  compared the labour market experience of participants before and after their  participation, with that of non-participants before and after the period that  corresponds to the EBSM participation (see the Example of Incremental Impact  Calculation in Figure 1).
The matching of participants and comparison group members  used up to 75 socio-demographic and labour market variables observed over five  years before participation. Two different comparison groups were used to  measure impacts for active and former EI claimants. For active claimants, the  incremental impacts were measured relative to a comparison group of active  claimants who were eligible to participate in EBSMs but did not during the  reference period.
Former claimants can be underemployed and unable to  requalify for EI, out of the labour force for various reasons or on social  assistance. Based on previous evaluation methodologies, on expert advice and  given the difficulty in generating a suitable comparison for former claimants  using administrative data alone, the comparison group for former claimants was  created using individuals who only participated in Employment Assistance  Services during the reference period. This is a conservative approach given the  fact that participation in Employment Assistance Services can lead to limited  effects on labour market outcomes. In other words, the experience of former  claimants who received employment benefits (that is, Training and Skills  Development, Employer Wage Subsidy and Self-Employment Benefit) was compared to  the experience of former claimants who received a low intensity employment  service (that is Employment Assistance Services only). Due to this difference  in measurement, incremental impacts estimated for active claimants should not  be directly compared to former claimants.
Figure 1. Example of incremental impact calculation



Text description of Figure 1

Incremental    impact (Change due to program participation): + $3,000 (in other words,    $8,000 - $5,000)
Factors accounted for in the cost-benefit analysis
Program efficiency was assessed through a cost-benefit  analysis which compared the cost of participating in the program for the  participants and the cost of delivering the program for the government to the  benefits generated by the program. Overall, this analysis provided insights on  the extent to which the program is efficient for society (that is, for both the  participants and the government). The costs and benefits accounted for in the  calculations were as follows (see detailed definitions in Appendix  A):
Program costs include program and administration  costs paid by the government. 
Marginal social costs of public funds represent  the loss incurred by society when raising additional revenues such as taxes to  fund government programs. 
Employment earnings consist of incremental  impacts on participants’ earnings during and after participation. The  calculation accounts for the participant’s forgone earnings during  participation (that is opportunity cost). Employment earnings were also  increased by 15% for fringe benefits such as employer-paid health, life  insurance and pension contributions.
Strengths and limitations of the studies
One of the key strengths from the studies is that all  quantitative analyses were based on administrative data rather than survey  responses. Compared to survey data, administrative data are not subject to recall  errors or response bias.
The propensity score models used to match participants and  non-participants for the incremental impact analyses are judged to be robust in  part because they were based on five years of pre-participation data and on a  vast array of variables including socio-demographic characteristics, location,  skills level related to last occupation and indicators of labour market  attachment. Sensitivity analysis and the use of alternative estimation methods  have increased confidence in the incremental impact estimates. However, one  limitation with the propensity score matching techniques is that no one can be  fully sure the impacts were not influenced by factors not captured in the  data.
The cost-benefit analysis accounted for all quantifiable  costs and benefits directly attributable to the EBSMs and could be estimated  with the available administrative data. The analysis did not account for  non-quantifiable benefits such as improvements in participant’s wellbeing or  for the multiplier effect of increased spending on the economy.
In some studies that relied on the use of qualitative data  collection methods, the number of interviewed key informants was relatively  small. Responses provided by key informants reflect their own experience in  their own region and may not be fully representative of the entire province.
1.3  Overview of the studies summarized  in this report
Findings presented in this report were drawn from nine  separate studies. These studies examined issues related to EBSM effectiveness,  efficiency, design/delivery and used a mix of qualitative and quantitative  methods. Each study examined evaluation issues in relation to active and former  EI claimants.
Table G1 in Appendix  G presents an overview of these studies, including the type of evidence  generated, the methods used, the reference period and the length of the  post-program period over which program effects were observed.
2. Evaluation findings
2.1  Rationale and labour market context
LMDA investments align  with Provincial Government priorities
Active labour market programs are fairly similar across the  Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development countries and consist of  skills training in a classroom setting, work experience with employers (often  subsidized) or in the public/non-profit sector, return-to-employment assistance  and self-employment assistance. In New Brunswick, the Department of  Post-Secondary Education, Training and Labour administers a range of active  labour market programming targeted at various groups of individuals. Programs  and services offered to active and former EI claimants are primarily funded  under the LMDA.
The Department of Post-Secondary Education, Training and  Labour’s 2015 to 2018 strategic plan outlines key result areas and goals linking with LMDA investments in order to  meet New Brunswick’s labour market needs. These include:
Investing in youth population in order to remain  and work in New Brunswick.
Improving literacy and essential skills to  contribute to greater productivity.
Accelerating training and educational  opportunities to ensure consistent link between training and labour force  needs.
Enhance experiential learning opportunities to  facilitate the integration into the labour force. 
Create opportunities to all New Brunswickers to  enter and remain in the labour market.
Connecting people to jobs and jobs to people to  make it easier to know where to find jobs to keep people in New Brunswick.
Investing in employment programs and services to  respond to current and future labour market opportunities.
Overall, incremental impacts reported in the LMDA evaluation  and discussed in this report demonstrated that LMDA funded programs and  services delivered in New Brunswick are generally helping participants improve  their labour market experience after participation and contribute to meeting  the Department of Post-Secondary Education, Training and Labour’s key result  areas and goals.
2.2  Training and Skills Development
2.2.1 Program description
Based on a document  review and 4 key informant interviews completed in the summer of 2015
The objective of Training and Skills Development is to help  individuals determine the shortest training path to obtain the necessary skills  to either successfully transition into today’s labour market or obtain/maintain  long-term sustainable full-time employment.
The program provides financial assistance to cover the  following expenses:
Living allowance 
Exam/certification/licensing allowance
Tuition
Fixed rate allowance 
Books and other materials
Student fees
Special equipment, clothing and tools
Childcare and dependent care
Tutoring 
Transportation
Training supported under the program includes academic upgrading  preparation (general educational development or adult high school diploma  testing) as well as workplace essential skills and regular training (up to 2  years or 3 years for co-op programs at a recognized post-secondary  institution). Training and Skills Development funding may support the  completion of a university degree for a maximum of two years if the person had  already started a university program.
Table 4, below, shows the proportion of expenditures and  interventions by type of supported training. Most of the interventions in New  Brunswick provide assistance to individuals pursuing vocational/occupational  training (89% of investments and 74% of total interventions). Eleven percent of  expenditures are provided for adult basic education/essential skills training  and account for 26% of total interventions.
Source: Post-Secondary Education, Training and LabourL
In 2013 and 2014, Training and Skills Development  incorporated changes including increases in funding for travel, childcare,  income replacement, transportation, and a top up for active EI claimants. The  eligibility criteria were reduced from 3 years to 2 years out of the public  school system for all participants and individuals with a second degree/diploma  approved as an exception by a regional director no longer sees the cost of  their previous Training and Skills Development funding deducted from their new  funding amount. A new academic upgrading component 5-6 (Level 1, step 3) was  added and the minimum age requirement for academic upgrading participants was  lowered from 21 to 19 years of age.
According to the questionnaire completed by New Brunswick  representatives, the preferred training delivery method is client-specific and  is determined though the employment counselling process. The delivery method  may be a co-op program, classroom, distance education, etc., as long as the  program is delivered by an eligible institution.
2.2.2  Program delivery
Based on a document  review and 4 key informant interviews completed in the summer of 2015
The application process typically starts by referring  individuals to an information session. Employment counsellors also meet with  the individual to conduct a needs determination assessment in order to  establish an Employment Action Plan and determine what type of assistance is  required. If Training and Skills Development is identified as the required  intervention in the Employment Action Plan, the individual is assessed to  determine if he/she meets the criteria established in the program guidelines.  The individual is then required to conduct labour market research to confirm  that he/she is making the right training choice.
To be eligible for training, applicants must be out of the  school system for the last 2 years; be 19 years old and over; not be job ready  (that is do not have the capacity to get a job in the current labour market);  be unemployed, under-employed, threatened by lay off, or seasonally employed;  not have received overpayments from the program; and be motivated to return to  school.
The length of the application process depends on the  individual and may range from few meetings spread over a few weeks or a few  months.
All participants are monitored during training however the  means and frequency of monitoring may vary by region. Counsellors may also  contact the participants on an as-needed basis. Follow up with the participant  occurs after training to assist them with further services that may be  required. The follow-up may occur about every 4 months until the individual is  employed or no longer wants services.
2.2.3 Targeting to Labour  Market demand
Based on a document  review and 4 key informant interviews completed in the summer of 2015
Overall, Training and Skills Development counsellors steer  the prospective participants toward in-demand occupations through counselling  and labour market research. As part of the labour market research process, the  individual may have to speak to employers or employees from their chosen  occupation. As well, the counsellors may recommend the individual attend an  observation day at a community college or to speak with a student or professor.  The prospective participant may also be directed to use available labour market  information from websites or reports.
Table 5 presents the top 5 occupations that program  participants were trained for in 2013 to 2014.
Source: Post-Secondary Education, Training and Labour.
2.2.4 Profile of Training and  Skills Development participants
As shown in Table B1 in Appendix B, the majority of active claimants who started  Training and Skills Development participation between 2002 and 2005 were male  (63%) compared to 53% females for the 2006 to 2008 cohort of participants. As  well, 56% of participants in both cohorts were between 25 and 44 years old, and  they most frequently held occupations requiring secondary or occupational  training prior to participation (45% for the 2002 to 2005 cohort and 41% for  the 2006 to 2008 cohort). Active claimants who participated in Training and  Skills Development in 2002 to 2005 had higher employment earnings in the year  before participation ($16,633) compared to those who participated in 2006 to 2008  ($14,849).
Former claimants who started Training and Skills Development  participation in the 2002 to 2005 and 2006 to 2008 periods were mainly female  (51% and 61% respectively), and most were between 25 to 34 years of age (38%  and 42% respectively). Participants most frequently held occupations requiring  secondary or occupational training before participation (40% and 42%  respectively).  The 2002 to 2005 cohort  had higher employment earnings in the year before participation ($9,394)  compared to the average earnings for the 2006 to 2008 cohort ($8,171).
2.2.5 Incremental impacts
Active claimants
As shown in Table B2 in Appendix B, active claimants who started Training and  Skills Development participation between 2002 and 2005 had incremental gains in  earnings and incidence of employment in each of the five years after  participation. As shown in Figure 2, earnings continuously increased over time  with gains ranging between $592 and $5,673 following participation. Similarly,  the increases in incidence of employment ranged between 3.3 and 5.4 percentage  points. Participants also decreased the use of EI and social assistance during  the post-program period and reduced their level of dependence on income support  between 1 and 2 percentage points during the first three years following  participation.
Figure 2. Increased earnings of active and former Training and Skills Development participants relative to non-participants 



Text description of Figure 2
* Estimate non-statistically significant at the 95%  confidence level.
Active claimants who started Training and Skills Development  participation in the 2006 to 2008 period had incremental gains in earnings and  incidence of employment over the entire three years post-participation.  Participants also decreased their use of social assistance and experienced  short-term decreases in EI use and in dependence on government income support.
Overall, active claimants increased their labour market  attachment through increases in earnings, incidence of employment and a  decrease in the level of dependence on government income support (use of EI and  social assistance).
The results for sub-groups of active claimants were as  follows:
Youth (under 30 years old) who started Training  and Skills Development participation in the 2002 to 2005 period had incremental  gains in earnings and incidence of employment in all years after participation.  As well, they decreased the use of EI and social assistance and their  dependence on income support over most post-program years. 
Older workers (55 years old and over) who  started Training and Skills Development participation in the 2002 to 2005  period had incremental increases in earnings and incidence of employment during  the post-program period. Their use of EI increased over most of the  post-program period and their dependence on income support increased in the  second and fourth years following participation. Impacts on the use of social  assistance were non-statistically significant. The increase in EI use reflects  the inability of some older workers to retain the employment secured following  participation.
Long-tenured  workers who started Training and Skills Development participation between  2007 and 2009 had incremental gains in their incidence of employment in the  second and third year post-program. They also increased their earnings in the  third year after participation but this increase did not compensate for losses  in earnings during the participation years and in the first year after  participation. Most incremental impact estimates on the use of EI and social  assistance and the level of dependence on income support were non-statistically  significant, though social assistance decreased by $63 in the third year after  participation and dependence on income support decreased by 2.3 percentage  points in the second year following participation.
Former claimants
Former claimants who started Training and Skills Development  participation between 2002 and 2005 had incremental gains in earnings in most  years after participation. Gains in earnings increased from $1,727 in the  second year post-program to $4,432 in the fifth year (see Table  B3). As well, participants had increases in incidence of employment ranging  between 3.9 and 4.5 percentage points in four of the five post-participation  years. Former claimants decreased the use of social assistance by a cumulative  of $692 and reduced their dependence on government income support by 2  percentage points in years 4 and 5 post-participation.  Incremental impacts on the use of EI were  non-statistically significant.
Former claimants who started participation between 2006 and  2008 had a decrease in earnings in the first post-program year but gains in the  subsequent years. Participants also increased their incidence of employment in  the second and third years after participation. Their use of EI decreased in  the first year post-program and their use of social assistance and dependence  on income support also decreased over the entire post-program period.
Overall, former claimants increased their labour market  attachment through increases in earnings, incidence of employment and a  decrease in the use of social assistance.
The results for sub-groups of former claimants were as  follows:
Youth who started participation between 2002 and  2005 experienced an overall increase in earnings, as well as gains in incidence  of employment during several post-program years. Youth also decreased their use  of social assistance and dependence on government income support during several  post-program years. The incremental impacts on the use of EI were  non-statistically significant.
Incremental impacts for long-tenured workers who  started participation in the 2007 to 2009 period were non-statistically  significant for the entire three years post-participation.
2.2.6 Cost-benefit results
As shown in Table B4 in Appendix B,  for active claimants, the benefits of Training and Skills Development for  society were $4,965 higher than the costs six years after participation. The  benefits matched the costs 5.1 years after participation. For former claimants,  the benefits were $1,337 lower than the costs six years after the end of  participation. As such, the benefits matched the costs 6.3 years after  participation.
2.2.7 Challenges and lessons learned about  Training and Skills Development design and delivery
Based on a document  review and 4 key informant interviews completed in the summer of 2015
Key informants identified the following challenges in  relation to the design and delivery of Training and Skills Development:
Training and Skills Development eligibility  criteria exclude some individuals who would benefit from training and  upskilling. 
The financial assistance for tuition is too  limited in some situations. 
The following barriers were identified as being  barriers to employment as well as to accessing and completing training: 

Financial hardship. 
Access to childcare and transportation. 
Learning, mental or physical disabilities. 
Language barriers. 
Low education and literacy levels and lack of  work experience. 
The need to complete high school upgrading as  pre-requisite to training. 
Personal issues such as a criminal record.
Key informants also identified a number of lessons learned  and best practices:
Having flexible program criteria while ensuring  consistency in applying program guidelines. 
Examining the possibility of providing  employment supports (for example access to specialized clothing).
Providing additional funding for participants  pursuing training in high-demand occupations.
Providing more support (for example, increase  funding for tuition) to youth to retain them in their local communities.
Providing funding for a period of time after the  end of the training in order to support the individual while conducting job  search. 
Providing diagnostic assessments for those with  multiple barriers to employment to address barriers to training and employment  and to implement needed accommodations.
2.3  Skills Development-Apprentices
2.3.1 Program description
Based on a document  review and 3 key informant interviews completed in the summer of 2015
Skills Development - Apprentices provides funding to EI  eligible individuals who are on block release apprenticeship training. The  purpose of the program is to assess eligible apprentices and provide  interventions and accommodations to those requiring learning supports. Funding  is provided to apprentices to cover the following expenses while they are on  training including tuition, books, travel costs and tutors. Funding also covers  the salary of a learning strategist in each of the four New Brunswick regions.
2.3.2 Program delivery
Based on a document  review and 3 key informant interviews completed in the summer of 2015
The program is delivered by regional staff from the  apprenticeship office, under the supervision of regional apprenticeship  managers. Apprenticeship counsellors meet with eligible apprentices once they  are registered for classroom training.   The counsellors provide them with information and assist with applying  for all available supports.
Counsellors do follow-up with apprentices while they are in  training to monitor the financial aspects and their progression along the  apprenticeship path.  Monitoring can be  site visits and/or verifying attendance. The counsellors also ensure that  apprentices are employed, working enough hours to progress in their  apprenticeship and are ready for training.
2.3.3 Profile of Skills  Development - Apprentices participants
The majority of active claimants who started Skills  Development - Apprentices participation in 2003 to 2005 and 2013 to 2014 were  male (86% and 98% respectively) and were below 35 years of age (81% and 63%).  See Table C1 in Appendix C for  more details.  As well, participants most  frequently held occupations requiring college or apprenticeship training before  participation (65% and 86% respectively). Active claimants who started  participation in 2003 to 2005 had lower employment earnings in the year before  participation ($21,429) compared to those who participated in 2013 to 2014  ($30,004).
Seventy percent of former claimants who participated in  Skills Development - Apprentices in 2003to 2005 were male, and the majority of  participants were below 35 years of age (79%). Most of them (46%) had an  occupation requiring college or apprenticeship prior to participation.  As well, in the year before participation,  the participants had an average of $16,113 in earnings from employment.
2.3.4 Labour Market outcomes
The labour market outcomes were based on individuals who  began their participation during the 2003-2005 period. Statistics presented in  Tables C2 and C3 in Appendix C  focused on 5 years prior and 7 years after the program start year.
Active claimants
As shown in Figure 3, the employment earnings of active  claimants increased from $13,631 in the fifth year pre-program to $48,295 in  the seventh year after the participation start year. However, their annual  average incidence of employment was slightly lower in the seven years after the  participation start year (94% to 97%) compared to before participation (95% to  99%). Higher proportions of self-employed participants and lower proportions of  participants on social assistance were observed during the post-program period.
Figure 3. Average earnings for active claimant participants in Skills Development-Apprentices



Text description of Figure 3
Former claimants
As shown in Figure 4, former claimants had steady increases  in their employment earnings in all years before participation and the first  six years following the participation start year. Over that period, their  average annual earnings grew from $10,633 to $40,321 in the sixth year  post-program. The average annual proportion of employed participants fluctuated  between 88% and 99% in the five years before participation and then between 93%  and 99% in the seven years following the participation start year. Participants  reported higher levels of self-employment during the post-program period and  they had a decrease in the use of social assistance.
Figure 4. Average earnings for former claimant participants in Skills Development-Apprentices



Text description of Figure 4
2.3.5 Challenges and lessons learned  about Skills Development - Apprentices design and delivery
Based on a document  review and 3 key informant interviews completed in the summer of 2015
Existing literature has shown that there is a fairly high  non-completion rate among apprentices in Canada (40-50%).  Furthermore, subject matter literature revealed that despite the growth in  apprenticeship registrations in Canada, there has not been a corresponding  increase in completions.  While available data do not provide reliable information on completion and  non-completion rates for Skills Development - Apprentices participants, key  informants interviewed in the evaluation identified reasons that could lead  apprentices to drop-out from the apprenticeship process. These include:
The apprentice realizes that he/she is not  suited for the trade selected. 
Change in the economy such as downturn and  sudden lack of work.
Financial constraints. 
Delays in getting EI benefits. 
Employers not willing or able to let their  apprentices go on training.
Lack of incentive to complete the training.
Learning disability or lack of essential skills.
Living in a remote location when the apprentice  has to leave their family and travel a long distance to the location of the  training.
Challenges in relation to the design and delivery of Skills  Development - Apprentices or apprenticeship training in general included:
Lack of awareness about how the apprenticeship  system works. 
No electronic systems for the apprenticeship  application and for funding supports. 
Delay in reimbursing the tuition rebate. 
Apprentices do not see a big financial gain from  attending apprenticeship training. 
Level of funding is perceived to be  insufficient; particularly the level of financial support for childcare and  transportation.
Lessons learned and good practices related to program design  and delivery included:
Conducting essential skills assessment up front  to ensure that the person has the necessary support before starting  training.  
Having access to learning strategists whom are  able to implement accommodations for apprentices with special needs based on  psycho-educational assessments. 
Having apprenticeship training counsellors  monitor the progress of apprentices, communicate with them personally, provide  them with relevant information and help them access available supports.
2.4  Employer Wage Subsidy
2.4.1 Program description
Based on a document  review and 5 key informant interviews completed in the summer of 2015
The intent of Employer Wage Subsidy is to foster employer/employee  relationships and enhance the skills of unemployed individuals ultimately  resulting in long-term sustainable full-time employment. Program-specific  objectives include:
Stimulate the creation of long-term employment  opportunities in the private sector, non-profit organization or First Nations. 
Assist unemployed individuals to secure  sustainable employment.
Stimulate the hiring of identified priority  groups in New Brunswick (that is, Indigenous people, social assistance  recipients, persons with disabilities, visible minority, newcomers, older  workers and recent post-secondary graduates).
Potential participants must meet the following criteria in  order to become eligible for Employer Wage Subsidy:
Be EI eligible and unemployed (that is  individual is working 15 hours or less/week).
Be legally entitled to work in Canada. 
Be residing in New Brunswick or be willing to  establish residency in New Brunswick. 
Not be a full-time student. 
Not be an immediate family member of the  employer (for example spouse, child, parent, brother, sister), nor can they be  an officer or a director of the organization or a member of their immediate  family.
Priority for program funding is given to individuals in the  following groups, whom may or may not be EI eligible: Indigenous people, social  assistance recipients, persons with disabilities, visible minorities,  newcomers, older workers and recent post-secondary graduates. Individuals who  are not EI eligible would receive funding from other non-LMDA programs.
Employer Wage Subsidy funds full-time permanent positions  and seasonal employment in seasonal industries. The level and duration of the  subsidy varies depending on the type of participants or employment:
For EI eligible individuals, the subsidy  represents 50% of their hourly wages up to a maximum of $8 per hour. The  duration varies between 12 and 24 weeks depending on the job. 
For EI eligible individuals who are seasonally  employed, the subsidy consists of 50% of the hourly wage to a maximum of $8 per  hour. The job must be at least 14 weeks in duration and the subsidy is granted  for a minimum of 7 weeks and up to 10 weeks maximum.  
For unemployed individuals from a priority  group, the subsidy represents 70% of the hourly wage, up to a maximum of $8 per  hour. The duration ranges from 12 to 24 weeks. For recent post-secondary  graduates who obtained their diploma in the past 4 years and are being hired in  their field of study, the subsidy is offered over 52 weeks at a rate of $10 per  hour provided that the employer pays an hourly wage of at least $14 per hour.
2.4.2 Program delivery
Based on a document  review and 5 key informant interviews completed in the summer of 2015
Employer Wage Subsidy is managed and delivered by the  regional director and program staff of the Department of Post-Secondary  Education, Training and Labour. A central Employer Wage Subsidy program  consultant is responsible for coordinating the program on behalf of the regions.
The program can be either employer or participant driven. When  the program is employer driven, the employer contacts a regional office to  submit an application. Program officers determine the employer’s eligibility  and, if eligible, the employer becomes responsible for finding an employee. The  qualifications and the skill level of the potential employee are assessed by  the employer.  The Department of  Post-Secondary Education, Training and Labour’s staff develop a contract with  the employer once a suitable candidate is found.
When the application process is driven by the participant,  the employment counsellor provides a recommendation letter to the case-managed  candidate. The individual uses this letter of recommendation to inform  potential employers about the subsidy. Program officers may also help the  employer identify potential candidates by referring them to case-managed  individuals or by informing case-managed individuals of possible employment  opportunities.
To be eligible for Employer Wage Subsidy, employers have to  use the subsidy to fill a new position. As part of the program application  form, employers must provide their payroll history for the last 12 months so  program officers can validate the creation of a new position. Employers who do  not keep the position after the end of the subsidy would not qualify for the  program a second time.
There is no systematic follow-up of participants during the  subsidy. However, program officers may meet the participants or conduct a  monitoring visit with the employer on an as-needed basis.
The top five occupations most frequently subsidized during  fiscal year 2013 to 2014 were: labourers in food, beverage and associated  products processing; administrative assistants; nurse aides, orderlies and  patient service associates; early childhood educators and assistants; and  retail salespersons.
2.4.3 Profile of Employer Wage  Subsidy participants
As shown in Table D1 in Appendix D, active claimants who started participation in  2002 to 2005 and 2006 to 2008 were mainly male (57% and 54% respectively).  Sixty one percent of those who started participating between 2002 and 2005 were  35 years of age and over compared to 63% of the 2006 to 2008 participants.  Thirty-five percent of the 2002 to 2005 participants most frequently held occupations  requiring secondary or occupational training prior to program participation.  For the 2006 to 2008 cohort, 35% of participants held occupations requiring  college or apprenticeship training prior to their participation. Employment  earnings in the year before participation were similar between the two cohorts  ($14,235 versus $14,895).
Former claimants who started program participation in 2002 to  2005 and 2006 to 2008 were mainly male (55% and 62% respectively). Slightly  more than half of participants in these two cohorts were 34 years of age and  younger (51% each). Thirty-six percent of the 2002 to 2005 participants most  frequently held occupations requiring secondary or occupational training prior  to program participation. For the 2006 to 2008 cohort, 36% of participants held  occupations requiring college or apprenticeship training prior to  participation. Employment earnings in the year before participation were  similar between the two cohorts ($11,534 versus $12,192).
2.4.4 Incremental impacts
Detailed incremental impact results for active and former  claimants are presented in Tables D2 and D3 in Appendix D.
Active claimants
Active claimants who started Employer Wage Subsidy participation  between 2002 and 2005 had incremental increases in earnings after participation  ranging from $813 to $1,415 (see Figure 5). Their incidence of employment  increased between 2.1 and 2.7 percentage points following participation.  Participants reduced the use of EI by a cumulative of $1,120 or 3 weeks  following participation. Results for social assistance use and the level of  dependence on income support were non-statistically significant.
Figure 5. Increased earnings of active and former Employer Wage Subsidy participants relative to non-participants



Text description of Figure 5
Active claimants who started Employer Wage Subsidy  participation between 2006 and 2008 increased their earnings and incidence of  employment over most of the post-program years as well as their use of EI after  participation. Incremental impacts on the use of social assistance were  non-statistically significant. The increase in EI use reflects the inability of  some Employer Wage Subsidy participants to maintain the employment secured  during or after the end of the subsidy. When interpreting these results,  readers should keep in mind that participants collect insurable hours under EI  while working in the subsidized job. This may allow them to start claiming EI  if they are not able to maintain their subsidized job.
Overall, despite the increase use of EI, active claimants  improved their labour market attachment through increases in earnings and  incidence for employment.
Results for the various sub-groups showed:
Youth (under 30 years old) who started Employer  Wage Subsidy participation between 2002 and 2005 experienced short-term  positive impacts with increased earnings ($1,150), incidence of employment (3.4  percentage points), and decreased dependence on income support (5 percentage  points) in year 1 post-program. They also reduced their EI use following  participation by a cumulative of $2,224 or 5 weeks. All other incremental  impacts were non-statistically significant.  
Long-tenured  workers who started Employer Wage Subsidy participation between 2007 and  2009 experienced decreases in their employment earnings by a cumulative of  $7,456 over the three years post-program period. They increased the use of EI  by a cumulative of $1,486 or 4.1 weeks and decreased their use of social  assistance by $117 following participation. Incremental impacts on the  incidence of employment were non-statistically significant.
Former claimants
Former claimants who started Employer Wage Subsidy  participation in 2002 to 2005 had incremental increases in earnings ranging  between $925 and $1,652 annually over the five years post-participation. They  also increased their incidence of employment between 3.5 and 4.9 percentage  points following participation. They increased the use of EI by a cumulative of  $1,430 or 2.8 weeks, while the use of social assistance decreased by a cumulative  of $915 post-participation.
Similar to the 2002 to 2005 participants, former claimants  who started Employer Wage Subsidy in 2006-2008 had increases in earnings (cumulative  of $9,893) and incidence of employment (ranging between 3.6 and 6.5 percentage  points) over the three post-program years. Their social assistance use and  dependence on income support decreased over the post-program period.
Overall, former claimants increased their use of EI  following participation. This indicates the inability of some former claimants  to maintain the employment secured in the short-term. It can also be argued  that the increase in EI use is an indication of an increase in labour market  attachment for this client group since they did experience increases in  employment earnings and incidence of employment as well as a decrease in the  use of social assistance. As a reminder, former claimants are participants for  whom the EI benefit period ended up to three years pre-participation.
Results were similar for other groups of former claimants:
Youth who started participation in the 2002 to 2005  period increased their earnings (cumulative of $10,112) and incidence of  employment (ranging between from 3.3 to 6.6 percentage points) over the five  years post-participation. They decreased their use of social assistance  (cumulative of $1,128), as well as their dependence on income support during  several post-program years. There was a short-term increase in EI use,  indicating the inability of some youth to retain the employment secured during  the subsidy.
Long-tenured workers who started their  participation between 2007 and 2009 increased their incidence of employment  between 5.3 to 8.4 percentage points following participation. They also reduced  their use of social assistance by a cumulative of $675 following participation.  Incremental impacts on earnings and the use of EI were non-statistically  significant.
2.4.5 Cost-benefit results
As shown in Table D4, for active  claimants who started Employer Wage Subsidy participation between 2002 and 2005  the benefits of Employer Wage Subsidy recovered the costs within 5.1 years  after participation from the social perspective. The total benefits six years  after program end exceeded the costs by $1,390. Similarly the benefits of  Employer Wage Subsidy for former claimants exceeded the costs during the second  year of the participation period. The benefits six years after the end of participation  exceeded the costs by $10,789.
2.4.6 Challenges and lessons learned about Employer Wage Subsidy design and  delivery
Based on a document review and 5 key informant interviews completed in  the summer of 2015
Despite being effective at helping participants to find and  maintain employment, there has been a steady decline in the number of new  Employer Wage Subsidy interventions delivered per year. The number of new  interventions decreased from 3,109 in 2004 to 2005 to 1,632 in 2014 to 2015.
Key informants identified the following reasons to explain  the decline in the use of Employer Wage Subsidy:
Changes to the eligibility criteria reduced the  number of participants who can benefit from the program.
There is significant outmigration of potential  workers to Western Canada. 
Local economic conditions indicate that, in some  regions of New Brunswick, the number of employers is decreasing. As well,  business expansion may be limited in regions with a struggling economy.
They also identified the following reasons to explain why  employers may not be inclined to use the program:
Some employers believe there is too much  paperwork required for the program. 
Employers may have difficulty finding an  employee who is EI eligible and who has the right skill sets.
There is a lack of awareness about the program.
Challenges with the design and delivery of Employer Wage  Subsidy include:
Employer eligibility criteria limit the number  of employers that can access the program.
Validating whether the requested subsidy will be  used to support a new position is time consuming for program officers.
The level of awareness about the program could  be improved.
The Program Officers’ high workload can be an  issue in urban centers.
Key informants were asked about the best practices and the  lessons they learned in terms of the design and delivery of the program. These  included:
Employers generally appreciate that the program  is delivered at the regional level because regional staff are better placed to  understand the needs of the local labour market. 
Conducting on-site assessments of employer  applications and maintaining contact with employers is beneficial and allows  counsellors to assess how the employee is fitting in the position. 
Managing employer’s expectations. 
The program has flexibility with access to  additional funding to assist different client groups.
The post-secondary component is very important  for the retention of youth in New Brunswick. 
It would be helpful if the administrative  process depended on email and scanned forms rather than correspondence by  regular mail. 
Program officers should be consistent when applying  program guidelines. 
Using the employer-driven approach for the  application process is a best practice.
2.5 Self-Employment Benefit
2.5.1 Program description
The Self-Employment Benefit program assists unemployed  individuals create a job for themselves by starting a new business. Financial  support and advice is provided to unemployed individuals as they develop their  business.
2.5.2 Profile of participants
As shown in Table E1 in Appendix E, active claimants who started participating in  Self-Employment Benefit in 2002 to 2005 and 2006 to 2008 were primarily male  (66% and 68% respectively). Most participants in both cohorts were 35 years of  age and older (62% and 68% respectively).   Both the 2002 to 2005 and 2006 to 2008 participants most frequently had  occupations requiring college or apprenticeship training prior to participation  (36% and 43% respectively). Both cohorts had similar earnings in the year  before participation ($23,343 and $23,086 respectively).
Former claimants who started Self-Employment Benefit  participation in 2002 to 2005 were mainly male (52%) and in 2006 to 2008,  participants were primarily female (52%). Most participants in both cohorts  were 35 years of age and older (64% and 65% respectively). Former claimants in  both cohorts most frequently held occupations requiring college/apprenticeship  training (35% and 32% respectively) prior to participation. As well,  respectively, 27% and 36% of these participants had an occupation requiring  secondary or occupational training. The 2002 to 2005 cohort had slightly higher  earnings in the year before participation ($12,745) than the 2006 to 2008  cohort ($10,127).
2.5.3 Challenges in measuring  Self-Employment Benefit incremental impacts
Like other EBSMs, incremental impacts were estimated for  Self-Employment Benefit participants in the 2002 to 2005 and 2006 to 2008  periods. Results showed large decreases in employment/self-employment earnings  and decreases in the incidence of employment. As well, compared to similar  non-participants, participants decreased their use of EI and social assistance  and reduced their dependence on government income support.
Detailed estimates are presented in Tables E2 and E3 in Appendix E. However, they are not discussed in  the report since they may not provide an accurate depiction of the financial  well-being of Self-Employment Benefit participants in the post-program period.  Impacts were examined using individual earnings reported in the T1 and T4  taxation files from Canada Revenue Agency, and measured relative to active  claimants who did not participate in Self-Employment Benefit and may have been  in any employment/unemployment situation following participation (for example,  unemployed, paid employee or self-employed).
According to a study from Statistics Canada, self-employed  individuals in Canada have a lower average annual income than paid employees  ($46,200 versus $52,400 in 2009), but the average net worth of their households  is 2.7 times greater than that of the paid employee households, which indicates  that some self-employed individuals may leave funds within their business for  reinvestment purposes.  Overall, this suggests that looking at individual earnings alone, without  taking the net worth into consideration, may not provide a fair assessment of  how well participants are doing financially after participation.
As well, little is known about the design and delivery of  this program. In particular, there is a lack of understanding around the role  played by this program in helping future entrepreneurs implement viable  business plans and develop their entrepreneurship skills. Overall, it is not  clear whether participant’s success in improving their labour market attachment  through self-employment is more closely associated with their business idea and  their entrepreneurship skills than the assistance provided under the  Self-Employment Benefit program.
2.6 Employment Assistance Services
2.6.1 Program description
Based on a document  review and 11 key informant interviews completed in the summer of 2013
Employment Assistance Services assists unemployed  individuals prepare for, obtain and maintain employment. Services are  accessible to all unemployed persons seeking employment-related supports.
Key Employment Assistance Services in New Brunswick include:
Individualized case management - including  employment counselling, skills assessment, assessment of strengths and  weaknesses, and development of employment action plans. All LMDA participants  must have an employment action plan.
Help with career decisions.
Job search activities and workshops (job search,  networking, etc.).
Referral services - linking employers,  educational institutions and government, and coordination of support services.
Marketing clients and client groups.
Job preparation intervention such as interview  skills and techniques.
Help with résumé writing and cover letters.
Networking with employers and job placements.
One-on-one job assistance.
Long-term follow-up for employment maintenance.
Essential skills training (soft skills training,  first aid, job shadowing, on-the-job work exploration experience). 
Access to labour market information (newspapers  and internet).
Off-site employment services to companies that  are laying-off employees.                                     
Drop-in career information centres with access  to computers, newspapers and community resources.
2.6.2 Program delivery
Based on a document  review and 11 key informant interviews completed in the summer of 2013
In New Brunswick, the Department of Post-Secondary  Education, Training and Labour delivers Employment Assistance Services through  external contracts in partnership with non-profit, private and/or public  organizations. Participants are referred to Employment Assistance Services by  employment counsellors and may also be self-referred. Department of  Post-Secondary Education, Training and Labour’s Regional Offices are  responsible for identifying participants’ needs and target participants to be  served under Employment Assistance Services as well as to set and achieve  targets.
2.6.3 Profile of Employment Assistance  Services participants
The socio-demographic profile was produced for individuals  who only received Employment Assistance Services without participating in other  employment benefits programs.
Active claimants
As shown in Table F1 in Appendix F, active claimants who started their Employment  Assistance Services participation in 2002 to 2005 and in 2006 to 2008 were  mostly males (57% and 64% respectively). Over half of the participants in both  cohorts were between 25 and 44 years of age (59% and 51% respectively). Active  claimants who participated in Employment Assistance Services most frequently  held occupations requiring secondary or occupational training before  participation (39% each). As well, both cohorts had similar employment earnings  ($16,504 and $16,263).
Former claimants
Former claimants were predominately males in both the 2002 to  2005 and 2005 to 2008 periods (54% and 58% respectively).  Fifty-eight percent of the 2002 to 2005  participants were between 25 and 44 years old compared to 55% for 2006 to 2008  participants. Both the 2002 to 2005 and 2006 to 2008 groups most frequently  held occupations requiring secondary or occupational training before  participation (36% and 38% respectively). Participants from the 2002 to 2005  cohort had lower earnings ($8,646) in the year before participation compared to  the 2006 to 2008 cohort ($10,934).
Labour Market barriers faced by Employment Assistance Services participants
Based on a document  review and 11 key informant interviews completed in the summer of 2013
The program managers and representatives from service  delivery organizations interviewed identified a number of barriers that  Employment Assistance Services participants are facing in terms of labour  market participation. Examples of barriers include low educational attainment,  low literacy and numeracy skills, lack of on-the-job skills, limited job  opportunities (especially during the off-season), bilingual requirements, older  workers competing with younger workers for similar positions, transportation  (especially in rural areas), poverty in general (lack of transportation and no  telephones), mental health issues, and pressure to hold multiple jobs in order  to support a basic level of sustenance.
Other Employment Assistance Services participants, such as  persons with disabilities, face unique barriers to work. They often have low educational  attainment, low literacy and numeracy skills, lack of work experience,  difficulties multi-tasking on-the-job.   Persons with disabilities often take lower skilled jobs as a result of  competing with people that have higher skill sets.  In addition, it was identified that there is  social stigmatism towards people with disabilities.
2.6.4 Incremental impacts
Results presented in Table F2 in  Appendix F indicated that active claimants who participated in Employment  Assistance Services between 2002 and 2005 increased their earnings by a  cumulative of $6,182 after participation despite a short decrease in earnings  in year 1. As well, their incidence of employment increased between 1.0 and 1.4  percentage points after participation (see Figure 6). Participants reduced  their use of EI in all years after participation by a cumulative of $1,905 or  5.5 weeks. Their level of dependence on income support also decreased between  1.1 and 1.3 percentage points annually during four out of five post-program  years.
Figure 6. Incidence of employment for active claimant participants in Employment Assistance Services



Text description of Figure 6
* The estimate is not statistically significant at the 95%  confidence level.
Results for active claimants who participated in Employment  Assistance Services in 2006 to 2008 also showed incremental increases in  earnings and gains in incidence of employment in the three years after  participation. Their use of EI increased by a cumulative of 1.5 weeks and the  dependence on income support showed an increase of 1.6 percentage points in  year three post-participation.
The results varied for the three sub-groups examined:
Youth (under 30 years old) who started an  Employment Assistance Services intervention between 2002 and 2005 had incremental  gains in earnings starting in the third year after participation. Their use of  EI decreased in all post-program years along with a decrease in the dependence  on income support in the first and third post-program years. 
Older workers (55 years old and over) who  started an Employment Assistance Services intervention between 2002 and 2005  had incremental gains in earnings starting in the second post-program year and  increases in incidence of employment during most of the post-program period.  While the incremental impacts on the use of EI and social assistance were  non-statistically significant, older workers increased their dependence on  income support overall. 
Long-tenured  workers who started an Employment Assistance Services intervention between  2007 and 2009 had decreased earnings in the first year post-program, decreases  in the use of EI but an increase in social assistance use. This reflects their  difficulty to reintegrate into the labour market.
Earlier participation in Employment Assistance Services improves participant’s  labour market outcomes
The study on the effects related to the timing of  participation showed that incremental impacts on earnings and employment were  larger for individuals who received Employment Assistance Services early during  their EI claim compared to individuals who remained on EI longer before  receiving these services (see Figure 7 below and Table F3 in Appendix F). Specifically, individuals who started their participation  within four weeks following the start of their EI benefit period had a total  increase of $16,193 in their earnings over the five years post-program.
Figure 7. Cumulative incremental impacts on earnings related to the timing of participation in Employment Assistance Services



Text description of Figure 7
* Estimates are not statistically significant at the 95%  confidence level
As well, the study looked at the difference between the  number of EI weeks unused by participants and their comparison group to determine  the effect of the timing of Employment Assistance Services participation on the  return to employment. Those who started receiving assistance within the first  four weeks of their claim returned to employment faster than the comparison  group. Specifically, they returned to employment 3.5 weeks earlier than the  comparison group (see Table F4 in Appendix F).  Participants who started Employment Assistance Services after the fourth week  of their EI claim returned to employment 0.8 to 3.9 weeks later than the  comparison group.
Among all Employment Assistance Services participants in the  2002 to 2005 period, 1,555 received assistance within the first 4 weeks of  establishing an EI claim. With an average weekly EI benefits of $294 during  this period, the 1,555 participants did not use $1,600,095 in EI benefits  (1,555 * $294 * 3.5 weeks). The average cost of receiving only Employment  Assistance Services interventions in the 2002-2005 period was $658. This  represents a cost of $1,023,190 [(1,555) * $658] for a net saving of $576,905.
2.6.5 Cost-benefit results
As shown in Table F5 in Appendix F,  the benefits of Employment Assistance Services from the society perspective  exceeded the cost by $5,280 six years after participation.  It took 3.4 years after the end of  participation for the benefits to recover the costs.
Incremental impact analyses showed that Employment  Assistance Services are achieving this objective since it increased  participant’s earnings and employment, and decreased their EI use after  participation. The value of the return in employment was not accounted for in  this analysis since it is difficult to attribute a dollar figure to this  impact. The decrease in EI use was also not considered from the social  perspective because it represents a benefit for the government and a cost to  the individual – they cancel each other out.
2.6.6 Challenges and lessons learned  about Employment Assistance Services design and delivery
Based on a document  review and 11 key informant interviews completed in the summer of 2013
Key informants highlighted a number of challenges with  delivering Employment Assistance Services which fall under the following  categories: accessibility, capacity for delivery and lack of awareness of  programs and services.  Examples of  challenges identified include:
Accessibility: participants have transportation  issues especially in rural areas; limited support for transportation cost; and  some participants do not have telephones.
Capacity for Delivery: limited budgets and  resources to provide Employment Assistance Services; budgets have not increased  over time; difficulty in meeting targets; delivery of services has a  substantial administrative burden; and providing services to those who require  multiple interventions is costly. 
Awareness: there is a need to promote services  since some clients may not be aware of the services offered; however, service  delivery organizations do not necessarily have the funding to advertise their  services.
Best practices and lessons learned related to the general  design and delivery of program and services included:
Conducting individual case management and  providing a client-centered/holistic approach can help participants build  self-esteem. 
Investing time to help participants become  independent and use the drop-in resources and computers on their own. 
Demonstrating a standard business environment at  the employment centre to help identify potential social or behavioural  problems.
Making appropriate employee-employer matches  helps build relationships with employers and organizations as well as providing  participants with opportunities to explore career choices (job shadowing).
Working closely with referral agencies,  employment counsellors and social workers.
Having longer service provider contracts and  budgets would improve service delivery.  
The computer system “ContactNB.net” is seen by  service providers as assisting in tracking participants and verifying that they  get additional support after referrals.
Monitoring participants’ files at the service  provider level to ensure that the right services are provided to participants.
2.6.7 Challenges and lessons learned  for individuals facing multiple barriers
Based on a document  review and 11 key informant interviews completed in the summer of 2013
Challenges identified by key informants in terms of  providing Employment Assistance Services to individuals with multiple barriers  to employment include:
Participants with multiple barriers need  multiple services, but are limited since very few third party organizations are  able to provide all the services they need.
There is a lack of literacy training available  for participants with multiple barriers under EAS funding. 
Transportation in rural areas was identified as  a barrier for persons with disabilities; in some rural regions there is no  transportation at all.
Examples of best practices for participants with multiple  barriers to employment in New Brunswick included:
Individualized case management and detailed  assessment of participants’ strength and weaknesses.
Partnering with other third-party service  providers and sharing tools.
Support for transportation in rural communities  to facilitate access to Employment Assistance Services workshops.
Informing participants about the importance of  personal hygiene and wearing appropriate clothing, driving an automobile.
Drop-in career information centres help  participants build confidence and continue looking for work. 
Computer skills training.
Providing support to improve participant’s  self-esteem.
Résumé services.
Working closely with the Workplace Essential  Skills program to address barriers related to lack of essential workplace  skills. 
Conducting one-on-one job search support by  accompanying participants in handing out résumés or meeting one-on-one with  employers to market individual participants.
Providing Indigenous participants with role  models.
3. Comparison of key findings by program  type
This section provides an overview of the key findings from  the incremental impact analysis for Training and Skills Development, Employer  Wage Subsidy and Employment Assistance Services for both active and former EI  claimant participants who started participation in the 2002 to 2005 period.
Overall, incremental impacts demonstrate that LMDA programs  and services are improving the labour market attachment of participants,  including youth and older workers. As well, social benefits of participation  exceeded the cost of investments for most interventions over time. Finally,  providing Employment Assistance Services interventions earlier during an EI  claim (first four weeks) produced larger impacts on earnings and employment and  facilitated earlier return to work. This demonstrates the importance of  targeting early participation of EI active claimants.
Program participants  have a higher probability of being employed than comparison group members.
As show in Figure 8, active EI claimants who participated in  Training and Skills Development, Employer Wage Subsidy and Employment  Assistance Services had a higher probability of being employed (that is  increased their incidence of employment) compared to similar non-participants.  As well, former EI claimants who participated in Training and Skills  Development and Employer Wage Subsidy had a higher probability of being  employed compared to former EI claimants who received low intensity interventions  under Employment Assistance Services.
It is noted that Employment Assistance Services are  relatively modest activities such as counselling, job search assistance and  case management. By themselves, they are not expected to lead to substantial  effects on labour market outcomes. However, as demonstrated in the report,  providing Employment Assistance Services earlier during the EI claim (first  four weeks) generates significantly greater returns (see Figure 7 in  sub-section 2.6.4).
Figure 8. Change in probability of being employed in participants relative to non-participants



Text description of Figure 8
Increased earnings  for participants compared to comparison group members
As shown in Figure 9, active EI claimants who participated  in Training and Skills Development, Employer Wage Subsidy and Employment  Assistance Services increased their employment earnings compared to similar  non-participants. As well, former EI claimants who participated in Training and  Skills Development, Employer Wage Subsidy increased their employment earnings  compared to former EI claimants who received Employment Assistance Services  exclusively.
As already noted, providing Employment Assistance Services  earlier during the EI claim (first 4 weeks) generates significantly greater  returns.
Figure 9. Increased cumulative earnings of participants compared to non-participants



Text description of Figure 9
LMDAs are also  improving the probability of employment and the earnings of most youth and  older worker participants
Incremental impacts demonstrate that active and former EI claimants  who were youth and older workers, and who participated in Training and Skills  Development and Employment Assistance Services increased their employment  earnings compared to comparison group members. As well, former claimants who  were youth and who participated in Employer Wage Subsidy improved their  employment earnings (see Figure 10 and 11). Among active claimants, youth and  older workers who participated in Training and Skills Development had the  largest cumulative gain in earnings. This suggests that providing training to  youth and older workers yield strongest results.
Among active claimants, youth who  participated in Training and Skills Development and older workers who  participated in Training and Skills Development and Employment Assistance Services  increased the probability of employment compared to comparison group members.  As well, youth who were former claimants and who participated in Employer Wage  Subsidy increased their probability of employment. Among active claimants,  older workers experienced higher impacts on the incidence of employment than  youth participants in Training and Skills Development and Employment Assistance  Services.
Figure 10. Cumulative increase in employment earnings for youth participants relative to non-participants youth



Text description of Figure 10
* The estimate is not statistically significant at the 95%  confidence level
Figure 11. Cumulative increase in employment earnings for older workers participants relative to non-participants older workers



Text description of Figure 11
The use of EI is  reduced for all active claimant participants. While EI use increased for former  claimants who participated in Employer Wage Subsidy, it can be argued that this  reflects an increase in labour market attachment since the incremental impacts  on employment earnings and incidence of employment are positive and given the  decrease in the use of social assistance.
As shown in Figure 12, active EI claimants who participated  in Training and Skills Development, Employer Wage Subsidy and Employment  Assistance Services decreased their use of EI compared to similar  non-participants. Active claimants who participated in Training and Skills  Development decreased their use of social assistance.
Figure 12. Change in the cumulative use of Employment Insurance and Social Assistance for active claimants relative to non-participants



Text description of Figure 12
* The estimates are not statistically significant at the 95%  confidence level
As shown in Figure 13, former claimants who participated in  Employer Wage Subsidy increased their use of EI following participation. This  indicates the inability of some former claimants to maintain the employment  secured in the short-term. It can also be argued that the increase in EI use is  an indication of an increase in the labour market attachment for this client group  since they did experience increases in employment earnings and incidence of  employment as well as a decrease in the use of social assistance. As a  reminder, former claimants are participants for whom the EI benefit period  ended up to three years pre-participation.
Figure 13. Change in cumulative use of Employment Insurance and Social Assistance for former claimants relative to non-participants



Text description of Figure 13
*The estimate is not statistically significant at the 95%  confidence level
Social benefits of  participation exceeded costs of investments for most interventions.
As shown in Table 6, social benefits to participation  exceeded investment costs in a period ranging between the 2nd year of program  participation to just over 6 years after participation.
4. Conclusions
Evaluation evidence presented and  discussed in this report demonstrated that programs and services designed and  delivered by New Brunswick under the LMDA are generally helping participants  improve their labour market experience after participation. As such, evaluation  evidence suggests that LMDA funded programming contributes to achieving New Brunswick’s  strategic priorities.
Overall, incremental impacts demonstrate that LMDA programs  and services are improving the labour market attachment of participants,  including youth and older workers. As well, social benefits of participation  exceeded the cost of investments for most interventions over time. Finally,  providing Employment Assistance Services interventions earlier during an EI  claim (first four weeks) produced larger impacts on earnings and employment and  facilitated earlier return to work. This demonstrates the importance of  targeting early participation of EI active claimants.
Key informants interviews with service providers and program  managers as well as the documents reviewed and the questionnaires completed by  New Brunswick representatives generated a few lessons about program design and  delivery:
Training and Skills  Development
The Training and Skills Development application  process aims to ensure that prospective participants are choosing a trade that  will meet labour market demand. 
New Brunswick plans their training investment to  target labour market trends which may contribute to Training and Skills  Development effectiveness. 
According to the interviewed service providers  and managers, the main challenges related to Training and Skills Development  design and delivery included:

The eligibility criteria exclude some  individuals who could benefit from training and upskilling. 
The financial assistance for tuition is too  limited in some situations. 

Barriers to employment or to accessing and  completing training under Training and Skills Development included:

Financial hardship;
Access to childcare and transportation;
Learning, mental or physical disabilities;
Language barriers;
Low education, literacy levels and lack of work  experience;
Having to complete high school upgrading to take  training; and,
Personal issues such as a criminal record.
Skills Development-Apprentices
Existing literature showed that there is a  fairly high non-completion rate among apprentices in Canada (40-50%).  Furthermore, subject matter literature revealed that despite the growth in  apprenticeship registrations in Canada, there has not been a corresponding  increase in completion rates.  While it is not possible with available data to generate a reliable estimation  of the completion rate of Skills Development-Apprentices participants in New  Brunswick, key informants involved in apprenticeship delivery confirmed the  stagnation in completion rates.
According to key informants, apprenticeship  drop-out is due to factors such as lack of incentive to complete the training; a  learning disability; lack of essential skills; and living a long distance away  from the location of the training.
Other challenges noted by key informants  regarding the design and delivery of Skills Development-Apprentices included a  lack of awareness about how the apprenticeship system works; lack of electronic  application and funding supports system; delays in reimbursing the tuition  rebate; and the level of funding is perceived to be insufficient, particularly  the level of financial support for childcare and transportation.
Employer Wage Subsidy
While evaluation results have demonstrated the  effectiveness of Employer Wage Subsidy, its use has been falling in recent  years. According to EI Monitoring and Assessment reports, the number of new  interventions decreased from 3,109 in 2004 to 2005 to 1,632 in 2014 to 2015.  According to key informants, the reasons for the decline included: 

Changes to the eligibility criteria reduced the  number of participants who can benefit from the program.
Significant outmigration of potential workers to  Western Canada. 
Local economic conditions as some regions of New  Brunswick have a high unemployment rate and the number of employers is  decreasing.
Employment Assistance  Services
Key informants confirmed the need for labour  market information to support program. However, they pointed out that the  labour market information data was often out-of-date, inconsistent, and not  specific or timely.
Challenges with the design and delivery of  Employment Assistance Services included: 

Access to services due to a lack of  transportation and a lack of telephones.
Service delivery has a substantial  administrative burden.
Lack of awareness about services.
5. Recommendations
A total of six recommendations emerged from the evaluation  findings. They are as follows:
The study on the timing of Employment Assistance Services  participation showed that receiving assistance early after starting an  employment insurance claim can lead to better labour market impacts. However,  key informants reported a lack of awareness about the program.
Recommendation 1: Consideration should be given to providing New Brunswick with timely access to  data on new EI recipients to support targeting and increase awareness.
Key informants reported that low education, learning  disabilities and literacy issues may be barriers to accessing and completing  training.
Recommendation 2: Consideration should be given to removing barriers to accessing and completing  training such as literacy/essential skills training and learning disability  assessments. These measures would help individuals with multiple barriers  prepare for vocational training and integrate into the labour market. These  measures should be reported separately from other Skills Development  interventions given their unique objectives.
Incremental impacts showed improvements in participant’s  earnings and employment in the Employer Wage Subsidy program although its use  has been declining in recent years. According to key informants, the decline  may be related to the changes in the program’s eligibility criteria,  outmigration of workers, lack of vacant positions and a decrease in potential  employers.
Recommendation 3: New Brunswick should explore ways of removing barriers to employer  participation in the Employer Wage Subsidy program.
Key informants interviewed in the evaluation confirmed the  necessity of having labour market information to support the delivery of  Training and Skills Development and Employment Assistance Services. They,  however, pointed out that labour market information data was often out-of-date,  inconsistent, and not specific or timely.
Recommendation 4: Consideration should be given to strengthening the production and availability  of local labour market information to support program delivery.
The evaluation was not able to produce a conclusive  assessment of Self-Employment effectiveness and efficiency since the data used  to assess impacts on earnings may not be the best source of information  available to reflect the financial wellbeing of the participants. As well, it is  not clear whether the participant’s success in improving their labour market  attachment through self-employment is more closely associated with their  business idea and their entrepreneurship skills than the assistance provided  under Self-Employment.
Recommendation 5: Consideration should be given to examine in more detail the design and delivery  of Self-Employment and whether the performance indicators for this program are  appropriate.
Overall, the LMDA evaluation was able to produce a sound  assessment of EBSM effectiveness and efficiency because the team had access to  rich data on EI claimants, EBSM participation data and Canada Revenue Agency  taxation files. However, some data gaps limited the evaluation’s ability to  assess how EBSMs operate.
Recommendation 6: Improvements in data collection is recommended to address key program and  policy questions of interest to the federal and P/T governments. Specifically:
Collect data on whether participants are members of  designated groups including Indigenous peoples, persons with disabilities and  recent immigrants.
Collect data on the type of training funded under Training  and Skills Development and the type of assistance provided under Employment  Assistance Services. New Brunswick, ESDC and other P/Ts should work together to  define common categories for both EBSMs.
Collect detailed data on the cost of interventions.
References
Canada Employment Insurance Commission. Employment Insurance  Monitoring and Assessment Reports. 2003-2004 to 2013-2014.

      Coe, Patrick. “Apprenticeship programme requirements and  apprenticeship completion rates in Canada.” Journal of Vocational Education and  Training. 2013. 65(4):575-605

      Employment and Social Development Canada. Analysis of  Employment Benefits and Support Measures (EBSM) Profile, Outcomes and  Incremental Impacts for 2006-2008 Participants in New Brunswick: Technical  Report. Evaluation Directorate. February 4, 2015

      Employment and Social Development Canada. Analysis of  Employment Benefits and Support Measures (EBSM) Profile, Outcomes and  Incremental Impacts for the EI Claimant Category “Long-Tenured Workers”:  Technical Report. Evaluation Directorate. February 17, 2016

      Employment and Social Development Canada. Cost-Benefit  Analysis of Employment Benefits and Support Measures Delivered in New  Brunswick: Technical Report. Evaluation Directorate. May 25, 2016

      Employment and Social Development Canada. Effects of the  Timing of Participation in Employment Assistance Services: Report on National  Results. Evaluation Directorate. November 13, 2014

      Employment and Social Development Canada. Profile, Outcomes  and New Impacts of Employment Benefits and Support Measures (EBSM) Participants  in New Brunswick: Technical Report. Evaluation Directorate. March 2014

      Employment and Social Development Canada. Stream 1 Study for  2013-2014: National Level Analysis of EBSM Incremental Impacts: Methodology  Report. Evaluation Directorate. September   2013.

      Employment and Social Development Canada. Study on  Employment Assistance Services New Brunswick: Technical Report. Evaluation  Directorate. August 28, 2014

      Employment and Social Development Canada. Study on Skills  Development – Apprenticeship in New Brunswick: Technical Report. Evaluation  Directorate. June 10, 2016

      Employment and Social Development Canada. Study on Training  and Skills Development in New Brunswick: Technical Report. Evaluation  Directorate. May 5, 2016

      Employment and Social Development Canada. Study on Employer  Wage Subsidies in New Brunswick: Technical Report. Evaluation Directorate.  March 16, 2016

      Government of New Brunswick. Annual Annex 2: Canada-New  Brunswick Labour Market Development Agreement. 2016-2017.

      Government of New Brunswick. Strategic Plan 2015-2018.  Department of Post-Secondary Education, Training and Labour. April 2015.

      LaRochelle-Côté, Sébastien and Sharanjit Uppal, "The  Financial Well-Being of the Self-Employed," Perspectives on Labour and  Income, vol. 23, no. 4, Winter 2011.

      Red Seal. Apprenticeship Completion, Certification and Outcomes,  Ottawa: Red Seal. 2014.
Acronyms
EBSM             Employment Benefits and Support  Measures

      EI                    Employment Insurance

      ESDC             Employment and Social Development  Canada

      LMDA             Labour  Market Development Agreements

      P/T                 Province/Territory
Appendix A – Methodology
Qualitative  data
Qualitative data reported in the Training  and Skills Development (TSD), Training and Skills Development – Apprenticeship  (TSD-A), Employer Wage Subsidy (EWS) and Employment Assistance Services (EAS)  studies were collected from key informant interviews with managers and service  providers and a document/literature review. As well, questionnaires were  completed by provincial/territorial government representatives for the TSD,  TSD-A and EWS studies. Table A1 provides the number of key informants  interviewed.
Key informant interviews for the EAS study  were conducted in 2013 while those for the TSD, SD-A and EWS studies were  conducted in 2015.
Quantitative methods
All quantitative analyses were conducted using linked  administrative data from EI Part I (EI claim), EI Part II (EBSM participation  data) and T1 and T4 taxation files for 100% of the participants in New  Brunswick.
Incremental impacts
The incremental impact analysis compared the labour market  experience of participants before and after their participation with that of a  comparison group. The goal was to determine the direct effect of program  participation on key labour market indicators (see Figure 1).
For active claimants, incremental impacts were measured  relative to a comparison group of active claimants who could have participated  in the EBSMs but did not. Former claimants can be underemployed and unable to  requalify for EI, out of the labour force for various reasons or on social  assistance. Based on previous evaluation methodologies, on expert advice and  given the difficulty in generating a suitable comparison for former claimants  using administrative data alone, the comparison group for former claimants was  created using individuals who participated in low-intensity Employment  Assistance Services only during the reference period. This is a conservative  approach given the fact that participation in Employment Assistance Services  can lead to limited effects on labour market outcomes.
Participants and non-participants were matched based on a  wide array of variables including age, sex, location, skill level required by  the last occupation held prior to participation, reason for separation from  employment, industry in which they were previously employed as well as  employment earnings and use of EI and Social Assistance (SA) for each of the five  years before participation.
All analyses were conducted using a unit of analysis called  the Action Plan Equivalent, which combines all EBSMs given to an individual  within no more than six months of each other. For reporting purposes,  incremental impacts were attributed to the longest intervention of the Action  Plan Equivalent when TSD, EWS or Self-Employment Benefit was the longest  intervention. Impacts for EAS were calculated for Action Plan Equivalent that  contained only EAS with no employment benefits.
The incremental impact estimates were produced using  non-experimental methods, namely propensity score matching, using the Kernel  Matching method, along with Difference-in-Differences method to estimate  program impacts. Alternative matching techniques (that is, Nearest Neighbour and  Inverse Propensity Weighting) were also used for validation purposes.
Incremental impacts were measured for the following  indicators:
Employment/self-employment  earnings represent the total earnings an individual had from paid  employment and/or self-employment.  (This  information is available by calendar year and was obtained from T1 and T4 tax  return records). 
Incidence  of employment/self-employment represents the incidence of having  earnings from employment and/or self-employment. 
Amount  of EI benefits received represents the average amount of EI benefits received.
Weeks in receipt of EI benefits represents the  average number of weeks during which EI benefits were received. 
SA  benefits represent the average amount of SA benefits received. (This  information is available by calendar year and is obtained from T1 tax return  records.) 
Dependence  on income support represents the ratio of participant’s income that came  from EI and SA benefits (that is, EI benefits + SA benefits / (EI benefits + SA  benefits + earnings from employment/self/employment)).
Incremental impacts were estimated for different cohorts of  participants:
All active and all former claimants as well as  youth (under 30 years old) and older workers (55 years old and over) who started  their EBSM participation between April 1, 2002 and March 31, 2005.
All active and all former claimants who stated  their EBSM participation between January 1, 2006 and March 31, 2008.
Active and former claimants who were  long-tenured workers and who started their EBSM participation between January  1, 2007 and December 31, 2009. The long-tenured workers covered in this  study are individuals who have established an EI regular or fishing benefit  claimants and who had paid at least 30% of the annual maximum employee EI  premiums in seven of the ten years preceding their EI claim and who had  collected 35 or fewer weeks of EI regular or fishing benefits in the five years  preceding their claim. This definition is similar to the EI claimant category  long-tenured workers introduced under Connecting Canadians with Available Jobs.
Cost-benefit analysis
The cost-benefit analysis compared how much it cost for  individuals to participate in the programs and how much it costs the government  to deliver those programs with the benefits both the participants and the  government drew from those programs. The analysis was carried out from the  society perspective which combines the costs and the benefits for both the  participants and the government.
Costs and benefits included in the calculations were as  follows:
Program costs included the administration cost  and the direct cost of the EBSMs. The cost for each EBSM was calculated at the  Action Plan Equivalent level. The costs were determined based on the average  composition of the Action Plan Equivalent. 
The Marginal Social Cost of Public Funds  represented the loss incurred by society when raising additional revenues such  as taxes to fund government spending. The value was estimated as 20% of the  program cost, sales taxes, income taxes, impacts on EI and impacts on SA paid  or collected by the government.
Employment earnings consisted of incremental  impacts on participants’ earnings during and after participation. The  calculation accounts for the participant’s forgone earnings during  participation (that is, opportunity cost). These are based on incremental  impacts for the 2002 to 2005 participants. 
Fringe benefits included benefits such as  employer-paid health and life insurance as well as pension contributions. The  rate used to calculate the fringe benefits was 15% of the incremental impact on  earnings.
The program effects on EI and SA use, and the sale and  income tax revenues were not included in the calculations since these costs and  benefits cancel each other out from the social perspective by definition. For  example, while EI and SA are benefits received by participants, they represent  a cost for the government. However, as indicated above, these effects are  accounted for in the calculation of the Marginal Social Cost of Public Funds.
When producing the results, to bring all costs and benefits  to a common base and to account for inflation and interest on foregone  government investment, the estimates for the second year of participation and  up to the sixth year post-program were discounted by 5% per year.  As well, when the benefits were still lower  than the costs six years after program end, the payback period was calculated  by assuming that the average benefit or cost measured over the fifth and six  year post-program would persist over time (discounted at a 5% annual rate).
Strengths and limitations from the studies
Overall, the number of key informants interviewed was  relatively small in some studies.  The  key informants’ responses were representative of their own experience and their  own region but it is unclear if they were fully representative of the entire  province.
The matching process led to the creation of comparison  groups closely matched to the LMDA participants in terms of their background characteristics.  Results obtained with Kernel Matching were validated with the use of two other  techniques (that is, Inverse Propensity Weighting and Nearest Neighbour),  increasing the level of confidence in the results. However, readers should be  aware that incremental impacts may be affected by factors not captured by the  matching process. For example, the motivation to seek employment was not  directly measured except to the extent it was captured in prior income and labour  market attachment patterns.
Readers should also keep in mind that it is not possible to  compare the results obtained for each claimant type since the results for  active claimants represent the effects of the EBSMs relative to  non-participation while the results for former claimants represents the  Employment Benefits relative to a limited treatment (that is, EAS).
The definition for long-tenured workers differs from the  definition used in the literature as it does not consider the number of years  the worker remained employed with the same employer.
The cost-benefit analysis was limited in the sense that it  only took into account the quantifiable benefits and costs that were directly  linked to EBSM delivery and participation and that could be estimated using  available administrative data and the EI Monitoring and Assessment Report. The  analysis did not capture “intangible”, non-pecuniary and indirect benefits. It  did not consider the multiplier effect that improving participant’s income may  have on the economy and did not account for the effect of EI Part II investment  on sustaining a service delivery infrastructure and creating jobs among the  governmental program service providers.   As well, this analysis did not consider the displacement effect where  participants may take away jobs that would otherwise be filled by other  unemployed individuals. Finally, this analysis did not consider the possible  effect of EBSMs on increasing skill prices.
Appendix B – Detailed results Training and Skills Development regular
Proportions may not add up to 100% due to rounding.
Skill level corresponds to the type and/or amount of training    or education typically required to work in the last occupation participants    had before opening the last EI claim they had before participating in EBSMs:
-Managerial:    Management occupations
-University:    Occupations usually requiring university education (that is, University    degree at the bachelor's, master's or doctorate level)
-College or apprenticeship training: Occupations usually    requiring college or vocational education or apprenticeship training such as    2 to 3 years of post-secondary education at a community college, institute of    technology or CEGEP or 2 to 5 years of apprenticeship training or 3 to 4    years of secondary school and more than 2 years of on-the-job training,    specialized training courses or specific work experience and/or occupations    with supervisory responsibilities and occupations with significant health and    safety responsibilities, such as firefighters, police officers and registered    nursing assistants.
-Secondary or occupational training: Occupations usually    requiring secondary school and/or occupation-specific training such as one to    four years of secondary school education or up to 2 years of on-the-job    training specialized training courses or specific work experience.
-On-the-job training: On-the-job training is usually    provided for occupations (that is, short work demonstration or on-the-job    training or no formal educational requirements).
Average earnings for all individuals included in the    studies. The average was calculated including participants who reported $0    earnings during that year.
Earnings for 2006 to 2008 participants have been    adjusted by the Consumer Price Index published by Statistics Canada, using    2002 as the base year.
Significance level *** 1%;    ** 5%; * 10%
Significance level *** 1%;    ** 5%; * 10%
Appendix C – Detailed results  Skills Development-Apprenticeship
Proportions may not add up to 100% due to rounding.
Skill level corresponds to the type and/or amount of training    or education typically required to work in the last occupation participants    had before opening the last EI claim they had before participating in EBSMs:
-Managerial:    Management occupations
-University:    Occupations usually requiring university education (that is, University    degree at the bachelor's, master's or doctorate level)
-College or apprenticeship training: Occupations usually    requiring college or vocational education or apprenticeship training such as    2 to 3 years of post-secondary education at a community college, institute of    technology or CEGEP or 2 to 5 years of apprenticeship training or 3 to 4    years of secondary school and more than 2 years of on-the-job training,    specialized training courses or specific work experience and/or occupations    with supervisory responsibilities and occupations with significant health and    safety responsibilities, such as firefighters, police officers and registered    nursing assistants.
-Secondary or occupational training: Occupations usually    requiring secondary school and/or occupation-specific training such as one to    four years of secondary school education or up to 2 years of on-the-job    training specialized training courses or specific work experience.
-On-the-job training: On-the-job training is usually    provided for occupations (that is, short work demonstration or on-the-job    training or no formal educational requirements).
Average earnings for all individuals included in the    studies. The average was calculated including participants who reported $0    earnings during that year.
Earnings for 2006 to 2008 participants have been    adjusted by the Consumer Price Index published by Statistics Canada, using    2002 as the base year.
Earnings outcomes excluding individuals who reported no  earnings in a given year.
Earnings outcomes excluding individuals who reported  no earnings in a given year.
Appendix D- Detailed results Employer Wage Subsidy
Proportions may not add up to 100% due to rounding.
Skill level corresponds to the type and/or amount of training    or education typically required to work in the last occupation participants    had before opening the last EI claim they had before participating in EBSMs:
-Managerial:    Management occupations
-University:    Occupations usually requiring university education (that is, University    degree at the bachelor's, master's or doctorate level)
-College or apprenticeship training: Occupations usually    requiring college or vocational education or apprenticeship training such as    2 to 3 years of post-secondary education at a community college, institute of    technology or CEGEP or 2 to 5 years of apprenticeship training or 3 to 4    years of secondary school and more than 2 years of on-the-job training,    specialized training courses or specific work experience and/or occupations    with supervisory responsibilities and occupations with significant health and    safety responsibilities, such as firefighters, police officers and registered    nursing assistants.
-Secondary or occupational training: Occupations usually    requiring secondary school and/or occupation-specific training such as one to    four years of secondary school education or up to 2 years of on-the-job    training specialized training courses or specific work experience.
-On-the-job training: On-the-job training is usually    provided for occupations (that is, short work demonstration or on-the-job    training or no formal educational requirements).
Average earnings for all individuals included in the    studies. The average was calculated including participants who reported $0    earnings during that year.
Earnings for 2006 to 2008 participants have been    adjusted by the Consumer Price Index published by Statistics Canada, using    2002 as the base year.
Significance level *** 1%;    ** 5%; * 10%
Significance level *** 1%;    ** 5%; * 10%
Appendix E- Detailed results     Self-Employment Benefit
Proportions may not add up to 100% due to rounding.
Skill level corresponds to the type and/or amount of training    or education typically required to work in the last occupation participants    had before opening the last EI claim they had before participating in EBSMs:
-Managerial:    Management occupations
-University:    Occupations usually requiring university education (that is, University    degree at the bachelor's, master's or doctorate level)
-College or apprenticeship training: Occupations usually    requiring college or vocational education or apprenticeship training such as    2 to 3 years of post-secondary education at a community college, institute of    technology or CEGEP or 2 to 5 years of apprenticeship training or 3 to 4    years of secondary school and more than 2 years of on-the-job training,    specialized training courses or specific work experience and/or occupations    with supervisory responsibilities and occupations with significant health and    safety responsibilities, such as firefighters, police officers and registered    nursing assistants.
-Secondary or occupational training: Occupations usually    requiring secondary school and/or occupation-specific training such as one to    four years of secondary school education or up to 2 years of on-the-job    training specialized training courses or specific work experience.
-On-the-job training: On-the-job training is usually    provided for occupations (that is, short work demonstration or on-the-job    training or no formal educational requirements).
Average earnings for all individuals included in the    studies. The average was calculated including participants who reported $0    earnings during that year.
Earnings for 2006 to 2008 participants have been    adjusted by the Consumer Price Index published by Statistics Canada, using    2002 as the base year.
Significance level *** 1%;    ** 5%; * 10%
Significance level *** 1%;    ** 5%; * 10%
Appendix  F - Detailed results Employment Assistance  Services
Proportions may not add up to 100% due to rounding.
Skill level corresponds to the type and/or amount of training    or education typically required to work in the last occupation participants    had before opening the last EI claim they had before participating in EBSMs:
-Managerial:    Management occupations
-University:    Occupations usually requiring university education (that is, University    degree at the bachelor's, master's or doctorate level)
-College or apprenticeship training: Occupations usually    requiring college or vocational education or apprenticeship training such as    2 to 3 years of post-secondary education at a community college, institute of    technology or CEGEP or 2 to 5 years of apprenticeship training or 3 to 4    years of secondary school and more than 2 years of on-the-job training,    specialized training courses or specific work experience and/or occupations    with supervisory responsibilities and occupations with significant health and    safety responsibilities, such as firefighters, police officers and registered    nursing assistants.
-Secondary or occupational training: Occupations usually    requiring secondary school and/or occupation-specific training such as one to    four years of secondary school education or up to 2 years of on-the-job    training specialized training courses or specific work experience.
-On-the-job training: On-the-job training is usually    provided for occupations (that is, short work demonstration or on-the-job    training or no formal educational requirements).
Average earnings for all individuals included in the    studies. The average was calculated including participants who reported $0    earnings during that year.
Earnings for 2006 to 2008 participants have been    adjusted by the Consumer Price Index published by Statistics Canada, using    2002 as the base year.
Significance level *** 1%;    ** 5%; * 10%
* Significant at 10%; **    significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
  n= refers to the number of    participants. It corresponds to 100% of participants. pp= percentage points
      
	Note: For the estimations    we have selected a 50% random sample among comparison group in each cohort    due to their large number. We used 100% of participants.
* Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant    at 1%
      
  Note that, for the estimations we have selected 50% random sample,    in each cohort, among comparison group due to their large number. We used    100% of participants. 
  Note: The means of the standardized bias reduction after    matching was calculated as suggested by Rosenbaum and Rubin (1985). The    overall bias after matching lies between 3% and 15% which is generally    considered as acceptable in empirical research papers.
Appendix G – List of nine studies included in the synthesis  report
