Summary of the evaluation of the Aboriginal Skills and Employment Training Strategy and the Skills and Partnership Fund
Alternate formats
Summary of the evaluation of the Aboriginal Skills and Employment Training Strategy and the Skills and Partnership Fund
[
PDF
-  98.8
KB
]
Large print, braille,
MP3
(audio), e-text and
DAISY
formats are available on demand by
ordering online
or calling 1 800 O-Canada (1-800-622-6232). If you use a teletypewriter (
TTY
), call 1-800-926-9105.
About the program
The Aboriginal Skills and Employment Training Strategy    (the strategy) and the Skills and Partnership Fund (the fund) were introduced    in 2010.
The
strategy
provided funding to Indigenous service delivery organizations that design and    deliver labour market programs, services and other activities to Indigenous    people in their communities to increase their participation and integration    into the Canadian labour force. In 2017 to 2018, about 57,440 individuals    were supported by the strategy, representing $342 million in contributions.
The
fund
was a  demand-driven project-based contribution program that supports partners’  specific employment goals by funding time-limited skills development and  training-to-employment projects for Indigenous People. In 2017 to 2018, the fund  supported more than 50 projects, representing $50 million in contributions,  with about 1,970 individuals participating in that year.
Key  findings
Overall, the strategy and the fund had a positive impact on  participants’ labour market attachment.
The strategy’s Skills Development intervention was the most  effective at improving participants’ labour market attachment. In addition,  Employment Assistance Services and Targeted Wage Subsidies interventions showed  some positive results particularly with participants with relatively stronger  labour market attachment.
The strategy and the fund developed and fostered sustainable  relationships with Indigenous partners. Still, some Indigenous Agreement  Holders reported concerns about the implications of administrative reporting on  their relationship with the Department.
The Aboriginal Human Resources and Development Agreements,  predecessors of similar agreements under the Strategy, yielded a positive  social return on investment over a 12-year period when taking into account  costs and benefits for both the governments and participants.
In particular, from a societal perspective, benefits of  interventions outweigh their associated costs in less than 9 years; and, in  less than 5 years for participants with stronger attachment to the labour  market.
Recommendations
It is recommended that the Department better  leverage data to collaborate with partners to improve the program
It is recommended that the Department continue  to seek improvements in the administration of agreements with participating  Indigenous organizations
The full
Evaluation  of the Aboriginal Skills and Employment Training Strategy and the Skills and  Partnership Fund
is now available.
Page details
Report a problem on this page
Date modified:
2022-04-21