Evaluation of the Canada – Ontario Labour Market Development Agreement
From:
Employment  and Social Development Canada
On this  page
Executive summary
Management response
1. Introduction
1.1 Labour Market Development Agreement  background
1.2 Methodology
1.3 Overview of the studies summarized in this report
2. Evaluation findings
2.1 Rationale and Labour Market context
2.2 Skills Development
2.3 Skills Development-Apprentices
2.4 Targeted Wage Subsidies (Job Placement with  Incentive)
2.5 Self-Employment
2.6 Job Creation Partnerships
2.7 Employment Assistance Services
3. Comparison of key findings by program type
4. Conclusions
5. Recommendations
References
Acronyms
Appendix A - Methodology
Appendix B - Detailed results Skills Development
Appendix C - Detailed results Skills  Development-Apprenticeship
Appendix D - Detailed resultsTargeted Wage  Subsidies
Appendix E - Detailed results Self-Employment  Benefit
Appendix F - Detailed results Job Creation  Partnerships
Appendix G - Detailed results Employment  Assistance Services
Appendix H - List of eight studies included in the synthesis report
Alternate formats
Evaluation of the Canada – Ontario Labour Market Development Agreement Synthesis Report
[
PDF
- 1.15
MB
]
Large print, braille,
MP3
(audio), e-text and
DAISY
formats are available on demand by
ordering online
or calling 1 800 O-Canada (1-800-622-6232). If you use a teletypewriter (
TTY
), call 1-800-926-9105.
Executive summary
Introduction
Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC) worked  jointly with Ontario and 11 other Provinces and Territories (P/Ts) to undertake  the 2012 to 2017 second cycle for the Labour Market Development Agreement  (LMDA) evaluation. The  first cycle of LMDA evaluation was carried out between 1998 and 2012 and  involved the conduct of bilateral formative and summative evaluations in all  P/Ts. Under the second cycle, the evaluation work consisted of  conducting two to three studies per year on the Employment Benefits and Support  Measures (EBSMs) similar programming delivered under these agreements. The  studies generated evaluation evidence on the effectiveness, efficiency and  design/delivery of EBSMs for Canada overall, for Ontario and for the 11 other  P/Ts that opted for a joint evaluation process with Canada.
Under LMDAs, Canada transfers $2.14B annually in Employment  Insurance (EI) Part II funds to P/Ts for the design and delivery of programs  and services to help unemployed individuals, mainly those eligible under EI, to  find and maintain employment.
Programs and services delivered  by Ontario correspond to the EBSM categories defined under the EI Act. The  following is a short description the programs and services examined in the  evaluation
:
Skills  Development (Second Career)
helps participants obtain employment skills by giving them financial  assistance in order to attend classroom training
Skills  Development- Apprentices
program provides financial assistance to EI eligible individuals who are  attending full-time apprenticeship training in a classroom setting
Targeted  Wage Subsidies (Job Placement with Incentive)
help  participants obtain on-the-job work experience by providing employers with a  wage subsidy
Self-Employment (Ontario Self-Employment Benefits)
provides financial assistance and business planning advice to  participants to help them start their own business
Job Creation Partnerships (Ontario Job Creation Partnerships)
provide participants with opportunities to gain  work experience that will lead to ongoing employment. Employment opportunities  are provided by projects that contribute to developing the community and the  local economy
Employment  Assistance Services (Employment  Services)
such  as counselling, job search skills, job placement services, the provision of  labour market information and case management
Three additional programs and services are available under  the LMDA and they are: Labour Market Partnerships, Research and Innovation and  Targeted Earnings Supplements. They were not evaluated as part of this  evaluation. The Targeted Earnings Supplements program is used in one province  only while Labour Market Partnerships, and Research and Innovation will be  evaluated at a later stage.
Table i provides an overview of the share of funding  allocated to the five EBSMs examined under the second cycle for LMDA evaluation  and the average cost per participant.
Sources: EI  Monitoring and Assessment Reports 2002-2003 to 2014-2015.
Note: The  average cost per participant was calculated based on the Action Plan Equivalent  for active claimant participants.
This report presents a summary of the findings from eight  studies produced on Ontario LMDA interventions and participants. Results were  produced for active and former EI claimants as well as for long-tenured workers
, youth (under 30 years  old) and older workers (over 55 years old) when the number of participants was  sufficient to conduct quantitative analyses. Active EI claimants were actively  on EI at the time of their EBSM participation. Former EI claimants received EI  up to three years before staring their EBSM participation.
Key findings
Effectiveness and efficiency of EBSMs
Incremental impacts  and cost-benefit analyses addressed EBSM effectiveness and efficiency.
Overall, incremental impacts demonstrate that LMDA programs  and services are improving the labour market attachment of active and former EI  claimant participants, including youth and older workers. As well, social  benefits of participation exceeded the cost of investments for most  interventions over time. Finally, providing Employment Assistance Services  interventions earlier during an EI claim (first four weeks) produced larger  impacts on earnings and employment and facilitated earlier return to work. This  demonstrates the importance of targeting early participation of EI active  claimants.
Figure  i presents the incremental impacts on the incidence of employment for active  and former claimants by type of program. The estimates can be interpreted as a  change in the probability of being employed following participation. For  example, participation in the Skills Development program delivered in the 2002  to 2005 period increases the probability of being employed by 4.4 percentage  points for active EI claimants relative to unemployed non- participants.
Figure i. Change in probability of being employed in participants relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure i
Note: The estimates in Figure i represent an arithmetic  average of the annual incidence of employment estimates reported in the  annexes. All estimates are statistically significant at the 95% confidence  level. Results for Skills Development exclude apprentices.
Figure ii presents the  cumulative increase in employment earnings for active and former claimants over  the 5 years post-participation. It is noted that Employment Assistance Services  are relatively modest activities and, by themselves, are not expected to lead  to substantial effects on labour market outcomes.  In other words, these services aim to support  the return to work of unemployed participants and not necessarily to secure a  better paying job than pre-participation. However, as demonstrated later in the  report, providing Employment Assistance Services earlier during the EI claim  (first 4 weeks) produced larger impacts on earnings and employment and  facilitated earlier returns to work.
Figure ii. Increased cumulative earnings of participants relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure ii
* The  estimate is not statistically significant at the 95% confidence level.
Table  ii presents the number of years required for the social benefits to exceed  program cost. Social benefits to participation exceeded investment costs in a  period ranging between the 2nd year of program participation to about 20 years  after participation.
Main  challenges about program design and delivery
Key informant interviews with service providers and program  managers as well as the documents reviewed and the questionnaires filled by  provincial representatives also revealed specific challenges and lessons  learned about program design and delivery. Key challenges are highlighted  below.
Skills Development program (currently delivered as Second Career)
Key informants identified the following challenges related  to the design and delivery of the current Skills Development program (Second  Career in Ontario):
The perceived insufficient level of financial  support (7 key informants).
Participants with multiple barriers have more  complex needs and often require additional time for assistance (3 key  informants).
Skills Development – Apprentices
As presented in the report, existing Canadian literature  showed that there is a fairly high non-completion rate among apprentices in  Canada. Furthermore, literature revealed that despite the growth in  apprenticeship registrations in Canada, there has not been a corresponding  increase in completions. While program data does not provide reliable  information on completion and non-completion rates of participants, key  informants from Ontario overall agreed with the challenges identified in the  literature and confirmed a high dropout rate. They provided the following  reasons to explain why some participants drop out of the apprenticeship  process:
Financial barriers (5 key informants)
Timing and location of training (3 key  informants)
Apprentices are often working for the same pay  as journeymen and they are not motivated to write the final exam (3 key  informants)
Lack of ongoing case-management for apprentices  (2 key informants)
To deal with these barriers, key  informants identified the following supports to help apprentices access and  complete their apprenticeship training:
Pre-apprenticeship training would be beneficial  to helping apprentices complete their training and increase the probability of  success. The integration of Literacy and Basics Skills and employability skills  (job retention, leadership skills, document use, conflict resolution, goal  setting, etc.) components in pre-apprenticeship training are key components to  ensuring success, especially for persons with multiple barriers (4 key  informants).
Providing handouts to apprentices with detailed  information on the available supports and where to get help when needed (3 key  informants).
Increase awareness of the financial supports  that are available for apprentices (3 key informants).
Case managing apprentices for the full duration  of the apprenticeship process would be beneficial to increasing the probability  of completion (2 key informants).
Key  informants were asked about challenges in relation to the design and delivery  of the program or apprenticeship training in general and they identified the  following challenges:
Lack of awareness about the financial support  available to apprentices (3 key informants).
The amount of paperwork required when seeking  financial support (3 key informants).
Delays in confirming EI eligibility (3 key  informants).
Employment Services
Key informants interviewed identified the following  challenges they face with the provision and targeting of Employment Services:
Challenges in       accessing childcare and paying the cost of transportation to training (5       key informants).
Data collection is       challenging for some service providers (5 key informants).
Lack of funds       dedicated for the professional development of staff (4 key informants).
Insufficient       staff capacity can require the use of referrals, prevent the provision of       job retention services, result in a waiting list, limit pre-employment       services and also limit services to clients with multiple barriers (3 key       informants).
Recommendations
Recommendations that emerged from the evaluation findings  presented in this report are as followed:
Key informants reported that a lack of essential skills hinders participants from  completing training. The relevance of providing literacy, essential  skills and high school upgrading is well documented in the Canadian literature.  Because these interventions have different objectives and may lead to very  different labour market outcomes when compared to vocational or occupational  training, reporting them separately is important.
Recommendation 1:
It is recommended that these interventions be reported separately under the  LMDA from other vocational or occupational training interventions given their  unique objectives. Ontario, ESDC and other P/Ts should work together to define  common categories Skills Development programming.
Overall, the LMDA evaluation was able to produce a sound  assessment of EBSM effectiveness and efficiency because the team had access to  rich data on EI claimants, EBSM participation data and Canada Revenue Agency  taxation files. However, some data gaps limited the evaluation’s ability to  assess how EBSMs operate. For example:
Having access to data on whether participants are members of  designated groups including Indigenous peoples, persons with disabilities and  recent immigrants would be useful to inform policy development and program  design.
Little is also known about the various types of Employment  Assistance Services provided under the LMDAs. These services can be very  different in nature and it is possible that some may be more effective than  others at helping participants to return to employment. For example, having  access to a computer for researching jobs on its own may yield different  impacts than receiving counselling and assistance to develop a return-to-work  action plan.
Recommendation 2:
Improvements in the data collection are recommended to address key program and  policy questions of interest to the federal and provincial/territorial  governments. Specifically:
Collect data on whether participants are members  of designated groups including Indigenous peoples, persons with disabilities  and recent immigrants
Collect data on the various types of services  provided under Employment Assistance Services. Ontario, ESDC and other P/Ts  should work together to define common categories for these services
Collect detailed data on the cost of EBSM  interventions
The study on the timing of Employment Assistance Services  participation showed that receiving assistance early after starting an EI claim  can lead to better labour market impacts. However, key informants reported  insufficient level of funding to promote the program.
Recommendation 3:
Consideration should be given to providing Ontario with timely access to data  on new EI recipients for supporting targeting and increasing awareness.
The Job Creation Partnerships program was found to be  particularly effective at improving the labour market attachment for active and  former EI claimant participants. The evaluation has not yet examined the  challenges and lessons learned regarding the design and delivery of this  program. Therefore, a lot remains unknown about how this program operates and  the factors that contribute to its effectiveness.
Recommendation 4:
Consideration should be given to examine the design and delivery of Ontario Job  Creation Partnerships in order to better understand how this program operates.
The Targeted Wage Subsidy program was found to be effective  at improving the labour market attachment of active and former claimant  participants. In Ontario, the number of participants in the program declined  between 2003 and 2004 (n = 3,484), 2014 to 2015 (n = 1,806) and 2015 to 2016 (n  = 2,677).
Recommendation 5:
depending on ongoing labour market priorities and budget allocation across EBSM  programs and services, Ontario may wish to explore to what extent challenges  and lessons learned identified at the national level are applicable to the  unique context in Ontario and if applicable, to explore ways of removing  barriers to employer participation in the program.
Management response
Introduction
Ontario worked in close collaboration with the Evaluation  Directorate of ESDC during the planning and implementation of the second cycle  for the LMDA evaluation. Ontario would like to thank all members of the  Evaluation Steering Committee for their dedication and commitment to the  success of this evaluation process. These findings are an important source of  advice as governments work together to renew the labour market transfer  agreements.
Ontario reviewed the findings of  the second cycle Evaluation of the Canada-Ontario LMDA, which concluded that:
Overall, incremental impacts demonstrate that  LMDA programs and services are improving the labour market attachment of active  and former EI claimant participants, including youth and older workers
As well, social benefits of participation  exceeded the cost of investments for most interventions over time
Finally, providing Employment Assistance  Services interventions earlier during an EI claim (first four weeks) produced  larger impacts on earnings and employment and facilitated earlier return to  work. This demonstrates the importance of targeting early participation of EI  active claimants
As part of the review, Ontario would also like to highlight  that qualitative findings from the evaluation (for example, the key informant  interviews with the service providers and the program managers) are an  important source of information that allow the ministry to understand the depth  of issues and benefits related to the program. The limitation is that these  qualitative findings are the perception of a small number of key informants and  cannot be generalized to the entire province.
Ontario is interested in  continuing to build on the positive experience of LMDA cycle II evaluation for  the development of the Evaluation Strategy for the new Labour Market Transfer  Agreements (LMTAs). The following two practices that were particularly helpful  for Ontario that should be maintained are for:
P/Ts to continue to have an active role in the  governance, design and implementation of evaluations to ensure that P/T’s  evaluation needs and perspectives are reflected in the evaluation design; and
ESDC to ensure that the purpose of the evaluations,  relevance of selected streams, timing of evaluation and use of evaluation  findings are well coordinated to meet the needs of individual P/Ts.
Based on the lessons learned from LMDA cycle II evaluation,  Ontario would also like to propose that more mixed methods be used (qualitative  and quantitative) in the evaluations to contextually inform the quantitative  findings.
Detailed management response
Ontario agrees in principle with the evaluation  recommendations and is pleased to submit this management response.
Key informants reported that a lack of essential skills hinders participants from  completing training. As well, the relevance of providing literacy,  essential skills and high school upgrading is well documented in the Canadian  literature these interventions have different objectives and may lead to very  different labour market outcomes when compared to vocational or occupational  training.
Recommendation 1:
It is recommended that these interventions be reported separately under the  LMDA from other vocational or occupational training interventions given their  unique objectives. Ontario, ESDC and other P/Ts should work together to define  common categories for Skills Development programming.
Response:
According to the results of  Programme for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies (2013), almost  half of the Ontario population has low level skills (below Level 3).
In recognition of  this, in Budget 2017, the government announced the Ontario Lifelong Learning  and Skills Plan, which includes investment in and enhancements to the adult  education and essential skills system. Foundational to the plan is the  objective to support Ontario’s adults to find their place in an evolving  economy that is becoming more technology‐driven and knowledge‐based  every day.  The investment in Ontario  lifelong learning and skills recognizes that strengthened essential skills can  open doors — to advancement in the workplace, new opportunities, or enrolment  in an education that will help individuals launch into their next career. It  also recognizes the importance of essential skills in all facets of adults’ lives. In addition to supporting more adult  Ontarians to access programs to improve their literacy and other essential  skills, the plan is about working with partners to strengthen the adult  education system to better support learners to access programs that match their  individual needs, transition between programming, and receive recognition for their  prior learning and skills.
The improvement and  expansion of the Literacy and Basic Skills program will continue to support the  transition of adult learners to their goals of further education, training,  employment and independence through learner-centered design; strengthen the  connections to Employment Ontario programs, Ministry of Citizenship and  Immigration and Ministry of Education to support adult learner pathways; and,  revitalize ministry-stakeholder bonds for improved performance management and  program accountability as well as learner outcomes.
Ontario is pleased that changes to the LMDA  eligibility criteria will make it easier to fund essential skills programming  under the agreement.
As part of ongoing Federal/Provincial-Territorial development of the performance measurement  strategy under new generation of LMTAs, Ontario worked with ESDC and other P/Ts  to define common categories for Skills Development programming that will allow  separate tracking and reporting of interventions, including literacy and  essentials skills interventions.
Overall, the LMDA evaluation was able to produce a sound  assessment of EBSM effectiveness and efficiency because the team had access to  rich data on EI claimants, EBSM participation data and Canada Revenue Agency  taxation files. However, some data gaps limited the evaluation’s ability to  assess how EBSMs operate. For example:
Having access to data on whether participants  are members of designated groups including Indigenous peoples, persons with  disabilities and recent immigrants would be useful to inform policy development  and program design.
Little is also known about the various types of  Employment Assistance Services provided under the LMDAs. These services can be  very different in nature and it is possible that some may be more effective  than others at helping participants to return to employment. For example,  having access to a computer for researching jobs on its own may yield different  impacts than receiving counselling and assistance to develop a return-to-work  action plan.
Recommendation 2:
Improvements in the data collection is recommended to address key program and  policy questions of interest to the federal and provincial/territorial  governments. Specifically:
Collect data on whether participants are members  of designated groups including Indigenous peoples, persons with disabilities  and recent immigrants
Collect data on the various types of services  provided under Employment Assistance Services. Ontario, ESDC and other P/Ts  should work together to define common categories for these services
Collect detailed data on the cost of EBSM  interventions
Response:
Ontario  worked actively with Federal/Provincial-Territorial counterparts to develop a  performance measurement strategy for the new generation of LMTAs.  Recommendations to enhance data collection on designated groups and types of  Employment Assistance Services are being addressed through this strategy.
The study on the timing of Employment Assistance Services  participation showed that receiving assistance early after starting an EI claim  can lead to better labour market impacts. However, key informants reported  insufficient level of funding to promote the program.
Recommendation 3:
Consideration should be given to providing Ontario with timely access to data  on new EI recipients for supporting targeting and increasing awareness.
Response:
Ontario  agrees that timely access to data on new EI recipients for supporting targeting  and increasing awareness is important. As per the 2017 LMDA amending agreement  currently being negotiated between Ontario and Canada, Ontario intends to  implement the Targeting, Referral and Feedback system by 2020.
The Job Creation Partnerships program was found to be  particularly effective at improving the labour market attachment for active and  former EI claimant participants. The evaluation has not yet examined the challenges  and lessons learned regarding the design and delivery of this program.  Therefore, a lot remains unknown about how this program operates and the  factors that contribute to its effectiveness.
Recommendation 4:
Consideration should be given to examine the design and delivery of Ontario Job  Creation Partnerships in order to better understand how this program operates.
Response:
Ontario is pleased that the report’s findings demonstrate  that Ontario Job Creation Partnerships program is particularly effective at  improving the labour market attachment for active and former EI claimant  participants. Ontario is committed to reviewing and continuously improving  client outcomes and ensuring program alignment with current and future labour  market demands. In response to recent Ontario Auditor General recommendations,  the Ministry of Advanced Education and Skills Development is in the process of  developing and implementing new outcome measures for the program. As part of  the review of the Performance Management Framework for the Employment Services,  the ministry will enhance follow-up with more participants in order to  effectively measure, analyze and improve client outcomes. The changes being  explored include:
improving consistency of follow-up requirements  across employment and training programs;
examining roles, responsibilities and  accountabilities with respect to participant follow-up; and
establishing consistent and common definitions  for employment status categories across all programs.
Ongoing system-wide improvements, along with regular  monitoring of program delivery, will provide increased information on the  design and delivery of the Ontario Job Creation Partnerships program in order  to ensure the program guidelines are achieving sustainable and long-term  employment outcomes for clients. The ministry commits to publish outcome data  as part of the government’s commitment to open data as they become available.
The Targeted Wage Subsidy program was found to be effective  at improving the labour market attachment of active and former claimant  participants. In Ontario, the number of participants in the program declined  between 2003 and 2004 (n = 3,484), 2014 to 2015 (n = 1,806) and 2015 to 2016 (n  = 2,677).
Recommendation 5:
depending on ongoing labour market priorities and budget allocation across EBSM  programs and services, Ontario may wish to explore to what extent challenges  and lessons learned identified at the national level are applicable to the  unique context in Ontario and if applicable, to explore ways of removing  barriers to employer participation in the program.
Response:
Ontario agrees with the recommendation that  exploring the benefits of wage subsidies for the Ontario population is  warranted. While research has generally been supportive, evidence on the  efficacy of wage subsidies is mixed, particularly as it relates to different  target client groups and different policy objectives (for example, building  work experience for jobseekers at the beginning of their career paths, versus  achieving sustainable employment). In addition to considering challenges and  lessons learned from other provinces and territories, Ontario has the  opportunity to explore the effects of wage subsidies through the research  funded with the Ontario Human Capital Research and Innovation Fund to examine  the efficacy of wage subsidies in serving persons with disabilities.
In the meantime,  service providers continue to have access to funding to assist with job  placements with incentives for jobseekers and employers who require additional  support.
1. Introduction
Employment  and Social Development Canada (ESDC) worked jointly with Ontario and 11 other  Provinces and Territories (P/Ts) to undertake the 2012 to 2017 second cycle for  the Labour Market Development Agreement (LMDA) evaluations. The first cycle of  LMDA evaluation was carried out between 1998 and 2012 and involved the conduct  of bilateral formative and summative evaluations in all P/Ts. Under the second  cycle, the evaluation work consisted of conducting two to three studies per  year on the Employment Benefits and Support Measures (EBSMs) similar  programming delivered under these agreements. The studies aimed to generate  evaluation evidence on the effectiveness, efficiency and design/delivery of  programs and services for Canada, Ontario and for the 11 other P/Ts that opted  for a joint evaluation process with the Government of Canada.
This report presents a summary  of the findings from the studies conducted for Ontario. The report is organised  as follows:
Introduction with an overview of the studies  summarized in this report including their scope, methodology, and contextual  information on the LMDAs
Findings section with a discussion around the  rationale for investing in labour market programming and a summary of evaluation  evidence
Comparison of key findings by program type
Conclusions
Recommendations that emerge from the evaluation  findings and areas for future investigation
1.1  Labour Market Development Agreement background
LMDAs are bilateral agreements between Canada and each P/T,  and were established under Part II of the 1996 Employment Insurance (EI) Act.  As part of these agreements, Canada transfers $2.14B annually in EI part II  funding to P/Ts in order to design and deliver programs and services to assist  individuals to prepare for, obtain and maintain employment. Ontario receives  approximately $525M annually in EBSM funding.
The Canada-Ontario LMDA was signed on November 23, 2005. The  agreement transferred responsibility to Ontario for the design and delivery of  programs and services
classified under two categories: 1) Employment Benefits and 2) Support  Measures.
Employment Benefits
Employment  Benefits are offered to unemployed individuals who 1) are actively on EI  (active claimants); 2) ended their benefit period within three years before  participating (former claimants); or 3) established a claim for maternity or  parental benefits within the past five years and are returning to the labour  force for the first time (former claimants)
.  Employment Benefits include the following  categories:
Skills  Development (Second Career)
helps participants obtain employment skills by  giving them financial assistance that enables them to select, arrange and pay  for classroom training
Skills  Development- Apprentices
program provides financial assistance to EI eligible individuals who are  attending full-time apprenticeship training in a classroom setting
Targeted  Wage Subsidies (Job Placement with Incentive)
help participants obtain on-the-job work experience by  providing employers with financial assistance to help with the wages of  participants
Self-Employment
(Ontario Self-Employment  Benefits)
provides financial assistance and business planning  advice to EI-eligible participants to help them start their own business. This  financial assistance is intended to cover personal living expenses and other  expenses during the initial stages of the business
Job Creation Partnerships (Ontario Job Creation Partnerships)
provide  participants with opportunities to gain work experience that will lead to  ongoing employment. Employment opportunities are provided by projects that  contribute to developing the community and the local economy
Targeted Earnings Supplements
encourage  unemployed persons to accept employment by offering them financial incentives.  This program was not covered by the evaluation given the fact that it was  delivered in one province only
Support measures
Support Measures are  available to all unemployed individuals including those not eligible to receive  EI and include:
Employment Assistance  Services (Employment Services)
such as individual counselling, action planning,  help with job search skills, job-finding clubs, job placement services, the  provision of Labour Market Information (LMI), and case management and follow-up
Labour Market Partnerships
provide  funding to help employers, employee and employer associations, and communities  improve their capacity to deal with human resource requirements and implement  labour force adjustments. These partnerships involve developing plans and  strategies, and implementing labour force adjustment measures. This support  measure was not covered by the evaluation
Research and Innovation
supports activities that  identify better ways of helping people prepare for or keep employment and be  productive participants in the labour force. Funds are provided to eligible  recipients to enable them to carry out demonstration projects and research for  this purpose. This support measure was not covered by the evaluation
Table 1 provides an overview of the share of funding  allocated to the five programs and services examined under the second cycle for  LMDA evaluation and the average cost per participant. It is noted that the  average cost per participant was calculated based on the 2002 to 2005 data from  the EI Monitoring and Assessment Reports. The 2002 to 2005 period corresponds  to the cohort of participants selected for incremental impacts and cost-benefit  analysis in the LMDA evaluation.
*The average  cost per participant was calculated based on the Action Plan Equivalent for active  claimant participants. The Action Plan Equivalent regroups all interventions taken  by participants in the 2002 to 2005 period.
Sources: EI  Monitoring and Assessment Reports 2002 to 2003 to 2014 to 2015.
1.2  Methodology
This  section presents key aspects of the quantitative analyses carried out as part  of the LMDA studies, while a more detailed description of the methodology is  provided in
Appendix A
.
All  quantitative analyses were based on administrative data from the EI part I (EI  claim data) and Part II (EBSM participation data collected by Ontario and  transferred to ESDC) databanks, linked to the T1 and T4 taxation files from the  Canada Revenue Agency. Incremental impact analyses and the cost-benefit  analyses were based on up to 100% of participants in the reference period  selected
.
Incremental impacts  analysis
Four  studies assessed program effectiveness by estimating incremental impacts from  EBSM participation on participants’ labour market experience (for  example,
earnings from  employment/self-employment
,
incidence  of employment
,
use of EI
or
Social Assistance
(SA)  and
dependence on income support
)  after participation. The role of the incremental impact analysis is to isolate  the effects of participation from other factors such as the economic cycle. In  order to achieve this, the incremental impact analyses compared the labour  market experience of participants before and after their participation with  that of non-participants (see the example of incremental impact calculation in  Figure 1).
The matching of participants and comparison group  members used up to 75 socio-demographic and labour market variables observed  over five years before participation. Two different comparison groups were used to measure impacts for active  and former EI claimants. For active claimants, the incremental impacts were  measured relative to a comparison group of active claimants who were eligible  to, but did not, participate in EBSMs during the reference period.
Former  claimants can be underemployed and unable to requalify for EI, out of the  labour force for various reasons or on social assistance. Based on previous  evaluation methodologies, on expert advice and given the difficulty in  generating a suitable comparison for former claimants using administrative data  alone, the comparison group for former claimants was created using individuals  who participated in Employment Services only during the reference period. This  is a conservative approach given the fact that participation in Employment  Assistance Services can lead to limited effects on labour market  outcomes. In other words, the  experience of former claimants who received Employment Benefits (that is,  Skills Development, Targeted Wage Subsidies, Self-employment Benefits and Job  Creation Partnerships) was compared to the experience of former claimants who  received low intensity employment services (that is, Employment Assistance  Services only). Due to this difference in measurement, incremental impacts  estimated for active claimant participants should not be directly compared to  those of former claimant participants .
Figure 1. Example of incremental impact calculation Factors accounted for in the cost-benefit analysis
Text description of Figure 1
Presents an example of the approach used to estimate the incremental impacts on earnings.
Program  efficiency was assessed through a cost-benefit analysis which compared the cost  of participating in the program for the participants and the cost of delivering  the program for the government to the benefits generated by the program.  Overall, this analyses provided insights on the extent to which the program is  efficient for the society (in other words, for both the participants and the  government). The costs and benefits accounted for in the calculations were as  follows (see detailed definitions in
Appendix A
):
Program cost: includes program and  administration costs paid by the government
Marginal social costs of public funds: represent  the loss incurred by society when raising additional revenues such as taxes to  fund government programs
Employment earnings: consists of incremental  impacts on participants’ earnings during and after participation. The  calculation accounts for the participant’s forgone earnings during  participation (in other words, opportunity cost). Employment earnings were also  increased by 15% to account for fringe benefits such as the employer-paid  health, life insurance and pensions contributions
Strengths and limitations of the studies
One of the key strengths from the studies is that all  quantitative analyses were based on administrative data rather than survey  responses. Compared to survey data, administrative data are not subject to recall  errors or response bias.
The propensity score models used to match participants and  non-participants for the incremental impact analyses are judged to be robust in  part because they were based on five years of pre-participation data and on a  vast array of variables including socio-demographic characteristics, location,  skills level related to last occupation and indicators of labour market  attachment. Sensitivity analysis and the use of alternative estimation methods  have increased confidence in the incremental impact estimates. However, one limitation with the propensity score  matching techniques is that no one can be fully sure the impacts were not  influenced by factors not captured in the data.
It should also be noted that it is not possible to produce  an analysis of the incremental impacts of Skills Development-Apprentices  participation. Assessing these impacts poses a methodological challenge because  program participants are already employed and are expected to return to their  employment after completing their training. Therefore, expected labour market  impacts cannot be examined using a similar approach as for other EBSMs, which  are expected to help participants return to employment. As well, the data  available does not permit the identification of a proper comparison group since  program participants alternate between work and training and no other potential  counterfactuals have similar employment and training patterns. In this context,  it is possible to provide an analysis of labour market outcomes associated with  program participants but not possible to produce estimates of program  effectiveness. While outcomes can provide some insights about the labour market  experience of participants before and after participation, it is not possible  to attribute the change observed in the outcomes to program participation. For  example, a change in average annual earnings from before to after participation  could be due to program participation or to other factors such as the  maturation effect of youth, the economic cycle, lay off, etc.
When interpreting qualitative findings, readers should keep  in mind that these are based on the perception of a small number of key  informants (ranging between 7 and 16) who are directly involved in the design  or delivery of the program. Their perception may be representative of their own  region or community but not necessarily of the entire province.
1.3  Overview of the studies summarized in this  report
Findings  presented in this report were drawn from eight separate studies carried out on  Ontario LMDA interventions and participants. These studies examined issues  related to program effectiveness, efficiency, design/delivery and used a mix of  qualitative and quantitative methods. Each study examined evaluation issues in  relation to active and former EI claimants.
Table  H1
in
Appendix H
presents an overview of  these studies, including the type of evidence generated, the methods used, the  reference period and the length of the post-program period over which program  effects were observed.
2. Evaluation findings
2.1  Rationale  and labour market context
Active labour market  programs aim to help unemployed or underemployed individuals find and maintain  employment. These programs are fairly similar across the Organization for  Economic Co-operation and Development countries and consist of skills training  in a classroom setting, work experience with employers (often subsidized) or in  the public/non-profit sector, return-to-employment assistance and self-employment  assistance. In Ontario, the Ministry  of Advanced Education and Skills Development (formerly the Ministry of  Training, Colleges and Universities) administers a range of active labour  market programming targeted at various groups of individuals including EI  claimants and social assistance recipients. Employment Services and Job  Placement with Incentive are delivered by third party service providers while  the Second Career program is delivered by third party service providers and the  Ministry. As of 2016, the Ontario Self-Employment Benefit program is no longer  offered in Ontario. Programs and services offered to active and former EI  claimants are mainly funded under the LMDA.
The 2016  to 2017 plan for Ontario’s Ministry of Advanced Education and Skills  Development has the following priorities related to  EBSMs:
Continue delivery of quality employment and  training, apprenticeship, literacy and labour market programs
Continue support directed at employers,  apprentices and training institutions to promote access to and completion of  apprenticeships – including enhanced support for special apprenticeship  programs
Ensure the employment and training system  connects job seekers with employers and helps Ontarians find the jobs that are  right for them
Introduce a new, more consistent approach to  assessing clients’ unique barriers to employment and tracking clients’ journeys  through the system
Make changes to the Second Career program that  will ensure support for all eligible clients while enabling the government to  invest in other key employment programs
Overall, impacts found in  the LMDA evaluation and discussed in this report demonstrated that LMDA funded  programs and services delivered in Ontario are generally helping participants  to improve their labour market experience after participation. As such,  evaluation evidence suggests that LMDA funded programming contributing to meet  the key labour market priorities of the Ministry of Advanced Education and  Skills.
2.2  Skills Development
2.2.1 Program  description
Based on a document  review and 8 key informant interviews completed in summer 2015
During the 2002 to 2005 period, the federal government was  delivering the Skills Development program in Ontario. In January 2007, Ontario  assumed responsibility for the LMDA design and delivery, including the Ontario  Skills Development Program. Ontario’s Skills Development program is called  Second Career and was introduced in 2008. As such, quantitative findings  presented in this section are attributable to the Skills Development program  delivered by the federal government in 2002 and 2005 and to the Ontario Skills  Development program which was delivered by Ontario in the 2007 to 2008 period.  Qualitative findings apply to the Second Career program.
The  objective of Second Career is to assist laid-off, unemployed individuals in  obtaining the skills they need for employment in occupations with demonstrated  labour market prospects in Ontario.
The program provides up to $28,000 in financial assistance  to eligible learners to cover expenses related to:
Training, including tuition
Disability needs
Books
Financial hardship support
Basic living expenses and allowance
Equipment
Living away from home allowance
Transportation and parking
Dependent care
Tutoring
The level of financial support provided under the program is  determined through an assessment of the participant’s needs. Participants may  be required to financially contribute to their training to demonstrate their  commitment to the training plan. The proportion of the participant’s  contribution is determined based on their annual household income and household  size.
The types of  training supported under Second Career must be vocational in nature. The  program  generally supports training activities that are up to two years in length as  well as one additional year for literacy and basic skills training and second  language training in English or French. For persons with disabilities, the  literacy and basic skills training, language training and skills training  duration may be extended to meet the special needs of these individuals.
2.2.2  Program delivery
Based on a document  review and 8 key informant interviews completed in summer 2015
Individuals interested in skills training must meet with  caseworkers at a third-party Service provider and complete an employment  service assessment. The needs assessment looks at the participant’s work  history, skills and barriers to employment. If skills training is identified as  the most appropriate way to address an individual’s employment needs, it must  be specified in an employment service plan, which must also include a  confirmation that individuals have demonstrated that they have completed a  thorough job search. The application and approval process can take from 5 days  to 3 months, depending on training start dates and the length of time required  for each individual to progress through the application process.
The Ministry of Advanced Education and Skills Development  reviews and approves applications. The Ministry is responsible for  administering Second Career participant agreements, which includes the  monitoring of individuals’ progress and financial activity. The frequency of  monitoring depends on the duration of the training program.  Service providers do not maintain contact with  most participants during training, rather, they follow-up with individuals  experiencing challenges.  Some key  informants identified that they conduct follow-up with participants during  training on a monthly basis or once per semester. After the completion of  training, service providers do follow-up with participants at 3, 6 and 12  months in order to determine their current status (such as, satisfaction with  services received, employment status, etc.) and whether they need any  additional assistance.
2.2.3  Targeting to labour market demand
Based on a document  review and 8 key informant interviews completed in summer 2015
To be approved for Second Career, applicants must demonstrate that their desired training will lead to employment opportunities. Evidence of good employment prospects includes one or more of the following
:
The occupation is on the list entitled Labour Market  Indicators for Second Career
Submission of currently advertised job opportunities
Submission of attestations from employers that they  are hiring for the occupation
Evidence of future job opportunities (for example, future  plant or a new employer)
Key informants explained that prospective participants must  conduct research on training institutions as part of their Second Career application.  As well, key informants mentioned that participants may need to conduct  informational interviews with potential employers or individuals employed in  their chosen field. Finally, service providers use information from the  employment prospect ratings of Ontario Job Futures and other sources of labour  market information in their discussions with participants.
Table  2 presents the top 5 occupations that program participants were trained for in  2014 and 2015.
2.2.4 Profile  of participants
As shown in
Table B1
in
Appendix B
, active  claimants who started participation in 2002 to 2005 were equally split  between male (51%) and female (48%), while those who started between 2007 and  2008 were less likely to be male (44%) than female (56%). Sixty-five percent  (65%) of those who started participation in 2002 and 2005 and 62% of those who  started participation in 2007 and 2008 were between the ages of 25 and 44. As  well, 41% of participants from the 2002 to 2005 cohort and 45% of participants  from the 2007 to 2008 cohort held occupations requiring secondary school or  occupational training before participation.
Former claimants who started participation between 2002 and  2005 were equally split between female (51%) and male (48%), while those who started  in 2007 to 2008 had more female (62%) than male (38%) participants. Sixty-eight  percent (68%) of those who started participation in 2002 to 2005 and 67% of  those who started participation in 2007 to 2008 were between the ages of 25 and  44. As well, 42% of participants from the 2002 to 2005 cohort and 45% of  participants from the 2007 to 2008 cohort held occupations requiring secondary  school or occupational training prior to participation.
2.2.5 Incremental impacts
Active claimants
As shown in
Table  B2
in Appendix B, active claimants who started program participation  between 2002 and 2005 had gains in earnings and incidence of employment in each  of the five years after participation. As shown in Figure 2, earnings increased  over time, ranging from $817 in the first year after participation to $3,711 in  the fifth year. The increases in incidence of employment ranged between 3.8  percentage points and 5.1 percentage points after participation.
Gains in employment earnings and  incidence of employment were accompanied by decreases in the use of EI  (cumulative of $1,116 or 3.6 weeks) and social assistance benefits in years 4  and 5 after participation by $65 and $85 respectively. As well, the level of  dependence on income support decreased between 1.4 and 2.4 percentage points  throughout the post-program period.
Active claimants who started  program participation in 2007 and 2008 increased their incidence of employment  and decreased the use of EI and social assistance as well as the level of  dependence on income support. The incremental impacts on earnings were mixed  with a decrease in year 1 followed by an increase in year 3 after  participation.
Overall, active claimants  increased their labour market attachment through increases in earnings,  incidence of employment and a decrease in the level of dependence on government  income support (use of EI and social assistance).
Figure 2. Increased earnings of active and former skills development participants relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure 2
The results  for sub-groups of active claimants were as follows:
Youth (under 30 years old) who started program  participation in the 2002 and 2005 period had incremental gains in earnings and  incidence of employment in each year after participation. As well, youth  decreased their use of EI and social assistance as well as their dependence on  income support over the 5 post-program years
Older workers (55 years old and over) who  started program participation in the 2002 and 2005 period had incremental  increases in earnings and incidence of employment during the post-program  period. However, their use of EI increased over the entire post-program period and  their dependence on income support increased in every post-program year.  Impacts on the use of social assistance increased in the first year after the  program, but were otherwise not statistically significant. The increase in EI  use reflects the inability of some older workers to retain the employment  secured following Skills Development participation
Long-tenured workers
who started program  participation between 2007 and 2009 had a decrease in earnings in the first  year after participation, followed by an increase in the third year after  participation. Incidence of employment increased every year following  participation. This increase was complemented by decreases in EI use and  dependence on income support throughout the post-participation period and a  decrease in social assistance use in the third year after participation
Former claimants
Former claimants who started their participation between  2002 and 2005 had incremental gains in earnings in each year after participation,  ranging from $659 to $1,398 (see
Table  B3
in Appendix B). There were also  increases in the incidence of employment ranging between 2.2 and 3 percentage  points. Participants’ use of social assistance decreased by a cumulative of  $910 in the five years following participation while the dependence on income  support decreased between 1.4 and 2.3 percentage points annually.
Program participants increased the use of EI by a cumulative  of $497. This indicates the inability of some former claimants to maintain the  employment secured in the short-term. It can also be argued that the increase  in EI use is an indication of increase labour market attachment for this client  group since they did experience increases in employment earnings and incidence  of employment as well as a decrease in the use of social assistance. As a  reminder, former claimants are participants for whom the EI benefit period  ended up to three years pre-participation.
Former claimants who started their  participation in the 2007 to 2008 period had a decrease in earnings in the  first year following participation, with non-statistically significant findings  in the remaining years. Participants experienced increases in the incidence of  employment and decreases in social assistance use as well as dependence on  income support. The incremental impacts on the use of EI were mixed with a  decrease in year 1 and an increase in year 3 following participation.
The results  for sub-groups of former claimants were as follows:
Youth (under 30 years old) who started their  participation in the 2002 and 2005 period experienced incremental gains in  earnings and incidence of employment in all years after participation. As well,  they decreased the use social assistance and their dependence on income support  over most post-program years. Youth increased the use of EI indicating the  inability for some youth participants to maintain the employment secured  following participation.
Older workers (55 years old and over) who  started their participation in the 2002 and 2005 period had incremental  increases in earnings during the total post-program period. The incidence of  employment increased in the fourth and fifth year after participation. The  remaining results were not statistically significant.
Long-tenured workers who  started program participation between 2007 and 2009 decreased their earnings in  the first year after participation, but also experienced a decrease in EI use  and dependence on income support in the same year. In addition, these  participants experienced increases in the incidence of employment and decreases  in social assistance use in each year following participation. Other years did  not have statistically significant results for earnings, EI use and dependence  on income support.
2.2.6 Cost-benefit results
As shown in
Table  B4
in Appendix B, in order to recover the costs, benefits of the program  for society would need to be maintained for 7.8 years after participation for  active claimants and 14.3 years for former claimants.
2.2.7 Challenges and lessons learned about Skills  Development design and delivery
Based on 8 key  informant interviews completed in summer 2015
Key informants identified the following challenges related  to the design and delivery of the current Skills Development program (Second  Career):
The perceived insufficient level of financial  support (7 key informants)
Participants with multiple barriers have more  complex needs and often require additional time for assistance (3 key informants)
Key informants identified the following lessons learned in  terms of the design and delivery of the program:
The communication and coordination between  stakeholders was strong (4 key informants)
Ensuring that the participant is well supported  by caseworkers through each step (4 key informants)
Guidelines on estimating financial supports for  participants are important to ensure accurate and consistent levels of support  are provided (3 key informants)
2.3 Skills Development-Apprentices
2.3.1 Program  description
Based on a document  review and 7 key informant interviews completed in summer 2015
Under  the Ontario Skills Development-Apprentices program, the Ministry of  Advanced Education and Skills Development provides financial assistance to EI eligible individuals who  are attending full-time apprenticeship training in a classroom setting.  Funding is provided to apprentices enrolled in full-time training which is  generally 8 to 10 weeks in length.
Eligible  costs include weekly basic living cost, child care, transportation, travel and overnight  accommodation, living away from home all
o
wance  and disability allowance.
During the 2003 to 2005 period, the federal government was  delivering the Skills Development – Apprentices program in Ontario. Ontario  assumed responsibility for the design and delivery of the program in January  2007.
2.3.2  Program delivery
Based on a document  review and 7 key informant interviews completed in summer 2015
Apprentices  are not required to develop a Return to Work Action Plan and they are not case  managed because they generally have an employer attachment before and after the  classroom training. Employers  usually complete an Apprentice application and approval is made at the regional  level in Ontario. The Ministry of Advanced Education and Skills  Development carries out  discussions with schools and considerations are given for trades categories  that are in demand based on the number of registered apprentices.
Apprentices are contacted to attend training through a  letter issued by the Ministry.  After receiving confirmation of the apprentice’s intention to attend the  classroom training, they are invited to a documentation session usually during  the first week of training.  Staff from  the Ministry’s apprenticeship division evaluate eligibility for financial  support from the program and determine the level of support needed. Service  providers can advise clients on apprenticeship training and provide  pre-apprenticeship training, but they have no role to play in schools and  apprenticeship training.
Staff from the Ministry visit final level apprenticeship  classes to encourage participants to write their final exam. They also work on  arranging a one week training aiming for preparing clients for exams and to  increase success rates.
2.3.3 Profile of Skills Development- Apprentices participants
As shown in
Table C1
in
Appendix  C
, the majority of active claimants who started participation in 2003 to  2005 and 2013 to 2014 were male (96% and 97% respectively). Eighty-eight  percent (88%) of apprentices who started participation in 2003 to 2005 were  under 34 years old, while 82% of apprentices who started participation in 2013  to 2014 were between 25 and 44 years of age. As well, 87% of apprentices from  the 2003 to 2005 cohort and 88% of apprentices from the 2013 to 2014 cohort  held employment requiring college or apprenticeship training before  participation.
The majority of former claimants who started participation  in 2003 to 2005 and 2013 to 2014 were male (91% and 92%). Seventy-four percent  (74%) of apprentices from the 2003 to 2005 cohort were under 34 years old,  compared to 76% for apprentices from the 2013 to 2014 cohort. As well, 48% of  apprentices from the 2003 to 2005 cohort and 72% of apprentices from the 2013  to 2014 cohort held employment requiring college or apprenticeship training  before participation.
2.3.4 Outcomes
The labour market outcomes were based on individuals who  began their participation during the 2003 to 2005 period. Statistics presented  in Tables
C2
and
C3
in Appendix C focused on 5 years prior and 7  years after the program start year.
Active claimants
As shown in Figure 3, employment  earnings for active participants increased from $14,654 in the 5th pre-program  year to $55,135 in the 7th post-program year. The average proportion of participants employed remained almost  unchanged and declined slightly from 97% before to 96% after participation.
Figure 3. Average earnings for active claimants in Skills Development-Apprentices (in current dollars)
Text description of Figure 3
Former claimants
As shown in Figure  4, employment earnings for former participants increased from $15,456 in the 5th  pre-program year to $37,838 in the 7th post-program year. In  contrast to the increase in earnings, the average annual proportion of  participants employed decreased by 5 percentage points, from 93% to 88%. This  decrease should be interpreted with caution given the small number of  participants (n=327). A decrease of 5 percentage points in the proportion  employed represent 16 participants.
Figure 4. Average earnings for former claimants in Skills Development-Apprentices (in current dollars)
Text description of Figure 4
2.3.5 Challenges and lessons learned about Ontario  Skills Development-Apprentices design and delivery
Based on a document  review and 7 key informant interviews completed in summer 2015
Existing literature has shown  that there is a fairly high non-completion rate among apprentices in Canada  (40-50%)
.  Furthermore, subject  matter literature revealed that despite the growth in apprenticeship  registrations in Canada, there has not been a corresponding increase in  completions
.  Key informants overall agreed with the  barriers and challenges identified in the literature above and they confirmed a  high dropout rate. They provided the following reasons to explain why some  participants drop out of the apprenticeship process:
Financial barriers (5 key informants)
Timing and location of training (3 key  informants)
Apprentices are often working for the same pay  as journeymen and they are not motivated to write the final exam (3 key informants)
Lack of ongoing case-management for apprentices  (2 key informants)
To deal with these barriers, key  informants identified the following supports to help apprentices access and  complete their apprenticeship training:
Pre-apprenticeship training would be beneficial  to helping apprentices complete their training and increase the probability of  success. The integration of Literacy and Basics Skills and employability skills  (job retention, leadership skills, document use, conflict resolution, goal  setting, etc.) components in pre-apprenticeship training are key components to  ensuring success, especially for persons with multiple barriers (4 key  informants)
Providing handouts to apprentices with detailed  information on the available supports and where to get help when needed (3 key  informants)
Increase awareness of the financial supports  that are available for apprentices (3 key informants).
Case managing apprentices for the full duration  of the apprenticeship process would be beneficial to increasing the probability  of completion (2 key informants)
Key  informants were asked about challenges in relation to the design and delivery  of the program or apprenticeship training in general and they identified the  following challenges:
Lack of awareness about the financial support  available to apprentices (3 key informants)
The amount of paperwork required when seeking  financial support (3 key informants)
Delays in confirming EI eligibility (3 key  informants)
2.4  Targeted  Wage Subsidies (Job Placement with Incentive)
The targeted Wage Subsidy program was delivered by the  federal government in the 2002 to 2005 period. Ontario assumed responsibility  for program delivery in January 2007.
The current program, called Job Matching, Placement and  Incentives, matches client skills and interests with employment opportunities  and employer needs. Clients using this component need a work experience or  on-the-job training placement. Job Placements include “job test and hire”, work  experience, and community volunteer positions.
2.4.1 Profile of Targeted Wage Subsidies  participants
As shown in
Table D1
in
Appendix D
, active  claimants who started participation between 2002 to 2005 and 2007 to 2008 had  higher proportions of male than female participants (57% and 53% respectively).  Two-thirds of participants (65% and 66% respectively) from both cohorts were  above 35 years old. Before participation, active claimants in both  cohorts held occupations requiring secondary or occupational training (38% and  36% respectively) or college or apprenticeship training (29% and 32%  respectively).
Former claimants who started  participation in 2002 to 2005 and 2007 to 2008 had higher proportions of male  than female participants (56% and 52% respectively). Both cohorts were evenly  distributed among age groups:
25 to 34 years old (32% of the 2002 to 2005  cohort and 28% of the 2007 to 2008 cohort).
35 to 44 years old (30% of the 2002 to 2005  cohort and 28% of the 2007 to 2008 cohort).
45 to 54 years old (21% of the 2002 to 2005  cohort and 24% of the 2007 to 2008 cohort).
As well, 37% of participants from the 2002 to 2005 cohort  and 38% of participants from the 2007 to 2008 cohort held occupations requiring  secondary school or occupational training prior to participation.
2.4.2 Incremental  impacts
Active claimants
As shown in
Table D2
in Appendix D, active claimants who  started participation between 2002 and 2005 had gains in earnings and incidence  of employment in each of the five years after participation. As shown in Figure  5, participants’ gains in earnings ranged from $2,223 to $4,507. Increases in  the incidence of employment ranged between 6.7 percentage points and 7.4  percentage points. The incremental impacts on the use of EI, social assistance  and the dependence on income support were not statistically significant.
Figure 5. Increased earnings of active and former Targeted Wage Subsidies participants relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure 5
Active claimants who started  participation in 2007 to 2008 had a cumulative increase in incremental earnings  over the three years following participation. As well, they had incremental  increases in the incidence of employment and a cumulative decrease in the use  of social assistance benefits over the three years following participation.  Incremental impacts on the use of EI and the level of dependence on government  income support were not statistically significant.
Overall, active claimants improved their labour market  attachment through increases in earnings and incidence of employment.
The results  for sub-groups of active claimants were as follows:
Youth (under 30 years old) who started  participation in the 2002 to 2005 period generally experienced incremental  gains in earnings and incidence of employment after participation. The use of  EI, social assistance and the dependence on income support decreased only in  the first year after participation, while the remaining results were not  statistically significant.
Older workers (55 years old and over) who started  participation in the 2002 to 2005 period experienced incremental increases in  earnings and incidence of employment during the post-program period. However,  there was an increase in EI benefits and dependence on income support following  participation. This reflects the inability of some older workers to retain the  employment secured in the post-program period.
Long-tenured workers
who started participation  between 2007 and 2009 decreased their earnings in the first year after  participation, but also decreased their EI and the dependence on income support  in this same year. Other results were not statistically significant. The decrease  in earnings during program participation and in year one afterward may reflects  the inability of long-tenured workers to retain the job secured under the  program, to find a subsequent employment or to secure an employment long enough  to build new entitlements for EI.
Former claimants
As shown in
Table D3
in  Appendix D, former claimants who started their participation between 2002 and  2005 experienced incremental gains in earnings in each year after  participation. As show in Figure 5, those gains ranged from $2,662 to $3,010.  There were also incremental increases in the incidence of employment ranging  between 5.1 and 6.3 percentage points over the five-year post-program period.  While use of EI use increased by a cumulative of $1,515 or 4.3 weeks, the use  of social assistance decreased by a cumulative of $1,412 and the dependence on  income support also decreased between 2.1 to 2.7 percentage points following  participation.
Overall, former claimants increased their use of EI following  participation. This indicates the inability of some former claimants to  maintain the employment secured in the short-term. It can also be argued that  the increase in EI use is an indication of increase labour market attachment  for this client group since they did experience increases in employment  earnings and incidence of employment as well as decreases in the use of social  assistance and dependence on income support. As a reminder, former claimants  are participants for whom the EI benefit period ended up to three years  pre-participation.
Former claimants who started their  participation in the 2007 to 2008 period also experienced increased earnings,  incidence of employment, and use of EI, along with decreased social assistance  use. The results for dependence on income support were not statistically  significant.
The results  for sub-groups of former claimants were as follows:
Youth (under 30 years old) who started  participation in the 2002 to 2005 period experienced incremental gains in  earnings and incidence of employment in most years after participation. The use  of EI increased while the use of social assistance and the dependence on income  support decreased following participation
Older workers (55 years old and over) who started  participation in the 2002 to 2005 period generally experienced incremental  increases in earnings and incidence of employment following participation.  Older workers increased the use of EI and decrease the use of social assistance  over the entire five years following participation
Long-tenured workers who started participation  between 2007 and 2009 increased their earnings and incidence of employment  after participation. The use of social assistance and the level of dependence  on income support decreased in most years following participation. Results for  the use of EI were not statistically significant
2.4.3 Cost-benefit  results
As shown in
Table  D4
in Appendix D, for active claimants, the benefits of Employment  Service-Job Placement with Incentive for society exceeded the costs 3.9 years  after participation. For former claimants, the benefits exceeded the costs 2  years after participation.
2.5  Self-Employment
2.5.1 Program  description
Based on information  available on the website of the Ministry of Advanced Education and Skills  Development
During the 2002 to 2005 period, the federal government was  delivering the Self-Employment program in Ontario. Ontario assumed  responsibility for the design and delivery of the program in January 2007.
This Ontario Self-Employment Benefit program did sunset in  2016 and the information below refers to the period of time when this program  was active in Ontario. The program provided entrepreneurial skills development  support to approved participants to help them develop and implement a business  plan and become self-employed. The program allowed participants to concentrate  on building a sustainable business by providing them with financial assistance  while they receive business advice and support.
Key elements of Ontario  Self-Employment Benefit were:
Information sessions for eligible and interested  individuals
Orientation and support sessions to enable  individuals to assess risk and opportunities of self-employment, personal  suitability and develop a business concept
Eligibility and suitability assessment including  a feasibility assessment of the proposed business concept
A mechanism for independent review of the  feasibility of the proposed business concept and subsequent business plan. An  independent review may include staff and recognized individuals in the  community or an organization that can provide an objective opinion on the feasibility  of the business concept
Entrepreneurial skills development support to  enable approved participants to develop and implement a business plan  (including but not limited to workshops, coaching, mentoring, etc.)
The provision of financial assistance by the  Ministry of Advanced Education and Skills Development
Financial assistance covered basic living allowance,  dependent care costs, disability needs and transportation costs.
2.5.2 Program delivery
Based on information  available on the website of the Ministry of Advanced Education and Skills  Development
The Ministry of Training, Colleges and Universities (now  Ministry of Advanced Education and Skills Development) was responsible for  confirming eligibility, reviewing the suitability and business feasibility  assessment completed by coordinators as well as approving program participation  and financial assistance. Third party service providers were responsible for  completing the employment service needs assessment, employment service plan and  referring individuals to coordinators. Coordinators of the program are  responsible for assessing the eligibility and suitability of applicants.
Assessment is based on individual eligibility, the  eligibility of business activities and the suitability and feasibility of the  business concept.
2.5.3 Profile  of Self-Employment participants
Active claimants who started participation in 2002 to 2005  included more male (56%) than female (43%) participants, while those who  started participation in 2007 to 2008 had more female (57%) than male (43%)  participants. As shown in
Table E1
in
Appendix E
, 70% of those who started participation in 2002  to 2005 and in 2007 to 2008 were above 35 years old. As well, 35% of  participants in both cohorts had occupations requiring college or  apprenticeship training before participation.
Former claimants who started participation between 2002 and  2005 were evenly split between female (49%) and male (50%) participants, while  those who started participation in 2007 to 2008 had more female (61%) than male  (39%) participants. Sixty-nine percent (69%) of those who started participation  in 2002 to 2005 and 70% of those who started participation in 2007 to 2008 were  35 years old and over. Participants in both cohorts held occupations requiring  secondary school or occupational training (31% and 32%) or college or  apprenticeship training (29% and 30%) prior to participation.
2.5.4 Incremental impacts
Like other EBSMs, incremental impacts were estimated for  Self-Employment participants in the 2002 to 2005 and 2007 to 2008 periods.  Results showed large decreases in employment/self-employment earnings and  decreases in the incidence of employment. As well, compared to similar  non-participants, participants decreased their use of EI and social assistance  and also reduced their dependence on government income support.
Detailed estimates are presented in Tables
E2
and
E3
in Appendix E. However, they are not discussed in the  report since they may not provide an accurate depiction of the financial  well-being of participants in the post-program period. Impacts were examined  using individual earnings reported in the T1 and T4 taxation files from Canada  Revenue Agency, and measured relative to active claimants who did not  participate in the Self-Employment program and may have been in any  employment/unemployment situation following participation (for example,  unemployed, paid employee or self-employed).
According to a study from Statistics Canada, self-employed  individuals in Canada have a lower average annual income than paid employees  ($46,200 versus $52,400 in 2009), but the average net worth of their households  is 2.7 times greater than that of the paid employee households, which indicates  that some self-employed individuals may leave funds within their business for  reinvestment purposes
. Overall, this suggests  that looking at individual earnings alone, without taking the net worth into  consideration, may not provide a fair assessment of how well participants are  doing financially after participation.
Finally, readers should also be aware that little is currently known about the design and delivery of  this program. In particular, there is a lack of understanding around the role  played by this program in helping future entrepreneurs to implement viable  business plans and to develop their entrepreneurship skills. Overall, it is not  clear whether participant’s success in improving their labour market  attachment through self-employment is more closely associated with their  business idea and their entrepreneurship skills than the assistance provided  under the program.
2.6  Job  Creation Partnerships
2.6.1 Program  description and delivery
Based on information  available on the website of the Ministry of Advanced Education and Skills  Development
During the 2002 to 2005 period, the federal government was  delivering the Job Creation Partnerships program in Ontario. Ontario assumed  responsibility for the design and delivery of the program in January 2007.
The Ontario Job Creation Partnerships program provides work  experience to unemployed job seekers within projects that benefit the community  or local economy. Participants who complete the program will have gained recent  work experience and additional skills to add to their résumés, increasing their  chances of finding long-term employment.
Eligible  organizations include businesses, non-profit organizations, crown corporations,  municipalities or provincial/territorial governments, First Nations councils  and public health and educational institutions.
The following are criteria for  projects that are eligible for the program:
Finite in nature and incremental to the  sponsors’ normal activities
Provides a benefit to the community or the local  economy
Provides participants with a meaningful work  experience
Within their ability to do so, sponsors share in  the cost of the project
2.6.2 Profile of  Job Creation Partnerships participants
As shown in
Table F1
in
Appendix F
, active claimants who  started participation in 2002 to 2005 and 2007 to 2008 included more female  than male participants (58% and 64% respectively). Nearly half of participants  in both cohorts were between 35 and 54 years old (47% and 49% respectively). As  well, participants between 25 and 34 years old represented 36% and 32%  respectively of participants in both cohorts. One-third of participants in both  cohorts (33% and 35% respectively) held occupations requiring secondary or  occupational training before participation.
Former claimants who started participation in 2002 to 2005  and 2007 to 2008 included more female (52% and 61% respectively) than male (47%  and 39% respectively) participants. Half of participants in both cohorts were  between 35 and 54 years old (49% and 50% respectively). As well, participants  between 25 and 34 years old represented 33% and 35% respectively of  participants in both cohorts. Thirty-two  percent (32%) of participants from the 2002 to 2005 cohort and 37% of  participants from the 2007 to 2008 cohort held occupations requiring  secondary school or occupational training before participation.
2.6.3 Incremental impacts
Active claimants
As shown in
Table F2
in Appendix F, active claimants who started  participation in Job Creation Partnerships between 2002 and 2005 had incremental  increases in earnings and incidence of employment following participation. As  shown in Figure 6, gains in earnings ranged between $2,396 and $5,155. As well,  gains in the incidence of employment ranged between 5.2 and 8 percentage  points. Active claimants had short-term decrease in EI use but they increased  their overall use of EI by a cumulative of 2.3 weeks over the five  post-participation years. Most of the incremental impacts on the use of social  assistance were non-statistically significant, while the level of dependence on  income support decreased in two of the five post-participation years.
Figure 6. Increased earnings of active and former Job Creation Partnerships participants relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure 6
Active claimants who started participation between 2007 and  2008 similarly had gains in earnings and incidence of employment in the  post-program period. Participants decreased their overall use of EI by a  cumulative of 3.4 weeks over the five post-participation years, while the level  of dependence on income support decreased in year 1 post-participation.  Incremental impacts on the use of social assistance were not statistically  significant.
Overall, active EI claimants who participated in the Job  Creation Partnerships program in 2002 to 2005 and 2007 to 2008 improved their  labour market attachment through increases in earnings and incidence of  employment following participation. Participants also had short-term decrease  in the use of EI and in the level of dependence on government income support.
Long-tenured  workers
who started participation between 2007 and 2009 increased  their incidence of employment following participation. No other results were  statistically significant.
Incremental impacts for youth and older workers who participated  in the program in 2002 to 2005 were not produced due to their small numbers.
Former claimants
As shown in
Table F3
in Appendix F, former claimants who started program participation in 2002and 2005  had incremental increases in earnings, ranging from $1,217 to $2,090, over the  five post-program years. As well, participants had incremental increases in the  incidence of employment that ranged between 3.6 to 4.2 percentage points over  the five post-program years. The use of EI increased in the second ($259) and  fifth year ($210) after participation. However, social assistance use decreased  in every year after participation, ranging from $221 to $306, and dependence on  income support decreased in the first four years after participation (ranging  between 2.4 to 3.8 percentage points).
Similar to participants who started in 2002and 2005, former  claimants who started participation in 2007 and 2008 increased their earnings  and incidence of employment following participation. They also decreased their  social assistance use and dependence on income support, while results on EI use  were not statistically significant.
Overall, former claimants increased their labour market  attachment through increases in employment earnings and incidence of employment  as well as a decrease in the use of social assistance and in the level of  dependence on government income support.
The results  for sub-groups of active claimants were as follows:
Youth (under 30 years old) who started  participation in the 2002 and 2005 period experienced incremental gains in  earnings. They also decreased their use of social assistance in every year  after participation and decreased their dependence on income support in the  first and third year following participation. Other results were not  statistically significant.
Incremental impacts for youth and long-tenured workers were  not produced due to their small numbers.
2.6.4 Cost-benefit results
As shown in
Table F4
in Appendix F, the benefits of the program for active claimants would need to  be maintained over 8.4 years after the end of participation to match the  costs.  For former claimants, the  benefits would need to persist over 19.9 years after the end of participation  to match the costs.
Overall, when interpreting cost-benefit results for Job  Creation Partnerships, it should also be acknowledged that program funding  contributes to develop the community and the local economy and none of these  benefits were accounted for in the calculations as they are difficult to  quantify.
2.7 Employment Assistance Services
2.7.1 Program description and delivery
Based on 16 key  informant interviews completed in summer 2013
During the 2002 to 2005 period, the federal government was  delivering Employment Assistance Services in Ontario. Ontario assumed  responsibility for the design and delivery of these services in January 2007.
The current program delivered by Ontario is called  Employment Services. These services aim to assist job seekers with securing  sustainable employment by providing access to all  Employment Ontario programs and services. A network of 171 third-party  service providers offer planning and coordination of client services; resources  and information; job search assistance; job matching, placement and incentives  and job and training retention services. Assistance and coaching is provided  for resumes, cover letters, online applications, connecting with employers,  preparing for interviews and much more. Services are tailored to meet the  individual employment and training needs of each participant.
2.7.2 Profile of Employment Assistance Services  participants
As shown in
Table  G1
in
Appendix G
, active claimants who started their  participation in Employment Assistance Services between 2002 and 2005 had more  male (54%) than female (45%) participants, while participants who started  between 2007 and 2008 were more likely to be female (58%) than male (42%).  Both cohorts were evenly distributed among  the age groups above 25 years old:
25 to 34 years old (28% of the 2002 to 2005 cohort  and 26% of the 2007 to 2008 cohort).
35 to 44 years old (32% of the 2002 to 2005  cohort and 30% of the 2007 to 2008 cohort).
45 to 54 years old (22% of the 2002 to 2005  cohort and 26% of the 2007 to 2008 cohort).
Thirty-eight percent (38%) of participants from the 2002 to 2005  cohort and 41% of participants from the 2007 to 2008 cohort held occupations  requiring secondary or occupational training.
Former claimants who started their participation in  Employment Assistance Services between 2002 and 2005 included more male (52%)  than female (47%) participants, while participants in the 2007 to 2008 cohort  included more female (59%) than male (41%) participants. Participants in both  cohorts were generally distributed among the age groups above 25 years old:
25 to 34 years old (29% of the 2002 to 2005  cohort and 28% of the 2007 to 2008 cohort).
35 to 44 years old (32% of the 2002 to 2005  cohort and 29% of the 2007 to 2008 cohort).
45 to 54 years old (22% of the 2002 to 2005  cohort and 24% of the 2007 to 2008 cohort).
Thirty-nine percent (39%) of participants from the 2002 to 2005  cohort and 41% of participants from the 2007 to 2008 cohort held occupations  requiring secondary or occupational training.
Labour market barriers faced by Employment Assistance Services participants
Based on 16 key  informant interviews completed in fall 2013
Key informants provided examples of specific barriers faced  by participants. These include:
Lack of certification, low educational attainment  and literacy issues
Lack of transferable skills and recent work  experience
Lack of motivation, self-esteem and interpersonal  skills
Lack of self-marketing skills and lack of job  search skill such as resume writing.
Mismatch between available skills and  expectations from both employers and unemployed
Having a criminal record, especially in a small  community
Stability issues (for example, homelessness,  mental health issues and addiction)
Transportation
Seasonal employment and employment opportunities  being limited, especially in rural areas
Lack of access to affordable childcare
Individuals belonging to some socio-demographic groups also  experience particular labour market challenges. The key informants interviewed  identified barriers that are specifically faced by immigrants, older workers  and youth:
Immigrants
may be facing difficulties  in integrating into the labour market due to language barriers, lack of  Canadian work experience, lack of credential recognition and unfamiliarity with  Canadian work culture. It was also mentioned that discrimination by employers  could be a barrier. Barriers to employment faced by immigrants also include  issues at the more personal level such as culture shock or lack of self-esteem  due to isolation from not understanding the language or the culture.
Older workers
are often dealing with  outdated skills and a lack of computer skills.
Youth
often have low educational  attainment. As well, youth and new graduates lack job experience and many tend  to hold temporary jobs.
2.7.3 Incremental impacts
Incremental impacts were produced only for active claimants  since former claimants who participated only in Employment Assistance Services  were used as a comparison group for former claimants who participated in other  EBSMs.
As  shown in
Table G2
in Appendix  G, active claimants who started participation in the 2002 to 2005 period  increased their incidence of employment between 1.4 and 1.7 percentage points  after participation (see Figure 7). As well, they decreased the use of EI by a  cumulative of $1,248 or 4.1 weeks, and the level of dependence on government  income support in years 1 and 2 following program participation. Participants  experienced a decrease in employment earnings in year 1 following program  participation ($1,036), but gains in earnings increased in years 4 and 5  following participation by $657 and $802, respectively.
Figure 7. Incidence of employment for active claimant participants in Employment Assistance Services
Text description of Figure 7
Results  for active claimants who exclusively participated in Employment Services in  2007and 2008 mirrored those of the 2002 to 2005 cohort. Participants  experienced an incremental increase in the incidence of employment and  decreases in EI use and in the level of dependence on government income  support. The use of social assistance decreased in year 1 post program while  estimates in years 2 and 3 were not statistically significant. As well,  participants experienced a decrease in employment earnings in year 1 following  program participation, but gains in earnings increased in years 2 and 3  following participation.
Overall, active claimants who participated in Employment  Assistance Services increased their labour market attachment by increasing  their incidence of employment, their employment earnings over time and  decreasing the use of EI. To contextualise these results, it should be noted  that Employment Assistance Services are short-term, low intensity measures that  are not focused on human capital development. It mostly includes services such  as counselling, help with job search, development of return-to-work action  plans and (in some cases) very short training such as First Aid. In this  context, it may not be reasonable to expect that participating only in  Employment Services would result in improved participant earnings. Rather, the  results for incidence of employment and EI use suggest that active claimants  are returning into employment after participation.
The results varied based on the  sub-groups examined:
Youth (under 30 years old) who started  participation between 2002 and 2005 increased their earnings and incidence of  employment in four of the five post-program years. The also decreased their use  of EI and dependence on income support.
Older workers (over 55 years old) who started  participation in 2002 to 2005 increased their incidence of employment in the  five years following participation. They also increased their earnings in three  of the five post-program years. Older workers decreased the use of EI in the  short-term but generally increased the use of social assistance.
Long-tenured workers
who started participation  between 2007 and 2009 increased their incidence of employment in the three  years following participation. They generally decreased the use of EI and the  level of dependence on government income support. The use of social assistance  increased over the entire three post-program years. Long-tenured workers also  experienced a decrease in employment earnings following participation.
Earlier participation in Employment Assistance Services improves participants’  labour market outcomes
The  study on the effects related to the timing of participation showed that the  incremental impacts of program participation on earnings and employment were  larger for individuals who participated in Employment Services early during  their EI claim compared to non-participants and to individuals who remained on  EI for longer periods before receiving these services (see Figure 8  below and
Table G3
in Appendix G). Specifically, individuals who started their participation within four  weeks following the start of their EI benefit period had a cumulative gain in  earnings of $10,624 over five post-program years.  These early starters also experienced annual  gains in their incidence of employment that ranged between 1.2 and 2.2  percentage points in four of the five post-program years.
Figure 8. Cumulative incremental impacts on earnings related to the timing of participation in Employment Assistance Services
Text description of Figure 8
* The  incremental impact on earnings for participants who started Employment Services  during the 2nd quarter after the start of their EI claim is not  statistically significant at the 95% confidence level.
As  shown in
Table  G4
in  Appendix G, the study also looked at the difference between the number of EI  weeks unused by participants and their comparison group in order to determine  the effect of the timing of participation in Employment Services on the return  to employment. Those who started participation within the first 4 weeks of  their claim returned to employment more quickly than the comparison group.  Specifically, those who started within 4 weeks returned to employment 2.9 weeks  earlier than the comparison group.
Among all participants who started in the 2002 to 2005  period, 22,869 received assistance within the first 4 weeks of establishing an  EI claim. With average weekly EI benefits of $324 during this period, the  22,869 participants did not use $21,487,712 in EI benefits (22,869 claimants *  $324 * 2.9 weeks). The average cost of Employment Services interventions in the  2002 to 2005 period was $840. This represents a cost of $19,209,960 (22,869  claimants * $840) for a net savings of $2,277,752 ($21,487,712 - $19,209,960).
2.7.4 Cost-benefit results
As shown in
Table G5
in Appendix G, if the benefits of this program were  maintained, it would take 9.3 years after the end of participation for the  benefits to recover the costs.
2.7.5 Challenges  and lessons learned about Employment Services design and delivery
Based on 16 key  informant interviews completed in summer 2013
Key informants interviewed  identified the following challenges they face with the provision and targeting  of the program:
Challenges in accessing childcare and paying the  cost of transportation to training (5 key informants)
Data collection is challenging for some service  providers (5 key informants)
Lack of funds dedicated for the professional  development of staff (4 key informants).
Insufficient staff capacity can require the use  of referrals, prevent the provision of job retention services, result in a  waiting list, limit pre-employment services and also limit services to clients  with multiple barriers (3 key informants).
Key informants interviewed  identified the following best practices and lessons learned:
Establishing relationships and communicate with  other service providers, community organizations and employers (9 key informants)
Centralizing services in one location and  ensuring that the service offices are strategically located to improve access  to other services (7 key informants)
Recruiting and training qualified staff (4 key  informants)
Monitoring participant satisfaction, program  outcomes and staff performance as well as having a good data collection system  can improve the understanding and delivery of the program (3 key informants)
Providing a participant-centered approach to  counselling by ensuring that the same counsellors are providing services to the  same individual over time and providing services that suit the client’s needs  (3 key informants)
3. Comparison of key findings by program type
This section provides an  overview of the key findings from the incremental impact analysis for Skills  Development, Targeted Wage Subsidies, Job Creation Partnerships and Employment  Assistance Services for both active and former EI claimant participants who started  participation in the 2002 to 2005 period.
Overall, incremental impacts demonstrate that LMDA  programs and services are improving the labour market attachment of  participants, including youth and older workers. As well, social benefits of  participation exceeded the cost of investments for most interventions over  time. Finally, providing Employment Assistance Services interventions earlier  during an EI claim (first four weeks) produced larger impacts on earnings and  employment and facilitated earlier return to work. This demonstrates the  importance of targeting early participation of EI active claimants.
Program participants  have a higher probability of being employed than comparison group members
As shown in Figure 9, active  EI claimants who participated in Skills Development, Targeted Wage Subsidies,  Job Creation Partnerships and Employment Assistance Services had a higher  probability of being employed (in other words, increased their incidence of  employment) compared to similar non-participants. As well, former EI claimants  who participated in Skills Development, Targeted Wage Subsidies, Job Creation  Partnerships had a higher probability of being employed compared to former EI  claimants who received low intensity interventions under Employment Assistance  Services.
Figure 9. Change in probability of being employed in participants relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure 9
Increased earnings  for participants compared to comparison group members
As shown in Figure 10,  active claimants who participated in Skills Development, Targeted Wage  Subsidies and Job Creation Partnerships increased their employment earnings  compared to similar non-participants. Former EI claimants who participated in  Skills Development, Targeted Wage Subsidies and Job Creation Partnerships also  increased their employment earnings compared to former claimants who  participated in Employment Assistance Services exclusively.
It is noted that Employment  Assistance Services are relatively modest activities and, by themselves, are  not expected to lead to substantial effects on labour market outcomes.  In other words, Employment Assistance Services  aims to support the return to work of unemployed participants and not  necessarily to secure a better paying job than pre-participation. However, as  demonstrated in the report, providing Employment Assistance Services earlier  during the EI claim (first 4 weeks) generates significantly greater returns  (see Figure 8).
Figure 10. Increased cumulative earnings of participants relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure 10
* The cumulative incremental impact on earnings for active      Employment Assistance Services participants is not statistically significant at the 95% confidence level.      Participants experienced a decrease in employment earnings in year 1      following program participation ($1,036), but gains in earnings were observed      in years 4 and 5 following participation by $657 and $802, respectively
LMDA are also  improving the probability of employment and the earnings for most youth and  older worker participants
Incremental impacts that are available demonstrate that active  and former EI claimants who were youth and older workers, and who participated  in Skills Development, Targeted Wage Subsidies and Employment Assistance  Services increased the probability of employment compared to comparison group  members. Results for Job Creation Partnership participants were not  statistically significant.
As well, active and former EI claimants who were youth and  older workers, and who participated in Skills Development, Targeted Wage  Subsidies, Job Creation Partnerships and Employment Assistance Services  increased their employment earnings compared to comparison group members (see  Figures 11 and 12).
Figure 11. Cumulative increase in employment earnings for youth participants relative to non-participants youth
Text description of Figure 11
Figure 12. Cumulative increase in employment earnings for older workers participants relative to non-participants older workers
Text description of Figure 12
The use of EI is  reduced for most active claimants. While EI use increased for former claimants,  it can be argued that this reflects an increase in labour market attachment  since the incremental impacts on employment earnings and incidence of  employment are positive and given the decrease in the use of social assistance.
As shown in Figure 13, active EI  claimants who participated in Skills Development and Employment Assistance  Services decreased their use of EI compared to similar non-participants. These  two programs account for 90% of current LMDA investments and the majority of  participants. Results for the use of social assistance benefits by active  claimants were not statistically significant.
Figure 13. Change in the cumulative use of Employment Insurance and Social Assistance for active claimants relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure 13
* The  estimates are not statistically significant at the 95% confidence level.
As shown in Figure 14, former  claimants who participated in Skills Development and Targeted Wage Subsidies  between 2002 and 2005 increased their use of EI following participation. This  indicates the inability of some former claimants to maintain the employment  secured in the short-term. It can also be argued that the increase in EI use is  an indication of increase labour market attachment for this client group since  they did experience increases in employment earnings and incidence of  employment as well as a decrease in the use of social assistance. As a  reminder, former claimants are participants for whom the EI benefit period  ended up to three years pre-participation.
Figure 14. Change in cumulative use of Employment Insurance and Social Assistance for former claimants relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure 14
* The  estimate is not statistically significant at the 95% confidence level.
Social benefits of  participation exceeded costs of investments for most interventions.
As shown in Table 3, social benefits to participation  exceeded investment costs in a period ranging between the 2nd year of program  participation to about 20 years after participation.
4. Conclusions
The evaluation evidence presented  and discussed in this report demonstrated that programs and services currently  designed and delivered by the federal government (in the 2002 to 2005 period)  and Ontario (starting in January 2007) under the LMDA are generally helping  participants improve their labour market experience after participation. As  such, evaluation evidence suggests that LMDA funded programming contributes to  achieving Ontario’s strategic priorities.
Overall,  incremental impacts demonstrate that programs and services are improving the  labour market attachment of participants, including youth and older workers. As  well, social benefits of participation exceeded the cost of investments for all  interventions over time. Finally, providing Employment Assistance Services  earlier during an EI claim (first four weeks) produced larger impacts on  earnings and employment and facilitated earlier return to work. This  demonstrates the importance of targeting early participation of EI active  claimants.
Key informant interviews with service providers and program  managers as well as the documents reviewed and the questionnaires filled by  provincial representatives also revealed specific challenges and lessons  learned about program design and delivery. Key challenges are highlighted  below.
Skills Development program (currently delivered as Second Career)
Key informants identified the following challenges related  to the design and delivery of the current Skills Development program (Second  Career in Ontario):
The perceived insufficient level of financial  support (7 key informants)
Participants with multiple barriers have more  complex needs and often require additional time for assistance (3 key  informants)
Skills Development –Apprentices
As presented in the report, existing Canadian literature  showed that there is a fairly high non-completion rate among apprentices in  Canada. Furthermore, literature revealed that despite the growth in  apprenticeship registrations in Canada, there has not been a corresponding increase  in completions. While program data does not provide reliable information on  completion and non-completion rates of participants, key informants from  Ontario overall agreed with the challenges identified in the literature and  confirmed a high dropout rate. They provided the following reasons to explain  why some participants drop out of the apprenticeship process:
Financial barriers (5 key informants)
Timing and location of training (3 key  informants)
Apprentices are often working for the same pay  as journeymen and they are not motivated to write the final exam (3 key  informants)
Lack of ongoing case-management for apprentices  (2 key informants)
To deal with these barriers, key  informants identified the following supports to help apprentices access and complete  their apprenticeship training:
Pre-apprenticeship training would be beneficial  to helping apprentices complete their training and increase the probability of  success. The integration of Literacy and Basics Skills and employability skills  (job retention, leadership skills, document use, conflict resolution, goal  setting, etc.) components in pre-apprenticeship training are key components to  ensuring success, especially for persons with multiple barriers (4 key  informants).
Providing handouts to apprentices with detailed  information on the available supports and where to get help when needed (3 key  informants).
Increase awareness of the financial supports  that are available for apprentices (3 key informants).
Case managing apprentices for the full duration  of the apprenticeship process would be beneficial to increasing the probability  of completion (2 key informants).
Key  informants were asked about challenges in relation to the design and delivery  of the program or apprenticeship training in general and they identified the  following challenges:
Lack of awareness about the financial support  available to apprentices (3 key informants)
The amount of paperwork required when seeking  financial support (3 key informants)
Delays in confirming EI eligibility (3 key  informants)
Employment Services
Key informants interviewed identified the following  challenges they face with the provision and targeting of Employment Services:
Challenges in accessing childcare and paying the  cost of transportation to training (5 key informants)
Data collection is challenging for some service  providers (5 key informants)
Lack of funds dedicated for the professional  development of staff (4 key informants)
Insufficient staff capacity can require the use  of referrals, prevent the provision of job retention services, result in a  waiting list, limit pre-employment services and also limit services to clients  with multiple barriers (3 key informants)
5.  Recommendations
Recommendations that emerged from the evaluation findings presented in  this report are as followed:
Key informants reported that a lack of essential skills hinders participants from  completing training. The relevance of providing literacy, essential  skills and high school upgrading is well documented in the Canadian literature.  Because these interventions have different objectives and may lead to very  different labour market outcomes when compared to vocational or occupational  training, reporting them separately is important.
Recommendation 1:
It is recommended that these interventions be reported separately under the  LMDA from other vocational or occupational training interventions given their  unique objectives. Ontario, ESDC and other P/Ts should work together to define  common categories Skills Development programming.
Overall, the LMDA evaluation was able to produce a sound  assessment of EBSM effectiveness and efficiency because the team had access to  rich data on EI claimants, EBSM participation data and Canada Revenue Agency  taxation files. However, some data gaps limited the evaluation’s ability to  assess how EBSMs operate. For example:
Having access to data on whether participants  are members of designated groups including Indigenous peoples, persons with  disabilities and recent immigrants would be useful to inform policy development  and program design.
Little is also known about the various types of  Employment Assistance Services provided under the LMDAs. These services can be  very different in nature and it is possible that some may be more effective  than others at helping participants to return to employment. For example,  having access to a computer for researching jobs on its own may yield different  impacts than receiving counselling and assistance to develop a return-to-work  action plan.
Recommendation 2:
Improvements in the data collection are recommended to address key program and  policy questions of interest to the federal and provincial/territorial  governments. Specifically:
Collect data on whether participants are members  of designated groups including Indigenous peoples, persons with disabilities  and recent immigrants
Collect data on the various types of services  provided under Employment Assistance Services. Ontario, ESDC and other P/Ts  should work together to define common categories for these services
Collect detailed data on the cost of EBSM  interventions
The study on the timing of Employment Assistance Services  participation showed that receiving assistance early after starting an EI claim  can lead to better labour market impacts. However, key informants reported  insufficient level of funding to promote the program.
Recommendation 3:
Consideration should be given to providing Ontario with timely access to data  on new EI recipients for supporting targeting and increasing awareness.
The Job Creation Partnerships program was found to be  particularly effective at improving the labour market attachment for active and  former EI claimant participants. The evaluation has not yet examined the challenges  and lessons learned regarding the design and delivery of this program.  Therefore, a lot remains unknown about how this program operates and the  factors that contribute to its effectiveness.
Recommendation 4:
Consideration should be given to examine the design and delivery of Ontario Job  Creation Partnerships in order to better understand how this program operates.
The Targeted Wage Subsidy program was found to be effective  at improving the labour market attachment of active and former claimant participants.  In Ontario, the number of participants in the program declined between 2003 to 2004  (n = 3,484), 2014 to 2015 (n = 1,806) and 2015 to 2016 (n = 2,677).
Recommendation 5:
depending on ongoing labour market priorities and budget allocation across EBSM  programs and services, Ontario may wish to explore to what extent challenge and  lessons learned identified at the national level are applicable to the unique  context in Ontario and if applicable, to explore ways of removing barriers to  employer participation in the program.
References
Canada Employment Insurance  Commission. Employment Insurance Monitoring and Assessment Reports. 2003 to  2004 to 2013 to 2014.
Coe, Patrick. “Apprenticeship programme requirements and  apprenticeship completion rates in Canada.” Journal of Vocational Education and  Training. 2013. 65(4): 575 to 605.
Employment and Social  Development Canada. Analysis of Employment Benefits and Support Measures (EBSM)  Profile, Outcomes and Incremental Impacts for 2007 to 2008 Participants in  Ontario. Evaluation Directorate. January 23, 2015.
Employment and Social  Development Canada. Analysis of Employment Benefits and Support Measures (EBSM)  Profile, Outcomes and Incremental Impacts for the EI Claimant Category  “Long-Tenured Workers” in Ontario. Evaluation Directorate. January 26, 2016.
Employment and Social  Development Canada. Cost-Benefit Analysis of Employment Benefits and Support  Measures Delivered in Ontario. Evaluation Directorate. November 13, 2015.
Employment and Social  Development Canada. Effects of the Timing of Participation in Employment  Assistance Services in Ontario. Evaluation Directorate. December 5, 2014.
Employment and Social  Development Canada. Profile, Outcomes and Net Impacts of Employment Benefits  and Support Measures (EBSM) Participants in Ontario. Evaluation Directorate.  May 2014.
Employment and Social Development Canada. Stream 1 Study for  2013 to 2014: National Level Analysis of EBSM Incremental Impacts: Methodology  Report. Evaluation Directorate. September   2013.
Employment and Social  Development Canada. Study on Employment Services in Ontario. Evaluation  Directorate. September 10, 2014.
Employment and Social  Development Canada. Study on Skills Development – Apprenticeship in Ontario.  Evaluation Directorate. June 20, 2016.
Employment and Social  Development Canada. Study on the programming offered under the Skills  Development Funding Stream in Ontario. Evaluation Directorate. June 14, 2016.
Government of Ontario. Published  Plan and Annual Report: Ministry of Training, Colleges and Universities. 2016  to 2017.
Government of Ontario. Second  Career Guidelines: Ministry of Training, Colleges and Universities. 2012.
LaRochelle-Côté, Sébastien and  Sharanjit Uppal, "The Financial Well-Being of the Self-Employed,"  Perspectives on Labour and Income, vol. 23, no. 4, Winter 2011
Red Seal. Apprenticeship Completion, Certification and  Outcomes. Ottawa: Red Seal, 2014.
Acronyms
Appendix A – Methodology
Qualitative  data
Qualitative data reported in the Second Career, Ontario  Skills Development- Apprentices and Employment Services studies were collected  from key informant interviews with managers and service providers and a  document/literature review. As well, questionnaires were completed by Ontario  representatives for the Second Career and Ontario Skills Development-  Apprentices studies. Table A1 provides the number of key informants  interviewed.
Key informant interviews for the Employment Services study  were conducted in 2013 while those for the Second Career and Ontario Skills  Development- Apprentices studies were conducted in 2015.
Quantitative methods
All quantitative analyses were conducted using linked  administrative data from EI Part I (EI claim), EI Part II (EBSM participation  data) and T1 and T4 taxation files for 100% of the participants in Ontario.
Incremental impacts
The incremental impact analysis compared the labour market  experience of participants before and after their participation with that of a  comparison group. The goal was to determine the direct effect of program  participation on key labour market indicators (see
Figure 1
in the introduction section).
For active claimants, incremental impacts were measured  relative to a comparison group of active claimants who could have participated  in the EBSMs but did not. Former  claimants can be underemployed and unable to requalify for EI, out of the  labour force for various reasons or on Social Assistance. Based on previous  evaluation methodologies, on expert advice and given the difficulty in  generating a suitable comparison for former claimants using administrative data  alone, the comparison group for former claimants was created using individuals  who participated in low-intensity Employment Assistance Services only during  the reference period. This is a conservative approach given the fact that  participation in Employment Assistance Services can lead to limited effects  on labour market outcomes.
Participants and non-participants were matched based on a  wide array of variables including age, sex, location, skill level required by  the last occupation held prior to participation, reason for separation from  employment, industry in which they were previously employed as well as employment  earnings and use of EI and social assistance for each of the five years before  participation.
All analyses were conducted using a unit of analysis called  the Action Plan Equivalent, which combines all EBSMs given to an individual  within no more than six months of each other. For reporting purposes,  incremental impacts were attributed to the longest intervention of the Action  Plan Equivalent when Skills Development, Targeted Wage Subsidies, Job Creation  Partnerships or Self-Employment Benefit was the longest intervention. Impacts  for Employment Assistance Services were calculated for Action Plan Equivalent  that contained only Employment Assistance Services with no employment  benefits.
The incremental impact estimates were produced using  non-experimental methods, namely propensity score matching, using the Kernel  Matching method, along with Difference-in-Differences method to estimate  program impacts. Alternative matching techniques (such as, the Nearest  Neighbour and the Inverse Propensity Weighting) were also used for validation  purposes.
Incremental impacts were  measured for the following indicators:
Employment/self-employment  earnings  represent  the total earnings an individual had from paid employment and/or  self-employment.  (This information is available  by calendar year and is obtained from T1 and T4 tax return records.)
Incidence of employment/self-employment represents the incidence of having  earnings from employment and/or self-employment
Amount  of EI benefits received  represents the average amount of EI benefits received
Weeks in receipt of EI benefits represents  the average number of weeks during which EI benefits were received
SA benefits  represent the average  amount of social assistance benefits received. (This information is available  by calendar year and is obtained from T1 tax return records.)
Dependence  on income support  represents the ratio of participant’s  income that came from EI and social assistance benefits (in other words, EI  benefits + social assistance benefits / (EI benefits + social assistance  benefits + earnings from employment/self/employment))
Incremental impacts  were estimated for different cohorts of participants:
All active and all former claimants as well as  youth (under 30 years old) and older workers (55 years old and over) who  started their EBSM participation between April 1, 2002 and March 31, 2005
All active and all former claimants who stated  their EBSM participation between January 1, 2007 and December 31, 2008
Active  and former claimants who were long-tenured workers and who started their EBSM  participation between January 1, 2007 and December 31, 2009. The long-tenured workers covered in this  study are individuals who have established an EI regular or fishing benefit  claimants and who had paid at least 30% of the annual maximum employee EI  premiums in seven of the ten years preceding their EI claim and who had  collected 35 or fewer weeks of EI regular or fishing benefits in the five years  preceding their claim. This definition is similar to the EI claimant category  long-tenured workers introduced under Connecting Canadians with Available Jobs.
Cost-benefit analysis
The cost-benefit analysis  compared how much it cost for individuals to participate in the programs and  how much it costs the government to deliver those programs with the benefits  both the participants and the government drew from those programs. The analysis  was carried out from the society perspective which combines the costs and the  benefits for both the participants and the government.
Costs and benefits included in  the calculations were as follows:
Program costs
included the  administration cost and the direct cost of the EBSMs. The cost for each EBSM  was calculated at the Action Plan Equivalent level. The costs were determined  based on the average composition of the Action Plan Equivalent.
The
Marginal Social Cost of  Public Funds
represented the loss incurred by society when  raising additional revenues such as taxes to fund government spending. The  value was estimated as 20%  of the program cost, sales taxes, income taxes, impacts on EI and  impacts on social assistance paid or collected by the government.
Employment earnings
consisted  of incremental impacts on participants’ earnings during and after  participation. The calculation accounts for the participant’s forgone earnings  during participation (in other words, opportunity cost). These are based on incremental  impacts for the 2002 to 2005 participants.
Fringe benefits
included  benefits such as employer-paid health and life insurance as well as pension  contributions. The rate used to calculate the fringe benefits was 15% of the  incremental impact on earnings.
The program effects on EI and social assistance  use, and the sale and income tax revenues were not included in the calculations  since these costs and benefits cancel each other out from the social  perspective by definition. For example, while EI and social assistance are  benefits received by participants, they represent a cost for the government.  However, as indicated above, these effects are accounted for in the calculation  of the Marginal Social Cost of Public Funds.
When producing the results, to bring all costs and benefits  to a common base and to account for inflation and interest on foregone government  investment, the estimates for the second year of participation and up to the  sixth year post-program were discounted by 5% per year.  As well, when the benefits were still lower  than the costs six years after program end, the payback period was calculated  by assuming that the average benefit or cost measured over the fifth and six  year post-program would persist over time (discounted at a 5% annual rate).
Strengths and limitations from the studies
Overall, the number of key informants interviewed was  relatively small in some studies.  The  key informants’ responses were representative of their own experience and their  own region but it is unclear if they were fully representative of the entire  province.
The matching process led to the creation of comparison  groups closely matched to the LMDA participants in terms of their background  characteristics. Results obtained with Kernel Matching were validated with the  use of two other techniques (Inverse Propensity Weighting and Nearest  Neighbour), increasing the level of confidence in the results. However, readers  should be aware that incremental impacts may be affected by factors not  captured by the matching process. For example, the
motivation to seek  employment was not directly measured except to the extent it was captured in  prior income and labour market attachment patterns.
Readers should also keep in mind that it is not possible to  compare the results obtained for each claimant type since the results for  active claimants represent the effects of the EBSMs relative to  non-participation while the results for former claimants represents the  Employment Benefits relative to a limited treatment (in other words, those who  participated exclusively in Employment Assistance Services).
The definition of long-tenured  workers used in this report differs from the definition used in the literature  as it does not consider the number of years the worker remained employed with  the same employer.
The cost-benefit analysis was limited in the sense that it  only took into account the quantifiable benefits and costs that were directly  linked to EBSM delivery and participation and that could be estimated using  available administrative data and the EI Monitoring and Assessment Report. The  analysis did not capture “intangible”, non-pecuniary and indirect benefits. It  did not consider the multiplier effect that improving participant’s income may  have on the economy and did not account for the effect of EI Part II investment  on sustaining a service delivery infrastructure and creating jobs among the  governmental program service providers.   As well, this analysis did not consider the displacement effect where  participants may take away jobs that would otherwise be filled by other  unemployed individuals. Finally, this analysis did not consider the possible  effect of EBSMs on increasing skill prices.
Appendix B - Detailed result Skills Development
Proportions may not add up to    100% due to rounding
Skill level corresponds    to the type and/or amount of training or education typically required to work    in the last occupation participants had before opening the last EI claim they    had before participating in EBSMs:
-Managerial: Management occupations
-University: Occupations usually requiring    university education (i.e., University degree at the bachelor's, master's or    doctorate level)
-College or apprenticeship training: Occupations usually requiring    college or vocational education or apprenticeship training such as 2 to 3    years of post-secondary education at a community college, institute of    technology or CEGEP or 2 to 5    years of apprenticeship training or    3 to 4 years of secondary school and more than 2 years of on-the-job    training, specialized training courses or specific work experience and/or    occupations with supervisory responsibilities and occupations with    significant health and safety responsibilities, such as firefighters, police    officers and registered nursing assistants.
-Secondary or occupational training: Occupations usually requiring    secondary school and/or occupation-specific training such as one to four    years of secondary school education or    up to 2 years of on-the-job training specialized training courses or    specific work experience.
-On-the-job training: On-the-job training is usually provided for    occupations (i.e., short work demonstration or on-the-job training or no formal educational requirements).
The average earnings includes participants who reported $0    earnings during that year.
Earnings    have been adjusted according to the Consumer Price Index, published by    Statistics Canada, to the 2002 base year.
Significance level *** 1%;    ** 5%; * 10%
Significance  level *** 1%;   ** 5%; * 10%
Random sample of  approximately 80% of participants.
Appendix C - Detailed results Skills  Development-Apprentices
Proportions    may not add up to 100% due to rounding.
Skill level corresponds to the type    and/or amount of training or education typically required to work in the last    occupation participants had before opening the last EI claim they had before    participating in EBSMs:
-Managerial:    Management occupations
-University:    Occupations usually requiring university education (that is, university    degree at the bachelor's, master's or doctorate level)
-College or    apprenticeship training: Occupations usually requiring college or vocational    education or apprenticeship training such as 2 to 3 years of post-secondary    education at a community college, institute of technology or CEGEP or 2 to 5 years of apprenticeship    training or 3 to 4 years of    secondary school and more than 2 years of on-the-job training, specialized    training courses or specific work experience and/or occupations with    supervisory responsibilities and occupations with significant health and    safety responsibilities, such as firefighters, police officers and registered    nursing assistants.
- Secondary    or occupational training: Occupations usually requiring secondary school    and/or occupation-specific training such as 1 to 4 years of secondary school    education or up to 2 years of on-the-job training specialized training    courses or specific work experience.
-On-the-job    training: On-the-job training is usually provided for occupations (that is,    short work demonstration or on-the-job training or no formal educational    requirements).
The average earnings include    participants who reported $0 earnings during that year.
Earnings for 2013 to 2014    participants have been adjusted according to the Consumer Price Index    published by Statistics Canada, to the 2002 base year.
Excluding individuals with no CRA data  for the 5 years before participation.
Earnings outcomes excluding individuals who reported no earnings  in a given year.
Excluding individuals with no CRA data  for the 5 years before participation.
Earnings outcomes excluding individuals who reported no earnings  in a given year.
Appendix D - Detailed results Targeted Wage  Subsidies
Proportions    may not add up to 100% due to rounding.
Skill level corresponds to the type    and/or amount of training or education typically required to work in the last    occupation participants had before opening the last EI claim they had before    participating in EBSMs:
-Managerial:    Management occupations
-University:    Occupations usually requiring university education (that is, university    degree at the bachelor's, master's or doctorate level)
-College or    apprenticeship training: Occupations usually requiring college or vocational    education or apprenticeship training such as 2 to 3 years of post-secondary    education at a community college, institute of technology or CEGEP or 2 to 5 years of apprenticeship    training or 3 to 4 years of    secondary school and more than 2 years of on-the-job training, specialized    training courses or specific work experience and/or occupations with    supervisory responsibilities and occupations with significant health and    safety responsibilities, such as firefighters, police officers and registered    nursing assistants.
- Secondary    or occupational training: Occupations usually requiring secondary school    and/or occupation-specific training such as 1 to 4 years of secondary school    education or up to 2 years of on-the-job training specialized training    courses or specific work experience.
-On-the-job    training: On-the-job training is usually provided for occupations (that is,    short work demonstration or on-the-job training or no formal educational    requirements).
The average earnings    includes participants who reported $0 earnings during that year.
Earnings for 2007-2008 participants    have been adjusted according to the Consumer Price Index, published by    Statistics Canada, to the 2002 base year.
Significance level *** 1%;    ** 5%; * 10%
Significance level *** 1%;    ** 5%; * 10%
Appendix E - Detailed results Self-Employment  Benefit
Proportions    may not add up to 100% due to rounding.
Skill level corresponds to the type    and/or amount of training or education typically required to work in the last    occupation participants had before opening the last EI claim they had before    participating in EBSMs:
-Managerial:    Management occupations
-University:    Occupations usually requiring university education (that is, university    degree at the bachelor's, master's or doctorate level)
-College or    apprenticeship training: Occupations usually requiring college or vocational    education or apprenticeship training such as 2 to 3 years of post-secondary    education at a community college, institute of technology or CEGEP or 2 to 5 years of apprenticeship    training or 3 to 4 years of    secondary school and more than 2 years of on-the-job training, specialized    training courses or specific work experience and/or occupations with    supervisory responsibilities and occupations with significant health and    safety responsibilities, such as firefighters, police officers and registered    nursing assistants.
-Secondary    or occupational training: Occupations usually requiring secondary school    and/or occupation-specific training such as 1 to 4 years of secondary school    education or up to 2 years of on-the-job training specialized training    courses or specific work experience.
-On-the-job    training: On-the-job training is usually provided for occupations (that is,    short work demonstration or on-the-job training or no formal educational    requirements).
The average earnings    include participants who reported $0 earnings during that year.
Earnings for 2007 to 2008    participants have been adjusted according to the Consumer Price Index,    published by Statistics Canada, to the 2002 base year.
Significance level *** 1%;    ** 5%; * 10%
Significance level *** 1%;    ** 5%; * 10%
Appendix F - Detailed results Job Creation  Partnerships
Proportions may not add up to    100% due to rounding
Skill level    corresponds to the type and/or amount of training or education typically    required to work in the last occupation participants had before opening the    last EI claim they had before participating in EBSMs:
-Managerial: Management occupations
-University: Occupations usually requiring    university education (that is, University degree at the bachelor's, master's    or doctorate level)
-College or apprenticeship training: Occupations usually requiring    college or vocational education or apprenticeship training such as 2 to 3    years of post-secondary education at a community college, institute of    technology or CEGEP or 2 to 5    years of apprenticeship training or    3 to 4 years of secondary school and more than 2 years of on-the-job    training, specialized training courses or specific work experience and/or    occupations with supervisory responsibilities and occupations with    significant health and safety responsibilities, such as firefighters, police    officers and registered nursing assistants.
-Secondary or occupational training: Occupations usually requiring    secondary school and/or occupation-specific training such as one to four    years of secondary school education or    up to 2 years of on-the-job training specialized training courses or    specific work experience.
-On-the-job training: On-the-job training is usually provided for    occupations (that is, short work demonstration or on-the-job training or no formal educational    requirements).
The average earnings includes participants who reported $0    earnings during that year.
Earnings for    2007 to 2008 participants have been adjusted by the Consumer Price Index published by Statistics    Canada, using 2002 as the base year.
Significance  level *** 1%;   ** 5%; * 10%
Significance level *** 1%;    ** 5%; * 10%
Appendix G - Detailed results Employment Assistance  Services
Proportions may not add up to    100% due to rounding
Skill level corresponds to the    type and/or amount of training or education typically required to work in the    last occupation participants had before opening the last EI claim they had    before participating in EBSMs:
-Managerial:    Management occupations
-University:    Occupations usually requiring university education (that is, University    degree at the bachelor's, master's or doctorate level)
-College    or apprenticeship training: Occupations usually requiring college or    vocational education or apprenticeship training such as 2 to 3 years of post-secondary    education at a community college, institute of technology or CEGEP or 2 to 5 years of apprenticeship    training or 3 to 4 years of    secondary school and more than 2 years of on-the-job training, specialized    training courses or specific work experience and/or occupations with    supervisory responsibilities and occupations with significant health and    safety responsibilities, such as firefighters, police officers and registered    nursing assistants.
-    Secondary or occupational training: Occupations usually requiring secondary    school and/or occupation-specific training such as one to four years of    secondary school education or up    to 2 years of on-the-job training specialized training courses or specific    work experience.
-On-the-job    training: On-the-job training is usually provided for occupations (that is,    short work demonstration or on-the-job training or no formal educational requirements).
The average earnings    includes participants who reported $0 earnings during that year.
Earnings for 2006 to 2008    participants have been    adjusted by the Consumer Price Index published by Statistics Canada, using    2002 as the base year.
Significance level *** 1%;   ** 5%; * 10%
Significant at 10%; **  significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
* Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
A random sample of 20% of participants was used.
Appendix H - List of eight studies included in the synthesis  report
During the 2002-2005 period,  the federal government was delivering the Skills Development program in  Ontario. When Ontario assumed responsibility for the LMDA design and delivery in  January 2007, the Ontario Skills Development Program was delivered by the  province of Ontario. The Second Career program was introduced in 2008 and  merged with the Ontario Skills Development program in 2009.
During the 2003 to 2005, the Skills Development – Apprentices program  was delivered by the federal Government.
Page details
Report a problem on this page
Date modified:
2022-04-14