List of abbreviations
CPPD
Canada Pension Plan Disability
CRA
Canada Revenue Agency
EI
Employment Insurance
ESDC
Employment and Social Development Canada
ROE
Record of Employment
SUB
Supplemental Unemployment Benefit
List of figures
Figure 1: Reported
          illnesses or injuries for EI sickness claimants
Figure 2: 5 year average employment income and total income prior to 2011 illness job separation
Figure 3: Share of illness job separators receiving workers compensation, 2011 illness job separation
Figure 4: Employment income before and after an illness separation, 2006 to 2016
Figure 5: Difference in total income between EI claimants and comparable non-claimants following a 2011 illness separation
Figure 6: Share of 2011 illness job separators who were employed in each year post-2011
Figure 7: Share of illness job separators by sources of income they received in Year 1 and Year 5 following a 2011 illness separation
Figure 8: Pure sickness claimants who used 15 weeks of benefits without any income
          support
Figure 9: Weeks between the end of a pure sickness claim and the return to work for those who used 15 weeks of benefits
Figure 10: Proportion of pure sickness claimants who return to the same employer
Figure 11: Speed of return to work by type of illness or injury
Figure 12: Pure sickness claimants who received CPPD or social assistance in 2011
Figure 13: Time between sickness and CPPD for pure sickness claimants who exhaust, 2011
Figure 14: Observed EI sickness claims vs. predicted, Canada, 2000 to 2016
Figure 15: Pure sickness claimants and regular claimants with multiple sickness spells, 2001 to 2016
Figure 16: Regular claimants with multiple sickness spells as a share of all sickness claims, 2001 to 2016
Figure 17: Number of spells for regular claims with multiple sickness spells, 2016
Figure 18: Number of spells for pure sickness claims with multiple sickness spells, 2016
Figure 19: Share of 90 survey respondents who reported illnesses or injuries for regular claimants with multiple sickness spells
Figure 20: Share of 171 survey respondents who reported illnesses or injuries for pure sickness claims with multiple sickness spells
Figure 21: Short-term sickness plans offered by employers interviewed for this evaluation
List of tables
Table 1: Characteristics of claimants in 2016 and their trends since year 2000
Table 2 : Share of EI sickness claims in combination with other EI benefits
Introduction
This evaluation provides an assessment of the Employment Insurance (EI) sickness benefits based on the use, the
  accessibility, as well as the impact of the benefits on post-illness
separation outcomes.
The focus of the evaluation is on EI claimants
  receiving sickness benefits from 2000 to 2016, excluding self-employed workers.
Self-employed workers were examined in the Evaluation of Employment Insurance Special Benefits for Self-employed Workers (2016).
The analysis in this evaluation report uses
  information and data up to year 2016 and therefore does not cover specific
  measures associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Terminology, information on the lines of
  evidence and methodology are be found in Annexes A to H.
For ease of reading, the terms “claimant” and
  “claim” are interchangeable throughout the report to reflect the fact that some
  claimants have more than one claim during the period of analysis.
Key evaluation results
There were 3 main findings from the evaluation:
the duration of the benefits is adequate for most claimants, but those with severe and/or long-term illnesses are more
  likely to use the full 15 weeks of sickness benefits and remain sick hereafter
there has been significant growth in
    claims for the EI Sickness benefits nationally since 2000 that
  can be explained, in part, by demographic changes, and
access to employer short-term
    sickness/disability plans is not uniform across the labour force in Canada.
    Without such coverage, EI sickness benefits remain the main support for many
    workers
Based on these findings, the evaluation
  recommends the following to the Department for the sickness benefits:
explore and report on the possibility of new
    data linkages to inform policy development on the Employment Insurance sickness
    benefits, and
examine Employment Insurance regular claims with
    sickness spells to better understand the interaction between these benefit
    types
Program description
The EI sickness benefits provide critical
  income support to Canadians.
Since 1971, the sickness benefits have been payable to individuals unable to work because of illness, injury or quarantine but who would otherwise be available for work if not for their incapacity due to medical reasons.
The EI Sickness Benefits are designed to provide temporary income replacement to
help ease the financial burden of claimants so that they can focus on restoring their health and returning to work.
In fiscal year 2017 to 2018, $1.7 billion of EI sickness benefits were paid to 411,870 claims (or roughly $4,160 per claim).
Some illness job separators are covered under employer short-term sickness plans which can result in them not claiming EI sickness benefits at all or claiming them once they have exhausted their employer benefits—in other words, EI as a “second” payer.
EI sickness benefits provide:
up to 15 weeks of temporary income support, at an amount equal to 55% of the average weekly insurable earnings up to a maximum weekly amount. In 2020, this maximum weekly amount is $573
To qualify for the sickness benefits, workers need the following:
accumulated at least 600 hours of insurable employment during the 52-week period before the start date of their claim or since their last EI claim (whichever is shorter) 
obtained a medical certificate signed by a doctor or approved medical practitioner. See Annex A for a description of medical certificates
experienced an EI sickness-eligible job separation— for example a reduction in their normal weekly earnings by at least 40% due to illness, injury or quarantine. For more information on the EI Program, refer to the annual Monitoring and Assessment Report produced by the Canada Employment Insurance Commission
Key changes to the EI sickness benefits: 1971 to 2018
1971
Sickness benefits were introduced as part of the Unemployment Insurance (UI) program along with the Premium Reduction Program and the Supplemental Unemployment Benefit Plans.
1990
Individuals were allowed to combine sickness and maternity benefits during a UI claim.
1996
Unemployment Insurance  changed to Employment Insurance (EI) and to an hours-based system.
2000
The number of insurable hours to qualify for sickness benefits and other special benefits decreased from 700 to 600 hours.
2010
Self-employed workers have the option of participating in the EI Program for special benefits, including sickness benefits.
2012
Claimants no longer have to provide their medical certificate to the Department upon application. They must keep their certificate in case it is asked for at a later date.
2013
Claimants can switch to sickness benefits from parental benefits.
2014
Claimants can switch to sickness benefits from Parents of Critically Ill Children or Compassionate Care Benefits. 
2017
EI waiting period reduced from 2 to 1 week.
2018
To facilitate a claimant’s transition back to work, new provisions were introduced to allow claimants to retain some of their earnings while on claim.
International comparison
France
Provides benefits replacing, on average, 50% of basic daily wages up to a maximum, for those who are ill or injured and meet a minimum amount of employment hours or income in the past 3 to 6 months, for up
    to 6 months, depending on different requirements. 
Germany
Provides benefits replacing 70 to 90% of most recent take-home pay, for those who fall ill and meet a monthly income threshold, for up to 78 weeks of benefits over 3 years.
U.K.
Provides a weekly benefit of at least $157, for those unable to work due to illness for more than 4 consecutive days, for up to 28 weeks of benefits.
Source: Annex H has a list of references for these international comparisons.
EI sickness claimants
Claimant profiles used 2016 EI Administrative Data as the benefit period for claims established in late 2017 were not yet complete at the time of analysis.
Sickness benefits in combination with other EI benefits
It is possible that an illness or injury may
  coincide with other life events where claimants would be eligible to receive
other benefits besides sickness. Such life events could include:
the birth of a child
loss in employment
The EI Program allows claimants to receive other types of benefits—either before or after their illness or injury—within the same claim in which there were sickness benefits paid. In other words, a sickness combination claim without having to re-qualify through a separate application process.
Nature of the illness or injury for sickness claimants
An individual is not asked to provide the type of illness or injury in order to receive the EI sickness benefits. Rather a medical certificate must be obtained from a certified practitioner that
  indicates the number of weeks that they are unable to work (see Annex A for more information on eligible practitioners).
To better understand the type of illness or injury, the Survey of Workers (the Survey) was administered in 2018 to ask illness job separators who did not claim EI sickness benefits and EI sickness claimants specific questions on the illness or injury that led to their separation.
EI sickness claimants of the survey responded as follows:
chronic conditions were responsible for 38% of cases, followed closely by acute traumas at 37%, with episodic conditions representing the remaining 25%
close to 66% reported being affected by an illness as opposed to an injury or quarantine. Within this group, over half reported that their illness was not from a previous condition
around 25% reported that their illness or injury resulted from a workplace incident
Figure 1: Reported illnesses or injuries for EI sickness claimants


Text description for figure 1
Factors leading to an EI sickness claim
A statistical model known as “probit regression” shows that demographic and socio-economic factors are more
important than the type of illness when determining the likelihood of whether someone claims or does not claim sickness benefits.
All reported results are statistically significant at the 10% level, at minimum. Coefficients reported are marginal effects evaluated at the mean.
More likely to claim:
temporary employment prior to illness (+16.9% more likely to claim EI sickness compared to permanent employment)
worked in the government industry prior to illness. (+11.4% more likely to claim EI sickness compared to service industry)
reported their illness as stress, anxiety, or mental health issues (+7.3% more likely to claim EI sickness compared to a physically-limiting condition)
age where the older the individual, the more likely they are to claim EI sickness (+3.4% more likely to claim EI sickness per additional decade of age)
No effect on claiming sickness benefits:
gender and educational attainment had no statistically significant effect on claiming EI sickness
Less likely to claim:
income: the higher the employment income of the individual, the less likely they are to claim sickness (2.4% less likely to claim EI sickness per $10,000 of additional income)
worked in the manufacturing industry prior to illness (9.9% less likely to claim sickness compared to service industry)
reported their illness as a pregnancy-related condition (10.7% less likely to claim sickness compared to a physically-limiting condition)
received payments from a short-term disability plan (33.5% less likely to claim sickness compared to not receiving short-term disability benefits)
Eligibility: Meeting the 600 insurable hours threshold for EI sickness.
While the share of non-claimants among workers with an illness or injury job separation has been steadily increasing—from 44% in 2000 to 49% in 2017—this does not appear to be a function of decreased eligibility.
Since 2014, approximately 4 out of every 5 non-claimants had sufficient hours to be eligible for EI sickness—an improvement from 2000 (74%).
A partial explanation is related to the share of non-claimants employed by a business that participates in the Premium Reduction Program (PRP). It has increased from 33% in 2000 to 43% in 2017.
EI sickness claimants compared to those who do not claim
Age and gender distribution
Compared to eligible non-claimants with an illness, injury or quarantine job separation, sickness claimants are somewhat older. In fact, 28% are 55 years of age or older compared to 24% for eligible non-claimants. Women account for slightly more 55%
  versus 54% for eligible non-claimants in 2016 (see Annex A for a
glossary of terms).
Income before illness
As shown in figure 2, EI sickness claimants and eligible non-claimants have different income levels prior to their illness or injury, on average.
During the 5-year period preceding illness job
    separations that occurred in 2011, eligible non-claimants earned $8,000 more
    per year in employment income relative to claimants ($38,828 versus $30,472, on
    average)
Figure 2: 5 year average employment income and total income prior to 2011 illness job separation


Text description of figure 2
Types of illness or injury
In terms of illness or injury, there were no significant differences in the types of illnesses or injuries between claimants and non-claimants reported in the survey.
However, sickness claimants were less likely to report that their illness or injury was related to work—26% versus 33%.
Figure 3 shows that eligible non-claimants were much more likely to receive Workers Compensation benefits than claimants in the year of their illness job separation—13.9% versus 5.9%.
As expected, this program is first-payer for those who are eligible. The benefits are for the most part, more generous than EI benefits.
Figure 3: Share of illness job separators receiving workers compensation, 2011 illness job separation


Text description of figure 3
EI claimants experienced a greater reduction to their employment income than eligible non-claimants following an illness separation.
Among claimants, sickness benefits represented approximately 20% of total income in the year of illness separation and 2% the following year.
Using the most recent tax year of 2016, a post-illness separation analysis was conducted to show their employment income after 5 years from their job separation in 2011. The following changes were observed:
employment income fell by 30% for EI sickness claimants in the first year following their illness separation. Eligible and non-claimants saw a 20% reduction following their job separation due to illness
unadjusted for other factors, total income for eligible non-claimants was, on average, much higher in the post-illness separation period of 2012 to 2016, and even exceeded their pre-illness levels,
    compared to EI sickness claimants 
while employment income appears to start to recover for both non-claimants and claimants between 2012 and 2013, the 2 years following their separation, they continue to fall from 2014 to 2016 for both groups
Figure 4: Employment income before and after an illness separation, 2006 to 2016


Text description of figure 4
Comparison group for figure 4
In order to have a representative comparison group for EI sickness claimants, the analysis used eligible non-claimants, in other words, those who had 600 insurable hours but did not claim EI sickness.
There are many other characteristics that further differentiate these 2 groups, for example income, short-term disability plan, age, are taken into account for the incremental impact analysis.
Incremental impact results
While the descriptive analysis of figure 4 compares all EI sickness claimants to eligible non-claimants, this incremental impact analysis further groups (matches) illness job separators by similar types of characteristics. These characteristics include gender, age, industry, province of residence, pre-claim income, presence of short-term disability plan. When this level of matching is carried out, the difference in total
  income, while negative, is considerably smaller than the reduction shown descriptively in figure 4.
The small negative statistically significant results in the second and third year is likely attributable to the fact that this model still lacks key variables that would have an effect an individual’s post-illness separation income. These variables are education level, type of illness or injury, severity of illness or injury, detailed information on short-term disability.
For more information, please see a full methodology note in Annex G.
After controlling for various socio-demographic characteristics, the difference in total income between EI claimants and non-claimants is considerably smaller.
The difference in total income between sickness claimants and a comparable group of non-claimants is small and statistically insignificant during the period where the claimant is in receipt of benefits. This difference was found after controlling for age, gender, workers compensation status and eligibility for an employer offering short-term disability plans. The following 2 key differences are worth noting:
the negative impact is significant in the second and third year following the illness job  separation
the gap subsequently narrows in later years and becomes statistically insignificant
While data from the Survey could not be used in the incremental impact analysis due to insufficient post-separation data, the negative impact in the second and third year could be attributable to the severity and/or long-term nature of their illness or injury (see Annex G).
Figure 5: Difference in total income between EI claimants and comparable non-claimants following a 2011 illness separation


Text description of figure 5
Return to work and other income sources
While the vast majority of claimants and eligible non-claimants returned to work within the first year following an illness job separation at 90%, EI sickness claimants returned at a slightly slower rate or at 87% (see figure 6).
Though not shown in figure 6, in fact, not only were sickness claimants slower to return to work, but they were also more likely to leave the workforce by 2015 (21%) relative to eligible non-claimants (17%). Leaving the workforce was defined as having not declared employment earnings for at least 2015 and 2016.
In figure 7, a higher rate of leaving the workforce and lower levels of employment income result in claimants being more likely to rely on other sources of public income supports compared to non-claimants.
Figure 6: Share of 2011 illness job separators who were employed in each year post-2011


Text description of figure 6
Figure 7: Share of illness job separators by sources of income they received in Year 1 and Year 5 following a 2011 illness separation


Text description of figure 7
Main findings
Finding #1
  
The duration of the benefit is adequate for most claimants, but those with severe and/or long-term illnesses are more likely to use the full 15 weeks of sickness benefits and remain sick hereafter.
From 2000 to 2016, a majority of claimants did not use or “exhaust” the potential full 15 weeks of entitlement available for an EI sickness claim. In 2016, 64% of all sickness claimants used less than the
  maximum number of weeks. Among this group, average duration of sickness benefits was 7 weeks.
The number of weeks of sickness benefits an individual used depends on a several socio-economic and demographic factors, as well as the illness or injury.
Using survival analysis as shown in Annex F, the duration of a claim varies based on several factors.
A shorter claim was associated with the following:
higher income and a statistical significance at the 1% level
a short-term health condition such as a flu, compared to a physically-limiting condition, and a statistical significance at the 1% level
claimants who worked in marketing/sales/services or in clerical/administrative occupations prior to the illness or injury, compared to technical/trade occupations. Occupational factor had a statistical significance at the 5% level and the 10% level, respectively
A longer claim was associated with the following:
a pure sickness claim compared to a sickness combination claim (a statistical significance at the 1% level)
older claimants (a statistical significance at the 1% level)
claimants who had cancer, or stress/anxiety, or mental health issues, compared to a physically-limiting condition (a statistical significance at the 1% level)
claimants who had a nervous system and sensory illness (a statistical significance at the 5% level)
Exhausting the 15 weeks of EI sickness benefits
A little over 1-in-3 EI sickness claimants in 2016 or 36% used the full 15 weeks of benefits. This is a trend that has risen since 2009 with 33%.
In 2016, the share of claimants using all 15 weeks was higher among pure sickness claims (44%) than sickness combination claims (27%).
Similar to the results on duration and using a probabilistic regression, the probability of using all 15 weeks of sickness benefits was higher for illnesses or injuries associated with more severe/long-term issues, older claimants, and those only claiming sickness benefits.
The following factors affect the probability of exhausting the sickness benefit with a statistical significance at the 5% level:
clerical or administrative occupations, (-15%) compared to a technical / trade occupations
unemployed status prior to illness, (-15%) compared to being employed
short-term illness (-13%) compared to a long-term illness
Quebec resident (-9%) compared to a resident of Atlantic Canada
For factors that affect the probability of exhausting the sickness benefit with a statistical significance at the 1% level, include:
claimants with cancer conditions (+24%) compared to a physically-limiting condition
claimants with stress/anxiety or mental health issues (+16%) compared to a physically- limiting condition
British Columbia resident (+15%) compared to a resident of Atlantic Canada
pure sickness claim (+9%) compared to a sickness combination claim
older claimants (+0.4% per year)
Weeks of no income among pure sickness claimants
Figure 8 shows that less than two-thirds of survey respondents who only claimed EI sickness, also used all 15 weeks of benefits. They reported having weeks with no income support during their illness. Percentages in figure 8 are for those who responded to the survey question. Due to rounding, they do not add up to 100%. Responses from the Survey of workers were linked with the EI administrative data.
For over 70% of them, this amounted to 5 weeks or fewer. These claimants appeared to be more commonly affected by severe health problems such as:
cancer
 cardiovascular or nervous system illnesses, or 
 mental health issues
Figure 8: Pure sickness claimants who used 15 weeks of benefits without any income support


Text description of figure 8
Survey respondents who only claimed sickness, and used all 15 weeks of benefits, have a longer gap between the end of their sickness benefits and their return to work (many did not return at all).
About 55% of 226 who responded to the Survey question exhausted their benefits and returned to work. They were pure sickness claimants. About 30% returning within 10 weeks after the end of their claim. Still, 45% did not return to work by the time of the Survey as shown in figure 9.
The length of leave duration may include individuals accessing employer paid long-term disability plans following weeks of EI sickness benefits. Information confirming the receipt of benefits from this type of wage-replacement plans was not available.
Figure 9: Weeks between the end of a pure sickness claim and the return to work for those who used 15 weeks of benefits


Text description of figure 9
Pure sickness claimants returning to work
Among claimants who only received sickness benefits and returned to work in figure 10, non-exhaustees are more likely to return to the same employer than exhaustees (see figure 10).
For exhaustees, reasons for not returning to
  the same employer included that the job was no longer available or they could
  not perform their previous task.
However, in cases where the claimant did not return
  to the same employer, there was no statistical difference in the reasons
  provided between exhaustees and non-exhaustees.
Of those who returned to work after having only
  claimed sickness benefits, exhaustees (48%) were more likely to have a gradual return
  to work than non-exhaustees (30%).
Gradual returns to work included working fewer
  hours or days per week.
Figure 10: Proportion of pure sickness claimants who return to the same employer


Text description of figure 10
Additional analysis using the Survey of workers
shows that certain types of illnesses and injuries significantly affect the length of time that it takes an individual to return to work.
A slower return to work was associated with
  more severe and/or long-term illnesses, such as cancer, cardiovascular, and
  nervous system and sensory illnesses (see figure 11). Pregnancy-related
  conditions led to the slowest returns to work, likely related to ongoing
  parental care. Comparatively, a faster return to work was
  associated with surgeries and episodic conditions.
Though less relevant in magnitude due to
  non-proportional hazards, the direction of the effect in figure 11 remains
  reliable.
Figure 11: Speed of return to work by type of illness or injury


Text description for figure 11
In addition to the type of illness or injury,  results from the survival analysis highlight key labour market and  sociodemographic characteristics that also play a critical role in the return  to work (see Annex  F).
The speed of returning to work from illness or  injury was faster for claimants with the following characteristics and a  statistical significance level of 1%:
a post-secondary degree
higher income
illness/injury not work-related
no EI sickness benefits
The speed of returning to work from illness or  injury was slower for claimants who were older and in receipt  sickness benefit before returning to work. These 2 characteristics have a statistical  significance level of 1%. Claimants in receipt of short-term disability and  those who had a temporary employment position were slower to return to work  after an illness or injury. These 2 characteristics have a statistical significance  level of 5%.
Pure sickness claimants and disability benefits
The higher likelihood of pure sickness  claimants who exhaust their sickness benefits, and who did not return to work,  may be partially explained by the severity and/or long-term nature of their  illness or injury.
Pure sickness claimants who exhaust their  benefits were 5 times more likely to receive Canada Pension Plan Disability  (CPPD) benefits in the year following an illness separation than those pure  sickness claimants who did not exhaust their benefits (figure 12).
The use of provincial Social Assistance among  these claimants was at least 3 times higher when compared to non-exhaustees.  This suggests that individuals may be utilizing the “disability” component of  certain Social Assistance plans, for example the Ontario Disability Support  Program as they attempt to re-enter the work force, or, as income support while  they wait for a decision of CPPD benefits (figure 12).
EI sickness benefits and Canada Pension Plan Disability  benefit
The pathway from EI sickness to CPPD is  complex, as both programs have different criteria for eligibility, with CPPD designed  for “severe and prolonged” illnesses (see Annex A for  definitions and a  complete description of the CPPD program).
Figure 12 shows that 10% of pure sickness  claimants received disability benefits, 60% received disability benefits  during their EI claim, or, 4 months following the end of their claim.
Given the 4-month waiting period for CPPD  benefits, this would suggest that most claimants applied and were found to be  eligible for disability benefits prior to the end of their sickness claim – the  first 5 bars in figure 13 and Annex A for a  description of CPPD waiting period.
Due to data limitations, it is not possible to  ascertain whether the receipt of CPPD benefits relates to the same injury or  illness that triggered the EI Sickness claim.
Figure 12: Pure sickness claimants who received CPPD or  social assistance in 2011





Figure 13: Time between sickness and CPPD for pure sickness  claimants who exhaust, 2011
Text description of figure 12



 Text description of figure 13
Finding  #2
  
There has been significant growth in claims for  the EI sickness benefits nationally since 2000 that can be explained, in  part, by demographic changes.
Figure 14 shows that the number of sickness  claims established between 2000 and 2016 increased by 49.1%, from 261,580 to  390,020.
While some of this was due to population growth  and aging of the labour force, much of this growth is not attributable to  demographic changes in the labour force such as age, gender, or income.
If the incidence of claims by age group was  unchanged, the number of claims would have increased by 55 claims per 100,000  labour force participants, from 2000 to 2016 due to the aging workforce.
Instead  the incidence of sickness claims went up by 354  over this period, from 1,648 per 100,000 labour force participants in 2000  to 2,002 in 2016, representing more than 5 times the predicted increase.
Figure 14: Observed EI sickness claims vs. predicted,  Canada, 2000 to 2016


Text description of figure 14
While the overall increase in total sickness  claims cannot be fully explained by demographic changes, most of the increase  in the number of pure sickness claims can be.
Out of the estimated gap of about 58,000 claims  between the observed and predicted number of claims in 2016, approximately  20,000—or about 33%—relates to pure sickness claims. The remaining gap relates to a growing number  and share of all sickness claims where regular benefits are paid.
Explanatory note 1: Predicting the number of EI sickness  claims
The predicted  number of sickness claims is estimated according to the proportion of the  labour force population receiving sickness benefits by gender, age and province  as of 2000—in other words, the incidence of claiming sickness benefits. In  particular, the predicted number of EI sickness claims is calculated by  assuming that the incidence rates observed in 2000 would remain constant over  the period from 2001 to 2016.
For instance,  at the national level, the incidence of claiming sickness benefits in 2000 was  relatively higher for women and generally increased with age. Therefore, as the  labour force population grew and aged from 2001 to 2016, the predicted number  of sickness claims commensurably grew as well (see red-dashed line in Figure 14).
In December  31, 2000, the number of insurable hours to qualify for sickness benefits and  other special benefits decreased from 700 to 600 hours. Sensitivity analysis  found that using the 2000 incidence rate (before the change), or the 2001  incidence level (after the change) did not have a significant effect on the  predicted number of EI claims.
Figure 15: Pure sickness claimants and regular claimants  with multiple sickness spells, 2001 to 2016


 Text description of figure 15
One of the potential factors behind the  increase in EI sickness claims is a greater incidence of claims where regular  benefits are paid first and are followed by multiple spells of sickness  benefits.
A regular claim with multiple sickness spells  is defined as a claim that started with regular benefits and combined with at  least 2 non-consecutive EI sickness spells. For example, after starting and  receiving regular benefits, a claimant falls ill and reports 2 weeks of  sickness. Once available to work, the claimant reverts back to receiving  regular benefits prior to returning on sickness benefits due to another bout of  illness.
Almost all claims (92%) that combine multiple  spells of sickness with regular benefits are claims where regular benefits were  paid first, in other words, a period of sickness following a layoff.
In 2016, of 139,720 claims 24,220 had multiple  spells of sickness. Claimants who are laid-off may be eligible to receive up to  15 weeks of sickness benefits because of an illness, injury, or quarantine  within the same claim. However, the maximum number of combined weeks (regular +  other special benefits, including sickness) cannot exceed 50 weeks.
As shown in Figure 15, regular claims with  multiple sickness spells only represent a fraction of claims compared to pure  sickness. However, the total number of these claims increased more rapidly,  from 3,080 in 2001 to 24,220 in 2016.
The growth does not appear to be driven by an  increase in regular claims. Specifically, Figure 16 shows that these types of  claims increased by about 6 times since 2001. Yet the total number of regular  claims in 2016 is lower compared to 2001 level.
Figure 16: Regular claimants with multiple sickness spells  as a share of all sickness claims, 2001 to 2016


Text description of figure 16
Compared to those with pure sickness claims,  claimants who combined regular and sickness benefits were more likely to have  multiple spells of sickness within the same claim.
In 2016, claims starting with regular benefits  and having multiple spells of sickness represented 17% of all claims that  combined regular and sickness benefits. Comparatively, among pure sickness  claims, about 13% had multiple spells of sickness (or 25,800 of 204,830 claims).
A pure sickness claim with multiple spells is  defined as having an interruption in their sickness benefits related to a  non-benefit reason. For example, a claimant starts their claim by collecting 5  weeks of sickness then reported 2 weeks of earnings followed by another 6 weeks  of sickness benefits.
In contrast with regular claims where benefits  were combined, the share of pure sickness claimants having multiple spells grew  from 11% to 13% since 2001.
Not only did regular claimants have a higher  incidence of having multiple spells of sickness, but their average number of  spells within the same claim was higher.
Half or 50% of regular claimants with multiple  sickness spells had 2 and 3 spells within the same claim in Figure 17 compared  to only 16% for pure sickness claimants in Figure 18.
Figure 17:  Number of spells for regular  claims with multiple sickness spells, 2016





Figure 18: Number of spells for pure sickness claims with  multiple sickness spells, 2016
Text description of figure 17


 
Text description of figure 18
In fact, regular claims with multiple spells of  sickness tended to have shorter spells of sickness than pure sickness claims  with multiple spells.
Though not shown above, the proportion of  regular claims with sickness spells of 2 weeks or less was higher (80%)  compared to pure sickness claims (35%).
Regardless of claim pattern, EI sickness  claimants are always required to obtain a medical certificate as an eligibility  requirement for the benefit.
A higher prevalence of multiple sickness spells  among regular claimants points to illnesses and injuries that could be more  short-term and episodic in nature. By analyzing data from the Survey of workers, Figures  19 and 20 show that regular claimants with multiple spells were 6 times more  likely to report their illness or injury as short-term, compared to pure  sickness claimants with multiple spells. In other words, 24% for regular  claimants with multiple sickness spells versus 4% pure sickness claimants with  multiple sickness spells.
Though not shown in the figures above, further  examination revealed that 27% of regular claimants with multiple sickness  spells indicated that their illness or injury was caused by an episodic  condition compared to 19% for pure sickness claimants who had multiple spells  of sickness.
It is acknowledged that the sample sizes from  the Survey are relatively small for these types of claimants ranging between 90  to 171 respondents and may not be completely reflective of the actual  population.
Figure 19:  Share of 90 survey respondents who reported  illnesses or injuries for regular claimants with multiple sickness spells





Figure 20: Share of 171 survey respondents who reported  illnesses or injuries for pure sickness claims with multiple sickness spells
Text description of figure 19


 
Text description of figure 20
Finding  #3
  
Access to employer  short-term sickness/disability plans is not uniform across the labour force in  Canada. Without such coverage, EI sickness benefits remain the main support for  many workers.
Employer short-term sickness plans, including  sick days and short-term disability, play an equally important role in  providing Canadians with support during a period of illness or injury.
In many cases, the coverage provided under an  employer plan may be sufficient to not require an individual to apply for EI  Sickness, as individuals must generally use all employer plan benefits  (first-payer) before receiving sickness benefits (second-payer).
As noted under the characteristics leading to a  sickness claim section, receiving short-term disability benefits reduces the  probability of claiming sickness benefits.
To address a data gap about the types of  short-term sickness plans offered by employers, the evaluation included key  informant interviews with 42 employers from small, medium and large businesses.
Employers without a formal short-term disability plan or  sick days
Among 9 employers who did not offer any formal  sick days or short-term disability plans, 8 were small businesses with fewer  than 50 people and 1 was a medium-sized business with 50 to 499 people. Thirty-three  employers interviewed also provided long-term disability benefits to their  employees. For more information see Annex H and  the report entitled: “Findings from the Employer Consultation for the  Evaluation of Employment Insurance”, a technical study available upon request.
Employers indicated the following reasons for  not offering such plans were:
medium-term  absences in their organization were low to non-existent
employees  preferred that money be spent on other kinds of benefits, and 
employers  and employees were already paying EI premiums to cover EI sickness benefits  which provide income support for medium-term illness or injury
Figure 21: Short-term sickness plans offered by employers  interviewed for this evaluation


Text description of figure 21
 Figure  21 represents a circle diagram providing a descriptive of the short-term  sickness plans offered by employers. The figure shows that out of 42 employers  interviewed for this evaluation:

9 had no formal short-term  disability plans or sick days
4 had bankable sick days
5 had non-bankable sick days
24 had sick days and a  short-term disability plan
Employers with a formal short-term disability plan or sick  days
Most employers interviewed indicated that they  provided some level of short-term sickness plan, but there was significant  variation in the generosity of these plans.
Of the 29 employers who provided details on  their sick day plans:
6 offered 5 days or less
16 offered 6 to 10 days
5 offered 11 to 15 days
2 offered an unlimited number  of days
In all cases where sick days were provided with  a short-term disability plan, the number of sick days offered was sufficient to  cover the waiting period of the short-term disability plan and provided a level  of income support equal to 100% of wages.
The type of coverage varied significantly. Among  19 employers, below are details of their short-term disability plans in terms  of level of income support:
10  offered a wage replacement between 55% and 74%
5  offered a wage replacement between 75% and 99%
4  offered a wage replacement of 100%
Status of employment
Part time - Coverage varied across employers, with some employers offering the  same level of benefits as full-time workers, while other organizations provided  no coverage at all
Seasonal - Typically no coverage was  provided, except when seasonal workers made up a significant portion of their  workforce and/or the season was long (6 to 8 months)
Casual/on-call - No coverage provided 
Temporary/contract - A small component  of the workforce for those interviewed and were usually not provided any  coverage
Transitioning back to work
Almost  all employers reported that they provide some level of support to help workers  transition back to work, which included:
partial hours/graduated return  to work
modification of duties
ergonomic adjustments
work from home
Explanatory note 2: The Premium Reduction Program and  Supplemental Unemployment Benefit Plans
The Premium Reduction Program and Supplemental  Unemployment Benefit Plans are available to employers to provide greater  short-term sickness coverage for their employees to help them regain their  health in order to return to work. Awareness and use of both programs among the  42 employers interviewed was relatively  low.
Premium Reduction Program
Employers who provide a short-term disability  plan to their employees that meets minimum requirements set out in the Employment Insurance Act and  Regulations, can register with Service Canada to be entitled to pay a lower  rate for their EI premiums.
A total of 16 employers reported being aware of  the program with only 11 were actively using it.
Administrative data shows that in 2017, 27.9%  of illness job separators were associated with an employer who provided a  short-term disability plan that qualified for a premium reduction at the time  of the separation. Data did not allow for the identification of individuals in  receipt of these benefits.
The following main reasons were provided by  employers for not taking advantage of the program:
their short-term disability  plan was not eligible 
a belief it would not reduce  their costs
Supplemental Unemployment Benefit plans
Employers have the option to register a  Supplemental Unemployment Benefit (SUB) Plan with Service Canada. SUB plans  provide employees with additional income during an EI claim resulting from a  period of unemployment due to the following reasons: a temporary stoppage of  work, training, illness, injury or quarantine. These plans top up employees’  weekly earnings without affecting their EI benefits.
A total of 14 employers reported that they were  aware of the ability to register a such a plan with only 2 were registered with  such a plan.
Administrative data shows that in 2017, only  5.4% of EI sickness claims were associated with such a plan.
Reasons provided by employers for not having a  registered SUB plan were:
they could not afford the extra  cost of topping up benefits
they felt that EI sickness  benefits were sufficient
Conclusions  and recommendations
The EI sickness benefits provide critical  short-term income support to workers in various life situations who fall ill or  are injured and are unable to work, $1.7 billion to over 400,000 workers in  2017 to 2018. For many of these workers, the sickness benefits are their only  source of short-term disability benefits while they transition back to work or  onto long-term disability programs.
Overall, the evaluation report provides  evidence that the sickness benefits have been effective in meeting its core  objective of providing short-term income replacement so individuals can focus  on restoring their health and returning to work.
In particular, this report found that:
15  weeks of benefits remain an adequate duration of short-term income replacement  for the majority of claimants as they transition back to work, and
the  incremental impact of receiving sickness benefits is not statistically significant  in the long-term, while in the short-term the negative impact is more than  likely linked to the severity/long-term nature of the illness or injury
However, the evaluation identified areas where  there were limitations with assessing the full impact of the interaction  between the type of illness or injury and the utilization of sickness benefits.
As such, the Evaluation Directorate offers the  following recommendations:
Recommendation  1: Explore and report on the possibility of new  data linkages to inform policy development on the Employment Insurance sickness  benefit
Recommendation  2: Examine Employment Insurance regular claims  with sickness spells to better understand the interaction between these benefit  types
Management response and action plan
Recommendation 1
Explore and report  on the possibility of new data linkages to inform policy development on the  sickness benefits.
The Department would like to thank the  Evaluation Directorate for its work on the program evaluation of the Employment  Insurance (EI) sickness benefits which included extensive quantitative analysis  complemented by surveys of employers and workers. Preliminary analysis shared  over the evaluation process helped inform policy analysis.
Management agrees with recommendation 1.
Employment Insurance sickness benefits are  short-term income supports for workers on leave due to illness, injury or  quarantine. They complement other measures available to support Canadians,  including longer-term illness and disability, benefits offered through  employer-sponsored group insurance plans, private coverage plans held by  individuals and Canada Pension Plan long-term disability benefits, as well as  federal, provincial and territorial programs, labour programs, and workers  compensation. However, for those Canadians who do not have access to  employer-paid sick leave or disability benefits, sickness benefits would act as  their primary social safety net.
Sickness claimants need to obtain a medical  certificate from a recognized medical professional with an expected return to  work date, but the program does not collect information on the nature of the  illness or injury. This approach protects Canadians’ privacy and improves  processing efficiency. However, this approach results in a knowledge gap  regarding the interaction between the type of medical condition and the use of  sickness benefits.
The Department will leverage available data and  explore and report on the feasibility of possible new data linkages to address  some of the knowledge gaps related to the sickness benefits. Additional  analysis could help the program better understand how workers facing different  types of health situations. For example, how workers with acute illnesses or  injuries, chronic or episodic conditions, critical illness or injury, or mental  health, use the sickness benefits and other government supports.
Actions planned
1.1 Explore and report on the feasibility to build upon the data analysis from the EI  sickness evaluation using additional years of Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) tax  data to conduct analysis on post-claim income compared to pre-claim income  levels by type of illness or injury.
  Anticipated completion date: Summer 2021
1.2   Explore and report on the feasibility of  other linking EI administrative data and other ESDC data sources.
  Anticipated completion date: Summer 2021
Recommendation  2
Examine Employment  Insurance regular claims with sickness spells to better understand the  interaction between these benefit types.
Management agrees with recommendation 2.
The program offers temporary financial  assistance to unemployed workers.
A person who cannot work because of illness,  injury or quarantine, but who would otherwise be available to work, may be  eligible to receive up to a maximum of 15 weeks of sickness benefits.
At times, workers leave their employment due to  illness, in other words, their “reason for separation” is specified as illness;  in other cases, an unemployed worker already collecting regular benefits may  become temporarily unavailable to search for work due to illness. Understanding  these combination benefits could offer valuable insights into improving service  delivery.
Examining regular claims with sickness spells  will allow for a better understanding of the interaction between these benefit  types, and possibly provide some insight into individuals with sickness spells  and their ability to access benefits.
In addition, as part of our continuous  improvements to the EI system, we will use the insights and observations  developed within this evaluation to inform the integrity analytical framework  for the system, and for sickness benefits in particular, going forward.
Action planned
2.1 Analyze  EI regular claims with sickness spells, to review the frequency of occurrence  and trends of this combination of benefit types. 
  Anticipated completion date: March 2021
Annex A: Terminology
Canada Pension Plan Disability (CPPD) benefits
 Designed  to provide partial income replacement to eligible CPP contributors who are  under age 65 with a severe and prolonged disability, as defined in the Canada  Pension Plan (CPP) legislation. 
CPPD  waiting period
 It  takes approximately 120 days for a decision to be made from the date we receive  your application and all the necessary documents.
Eligible  non-claimants
 All illness job separators who did not receive at least $1 in EI sickness  benefit and had 600 hours of insurable employment during the previous  52-weeks. 
Employment  income
 Employment  income captured from T4 supplementary tax records on an annual basis. 
Illness job separators
 Individuals  who are issued a record of employment (ROE) where the reason for separation is  illness, injury, or quarantine. Specifically, individuals who  experience a  reduction in their normal weekly earnings by at least 40% due to illness,  injury or quarantine. 
Medical certificate
 A form completed by a medical doctor or other medical  professionals attesting to the claimant’s inability to work and stating the  probable duration of the illness, injury or quarantine. To receive sickness  benefits, claimants need to obtain a medical  certificate, which they may be required to submit at a later  date. 
Non-claimants
 All  illness job separators who did not receive at least $1 in EI sickness benefit  following their job separation due to illness or injury. 
Pure  sickness claim
 A pure  sickness claim is a claim for which only EI sickness benefits are paid during  the benefit period. 
Sickness claim
 A sickness claim is any claim for which at least $1 was paid in sickness  benefits during the benefit period, such as a pure sickness claim or a  combination of claim. 
Sickness  claimants
 Sickness  claimants are individuals who received at least $1 in EI sickness  benefits during  the benefit period.
Sickness  combination claim
 A  sickness combination claim is when other EI benefits are paid (for example  regular, maternity, parental) within the same claim in which sickness benefits  were received. 
Total  income
 All income  reported on the T1 tax return records on an annual basis.
Annex B: Evaluation questions
The following evaluation questions were  approved at the February 2016 Performance Measurement and Evaluation Committee.
Sick leave plans:
    
in the context of the Canadian  labour market, what are the characteristics of public and employer-sponsored  paid sick leave/wage loss insurance plans?
to what extent do  employer-provided plans and public programs help workers transition back into  the workforce?
what are the best practices in  other countries?


What  proportion of Canada’s unemployed are eligible for EI sickness benefits?
What  proportion of employees is covered by an employer paid sick leave plan or a  wage loss insurance plan?
Claims:
    
what  are some of the factors influencing the level of sickness claims?
what  are the impacts of the changes regarding the requirement to provide medical  proof of incapacity? 
 did the 2006 change regarding medical certificate requirement affect the  likelihood of making a sickness claim?


How  many medical certificates are requested by Service Canada each year?
Are  claimants from regions with low unemployment (who are eligible for fewer weeks  of regular EI) more likely to use EI sickness benefits?
How  sickness benefits are being used:
    
what  is the duration of sickness claims?
how  are sickness benefits being combined?
how  many claimants interrupt their claims for other EI benefits (for example  parental, compassionate care) to access sick benefits?
what  is the exhaustion rate?
to  what extent are employers topping up EI sickness benefits via the SUB program?
to  what extent do claimants work while on claim?


What  is the overpayment rate for EI sickness benefits and what are the reasons for  overpayment?
How  easy is it to obtain a medical certificate?
What  is the nature of the illnesses/injuries that lead to sickness claims?
To  what extent do workers who leave employment due to sickness/injury exhaust  their employer paid sick leave/wage loss insurance before claiming EI sickness  benefits?
The  post-claim period:
    
what  was the employment status post-claim?
when  did a return to work occur?
what  is the source of income post-claim?
what,  if any, supports were available to ease the transition back to work?


To  what extent firms provide paid sick leave/wage loss insurance:
    
what  are the characteristics of employer-sponsored paid sick leave or wage loss  insurance plans?
do  the plans include measures that support the transition back to work?
Annex C: Lines of evidence
Key informant interviews
Key informant interviews were conducted with 42 employers from small,  medium and large organizations in 2017 to collect information on their  practices with respect to supporting employees that take a medical absence from  work. Both employers that provide a sick leave plan to their employees and  those that do not provide any such plans were consulted. More information on  the interviewed employers can be found in Findings from the Employer  Consultation for the Evaluation of Employment Insurance.
The sample of employers who were interviewed was derived from criteria  developed by the Conference Board of Canada in 2013 (see Disability Management: Opportunities for Employer Action. The Conference  Board of Canada).
Employment Insurance status vector administrative data, Canada  Revenue Agency tax files, and Canada Pension Plan Disabilities files
The administrative data  used for this evaluation included a 10% sample of all sickness claims  established, from 2000 to 2016, which comes directly from the Status Vector  file.
The Record of Employment  (10% sample) was used to identify those individuals who had an illness  separation but did not go on to claim EI Sickness (non-claimants).
Individual tax files from  2000 to 2016 (10% sample), such as the T1 and T4 were linked to the Status  Vector and the Records of Employment to provide detailed earnings and income  information for sickness claimants and non-claimants.
Canada Pension Plan  Disability (CPPD) benefits files from 2000 to 2016 were linked to the Status  Vector to provide information on the time between receiving sickness benefits  and CPPD benefits.
Survey of workers
In 2018, R.A.  Malatest & Associates Inc. conducted a survey on individuals who had  experienced an illness or injury in 2016. The sample that was used for the  survey was derived from Employment and Social Development Canada administrative  data and provided to the contractor to conduct the survey.
In total, 2,214 individuals  responded to the survey and provided consent to have their survey responses  linked to the Status Vector, Records of Employment, and tax files T1 and T4. Of  those who responded, 58% or 1,291 claimed EI sickness benefits while 42% or 923  did not claim sickness benefits, in other words, non-claimants did not receive  at least $1 of sickness benefits.
Annex D: Data limitations
Key informant interviews
Overall, 42 employers were interviewed for this evaluation, which  included:
15 small business with less than 50 employees 
15 medium sized businesses with 50 to 499 employees,  and 
12 large businesses with 500 or more employees
It is recognized that the sample of employers  interviewed does not reflect the portrait of employers in Canada (the majority  of whom meet the definition of small business). Still, the information  collected from interviewed employers is deemed useful and informative since it  helps contextualize employers’ practices with respect to supporting employees  that take a medical absence from work.
Status vector administrative data, CRA tax files, and CPPD  files
There is close to a 2-year lag in CRA tax data  which limited total income and employment income analysis to the years from  2000 to 2016. In addition, the benefit window for special benefits can span up  to 104 weeks, so 2016 is the most recent year that was used to analyze claims  that were combined with other benefits.
Although the total income variable used from  the T1 file captures all income declared in a given calendar year including  capital gains on investments, the tax files that were used in this evaluation  did not include detailed information on all the types of income that were  declared. Therefore, the evaluation was unable to identify if claimants or  non-claimants were more likely to be using investment or savings income during  their illness or injury.
Status Vector and CRA tax files did not contain  any information on the types of illness or injury of an individual that led to  a job separation. Therefore, all analysis on post-illness outcomes is limited  by a lack of information on their illness or injury.
Employment in the post-separation period is  captured from the T4 file by observing positive employment income during a  calendar year. However, the weakness of this indicator is that it does not  distinguish among employment spells of varying durations, but instead, treats  all employment episodes equally.
The CPPD benefits cannot be linked tax files. Therefore,  the cross-reference between CPPD data with T1 tax data was not performed to see  if an individual had in fact received CPPD benefits. In addition, the exact  date of payment for CPPD benefits cannot be determined. As such,  120 days was  added to the date effective variable to estimate the duration of the waiting  period.
Survey of workers
Respondents were not  asked to verify the exact Record of Employment or their sickness claim that was  associated with the illness or injury that they were providing responses to. It  may be the case that the Record of Employment and/or EI sickness claim that we  matched to was not correct.
The Survey of  workers only asked respondents about their illness or injury that occurred in  2016. Given that 2016 is the most recent and available tax information, no  post-claim analysis can be conducted for survey respondents their input took  place in 2018. Trend analysis was unfeasible with only one year of information  on illness or injury.
Although results  from the Survey of workers were weighted to be regionally consistent with the  target population of illness job separators, it is possible that those who were  surveyed and provided responses were not a random sample of EI claimants and non-claimants.  In fact, claimants who only collected sickness benefits were underrepresented  in the sample, resulting in an oversample of claimants who combined sickness  with regular benefits. However, it is not expected that the oversampling will  impact the results significantly, since the number of respondents is  sufficiently large to provide a good representation of their respective target  population and their type of illnesses and injuries.
Annex E: Factors analysis methodology
Population
In order to assess the factors that affect the level of sickness claims,  sickness claims were grouped based on the year, gender, age and province where  they reside. The labour force population in each of the demographic groups was  extracted from the Labour Force Survey from Statistics Canada’s CANSIM  database. Claim-to-labour force population ratio was then derived for each  subgroup, which provides a unique incidence of claiming for all subgroups of  year, gender, age group and province.
Count model
Using the claim-to-labour force population ratio as the dependent  variable, a log-linear regression model was fitted to the data using maximum  likelihood by assuming a negative binomial distribution to estimate the effects  of birth-cohort, gender, age, province and year on the claim-to-labour force  population ratio.
The model specification allows for the age effect to vary between men and  women, and for capturing the year effect in each of the 10 provinces. The figure A shows the result of the likelihood ratio test, based on which the negative  binomial distribution was found most appropriate for the data.
Figure A: Number of  sickness claims per 1000 population 


Text description of figure  A
 The figure shows 3 curves  representing the following distributions:

the observed proportion in  the data
the estimates of the Negative  Binomial model, and 
the estimates of the  Poisson model

The curve of the negative binomial  distribution is flattened compared to that of the Poisson distribution and is  the closest to the observed proportion; The Binomial negative distribution seems  to best suit the data.
Demographic prediction model
In order to assess the predicted effect of only demographic changes to EI  sickness claims, the claim incidence of each cell in 2000 was chosen and  assumed fixed as the baseline claim incidence, by which the number of labour  force participants in each cell from 2001 to 2016 was multiplied to obtain the  predicted number of claims.
Limitations
There are zero observations in some of the subgroups in a given year.  Since the sample used in this study is 10% of the Status Vector database, the  zero likelihood as the result of these “0”s may not reflect the reality and the  incidence rate could be underestimated. However, these situations represent  less than 1% of demographic groups and it occurs only in some calendar years.  Thus, the effects of the demographic characteristics obtained from the  regression should not be affected by this data limitation.
A full methodological note is available upon request.
Annex F: Survival analysis  methodology
Population
The population used for the survival analysis included respondents to  the Survey of workers who provided their consent to have their input linked to  information from the Status Vector. The full population was used to analyze the  return to work, while only claimants could be considered for the claim duration  analysis.
Cox Proportional Hazards Model
All survival analysis is undertaken on a time to event time-scale. The  model chosen known as the Cox Proportional Hazards Model. It is a  semi-parametric model estimated under the assumption that covariates are  multiplicatively related to the hazard (where  the
hazard function is the risk  for a given time 𝑡 ≥ 𝑡0  of the event occurring).
The model effectively assumes that the likelihood for some event to  occur is different between individuals with different characteristics, and that  this difference is constantly proportional over the study period.
Claim duration analysis
Duration of claim is determined directly from the Status Vector, with  duration given by the number of weeks in which benefits were received.  Claimants who took the maximum 15 weeks of sickness benefits were considered  not to have stopped claiming, and rather to have been censored.
Return to work analysis
The length of time before a return to work is based upon differences in  the week variable of the start of a sick leave in the Status Vector, and the  week in which a return to work was observed. The month of return to work was  determined from the Survey of workers.
Limitations
The survey provides a much richer set of data than is available in the Status  Vector database. However, the survey sample size is only 2,214 respondents,  which means that some caution should be taken in the interpretation of results.
The survival model chosen has a disadvantage of not specifying  expectation of the relative amount of “survival time” between individuals with  various characteristics. This means that at no point can the data indicate that  some group will experience a failure event some number of weeks earlier. For  example, the model captures only proportional hazards between groups over time.
Further, the survey analysis has limitations due to the intrinsic  uncertainty associated with linking survey results to administrative data.  Specifically, the analysis of time before a return to work requires a separation  date derived from the Record of Employment (ROE) to determine when the leave  begins, while the end of the sick leave is determined by survey data indicating  the month in which a return to work occurs. This issue is handled to the best  extent possible by selectively choosing between possible ROEs for consistency  between survey results and administrative data. However the process is imperfect  and relies on accurate recall on the part of survey respondents of events which  might have occurred over 2 years prior to them being surveyed.
A full methodological note is available upon request.
Annex G: Incremental impact  methodology
Population
In order to assess the incremental impact of claiming sickness benefits, the  comparison looked at those who received sickness benefits as the treatment  group and those who were eligible or had 600 hours but did not receive the benefits  as a comparison group.
The impact analysis is conducted for the 2011 cohort, which is comprised  of those who had an illness job separation in 2011. Indicators for employment  earnings and total income were obtained from T4 and T1 tax files for both  groups over a period of 5 years post-illness separation (2012 to 2016).
Propensity score matching
To account for the fact that sickness benefits claimants and  non-claimants are inherently different, especially in terms of income, a  propensity score matching technique that is based on a logistic regression  model was used to select non-claimants that resembled sickness claimants as  closely as possible.
The logistic model was developed to predict the likelihood of claiming  sickness benefits and incorporated over 150 variables to minimize inherent  differences concerning the likelihood of claiming.
Examples of variables that were included:
gender 
age 
marital  status 
region 
industry 
receipt  of worker’s compensation 
the  percentage change in earnings in 2011 relative to 2010, and 
earnings  in the past 5 years
Figures B and C show that after matching, both groups effectively had the  same likelihood of claiming.
Figure B: Distribution of propensity scores for 2011 illness job  separators, before matching


Text description of figure B
Figure B presents 2 curves illustrating the distributions of propensity scores before the matching for the treated group and the comparison group.  The 2 distributions are quite different. The curve of propensity scores is more  flattened for the treated group compared to the comparison group. The 2 groups do not have the same likelihood of claiming EI sickness benefits.
Figure C: Distribution of propensity scores for 2011 illness job  separators, after matching


Text description of figure C
 Figure C presents 2 curves  illustrating the distributions of propensity scores after the matching for the  treated group and the comparison group.  The 2 curves are superimposed, hence the distributions match perfectly. The  matching process was successful in minimizing inherent differences in the  likelihood of claiming EI sickness benefits between the 2 groups.
Limitations
While this method helps us to attribute the impact of receiving sickness  benefits on a claimant’s outcomes (employment earnings and total income), it is  limited to what can be observed in the administrative data. For instance, the  types and severity of illness or injury likely had an effect on the decision to  claim sickness benefits following an illness job separation, however they  cannot be measured with the available data.
A full methodological note is available upon request.
Annex H:  Bibliography
External sources
    International comparisons:
    
France:  https://www.internations.org/france-expats/guide/29458-social-security-taxation/sick-leave-and-disability-benefits-in-france-19289
Germany:  https://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=1111&langId=en&intPageId=4550
United Kingdom: https://www.gov.uk/statutory-sick-pay

Thorpe, K. & Chénier,  L. (2013). Disability Management: Opportunities for Employer Action. The  Conference Board of Canada. Retrieved from:  https://www.sunlife.ca/static/canada/Sponsor/About%20Group%20Benefits/Group%20benefits%20products%20and%20services/The%20Conversation/Disability/DisabilityManagement_SUNLIFE_EN.pdf

Technical studies (available  upon request):
    ESDC (2017).  Findings from the Employer Consultation for  the Evaluation of Employment Insurance.
      ESDC (2018). Descriptive  Analysis of EI Sickness Claims: Study for the Evaluation of the Employment  Insurance Sickness Benefit
      ESDC (2018). Methodology  note on sample weights for the Survey of Workers. 
      ESDC (2018). Methodology  note on the Analysis of the Survey of Workers. 
      ESDC (2018). Methodology  note on the Incremental Impact Analysis. 
      ESDC (2018). Methodology  note on the Factors Analysis. 
      ESDC (2018). Preliminary  results on the Survey of Workers. 

Data sources:
    Tax files. See Annexes C  and D. 
      Employment Insurance  Status Vector administrative data. See Annexes C and D. 
      Record of Employment data.  See Annexes C and D. 
      R.A. Malatest &  Associates (2018). Survey of Workers. See Annexes C and D.
      Statistics Canada. Table  14-10-0018-01. Labour force characteristics by sex and detailed age group,  annual (x 1,000)
