List of acronyms
Best 14 week 
Calculating Benefit Rate Based on Claimant's 14 Highest Weeks of Insurable Earnings Pilot Projects
EDB
Extended Duration of Employment Insurance Regular Benefits
EEILTW
Extension of EI Regular Benefits for Long-Tenured Workers
EI
Employment Insurance
CFOB
Chief Financial Officer Branch
LTW
Long Tenured Workers
MAR 
EI Monitoring and Assessment Report
NERE
Pilot Projects Providing Increased Access to Employment and Unemployment Benefits for New Entrants and Re-entrants Pilot Projects
Pilot 10
Extended EI Benefit Pilot Project (Pilot Project No. 10)
Pilot 15
Pilot Project Relating to Extended Benefits (Pilot Project No. 15)
Pilot 6
Increased Weeks of EI Pilot Project (Pilot Project No. 6)
SV
Status Vector
WWC
Working While on Claim
List of tables
Table 1: Extended duration of EI regular benefits analysis
Table 2: Extended duration of EI regular benefits additional week take-up rate
Table 3: Pilot 15 benefits analysis
Table 4: Pilot 15 additional week take-up rate
Table 5: Profile of seasonal claimants and gappers in the pilot 15 regions
Table 6: Claim profile
Table 7: Seasonal beneficiaries and gappers in pilot regions during pilot 15
Table A. 1: EI economic regions included in extended benefits pilots
Table B.1: Entitlement weeks for non-pilot regions and the no-extension period
Table C.1: Entitlement weeks for pilot regions
Table D.1: Entitlement weeks for the extended duration of EI regular benefit period
Table E. 1: Evaluation matrix
Table F. 1: Sequence of pilot projects and EI initiative related to 5 week extensions
Table F. 2: Socio-economic covariates
List of figures
Figure F2: Gappers' definition
Executive summary
This report presents the evaluation findings of the Extended  Duration of Employment Insurance Regular Benefits and the Pilot Project  Relating to Extended Benefits (Pilot 15).   Both initiatives extended the EI regular entitlement by five weeks.  However, each initiative had different policy  objectives.
The first EDB policy objective was to stimulate spending  considering the uncertainty of the 2008/2009 economic downturn.  Its second objective was to reduce EI  exhaustion rate.  The EDB extended EI  regular benefit entitlement nationwide by five weeks and increased the maximum  entitlement to 50 weeks from 45.  The EDB  initiative received Royal Assent on March 12, 2009 and came into effect on  March 1, 2009.  It concluded on September  11, 2010.
Pilot Project No. 15 was a two-year pilot project reintroducing Pilot Project No. 10 with the objectives of testing the impact of extending the number of weeks of benefits  in economic regions of relatively high unemployment during a period of economic  recovery to reduce the number of seasonal workers facing an income gap and  assessing the impact of a regional unemployment rate-based automatic  termination trigger. Pilot 15 was in effect in 21 EI economic regions where the unemployment rate was 8% or more, from September 12, 2010 to September 15, 2012. The automatic termination trigger provision excluded threes regions from the pilot since their unemployment rates dropped below 8% for 12 consecutive  months.
Evaluation approach
This evaluation report is primarily based on the technical study “Extended Duration of EI Regular Benefits: Evaluation Technical Study” (ESDC, 2015), which is a descriptive and econometric study of a sample of completed EI claims where only regular benefits were paid.
For both initiatives, the evaluation examined the take up by EI claimants of the additional weeks of benefits provided and the impact on the length of EI claims as well as on the likelihood of exhausting entitlements and benefits during the pilot periods.
An analysis of the total benefits paid associated to the additional weeks of entitlement was conducted for both initiatives. Although the assessment of the macro-economic impact of the EDB initiative was not in scope of this evaluation, the total benefits paid analysis provide an estimate of the direct spending stimulus of the EBD initiative.
In the case of Pilot 15, the evaluation explored the extent to which the pilot helped address the income gap issues related to seasonal workers in the pilot regions and the effectiveness of the termination trigger provision.
Evaluation findings
The evaluation provides key findings on the EDB initiative and Pilot Project 15.
The evaluation found EDB to be successful in that the initiative provided an estimated spending stimulus of 2.5 billion dollars between March 9, 2008 and September 11, 2010 for which 57% ($1.41 billion) is attributed to the additional EDB weeks paid and 43% ($1.09 billion) is attributed to increased use of regular entitlement among all EI claimants.
The EDB initiative resulted in 34% of regular claimants using additional benefits, of which 76% used the entire additional 5 weeks. In addition, the EDB initiative allowed all claimants, not only claimants who used the additional weeks, to remain on EI for 1.6 weeks longer on average and to reduce entitlement benefit exhaustion by 5.3 percentage points.
Results for Pilot Project No. 15 are mixed. Pilot Project No. 15 met its goal of reducing the number of seasonal workers facing an income gap with a 3.3 percentage point probability decrease and also led to a decrease of the income gap length of seasonal income gappers of 2.2 weeks on average. However, only 3.2% of the total 558 million of additional benefit paid during Pilot 15 period was used by seasonal income gappers. This indicates that although Pilot Project No. 15 improved the situation of seasonal gappers, the measure was too broad for the stated goal.
Furthermore, based on the facts that claimants' exhaustion of benefits and number of weeks used were similar before and after the trigger, the regional termination trigger included with Pilot 15 was found to be successful both in its timing and design.
Management response
Background
The testing of increasing the number of weeks of benefits available to some claimants began with EI Pilot Project No. 6.  Pilot 6 was introduced for a two-year period in 2004 in 24 regions.  The pilot was re-introduced as a new pilot project, Pilot Project No. 10, for a period of 18 months in 21 regions in 2006 and was extended in 2007 for a further period of 18 months until May 31, 2009.  Both pilot projects tested the costs and impact of extending the number of weeks of benefits in selected economic regions. 	  More specifically, they tested whether providing more weeks of benefits would reduce the number of seasonal workers facing an income gap with neither EI benefits nor employment income (referred to as "gappers"), and whether there would be associated behavioural effects.  Pilot 10 ceased to have effect in February 2009 during the economic recession, when the EI Act was amended via the Budget Implementation Act, 2009 to introduce the Extended Duration of Employment Insurance Regular Benefits (EDB).
Extended Duration of Employment Insurance Regular Benefits (EDB)
The EDB was intended as a temporary stimulus measure as part of a broader response to the recession of 2009 and to reduce EI exhaustion rates during the recession.  EDB temporarily provided additional support to unemployed workers facing transitions in tough economic times by providing claimants with five additional weeks of benefits.  In addition, the maximum duration of benefits available under the EI Program in regions of high unemployment has been increased from 45 weeks to 50.  The temporary measure came into effect on March 1, 2009, with extra weeks available to individuals who had an open claim on March 1, 2009, and were still unemployed.  EDB concluded on September 11, 2010 and was followed seamlessly by Pilot 15.
EI Pilot Project No. 15
Pilot Project No. 15 was based on the same parameters and included the same economic regions as Pilot Project No. 10, and allowed further testing through a period of economic recovery.  In addition, it tested the impact of a regional unemployment rate-based trigger, which removed some participating regions from the pilot when their regional unemployment rate fell below 8% for 12 consecutive months.  More specifically, the pilot ended on September 24, 2011 in St. John's (Newfoundland and Labrador); on March 24, 2012 in Chicoutimi-Jonquière (Quebec) and on June 23, 2012 in Sudbury (Ontario).  The pilot ran until September 15, 2012 and was allowed to sunset at that time.
Considerations
The EDB and subsequent Pilot 15 were introduced in different economic periods with different policy objective: the first one in a time of recession and the second one in a  time of recovery.  This could explain the broad assistance beyond the seasonal gappers that the evaluation rightfully points out for Pilot 15, but may also put the cost of the initiatives into perspective, as Pilot 15 was seen as a stimulus measure.
In addition, a number of EI pilots were in force during the EDB and Pilot 15 which were intended to change claimant's behavior both on and off claim.  These include the Best 14 Weeks, Working While on Claim, and NERE pilots.  While this report controls for all of these pilots, the changing parameters within each pilot complicates the analysis over time.
It is also important to remember other key differences between the EDB and Pilot 15.  Specifically, the EDB was available nationally and increased the maximum insurable weeks from 45 to 50 weeks. The report does reflect these differences and this is only pointed out here for further emphasis.
Finally, the inclusion of an unemployment based trigger in Pilot 15's design was a first and the Skills and Employment Branch is pleased that the evaluation finds that termination trigger was successful in terms of its timing and design.
Key conclusions
The Skills and Employment Branch welcomes the findings in the report and since EDB and Pilot 15 both were temporary measures with different policy objectives, no overall recommendations are made.
The evaluation points out that both initiatives were successful in terms of reducing the entitlement exhaustion rate.  However, this came at a cost as the increased use of benefits was observed among all claimants, not just among those who used additional weeks of benefits.  As discussed in the considerations section, the wide reach of the assistance was part of stimulus package in response to a recession.
The Branch also appreciates the lessons learned from the evaluation with regard to the testing and evaluation of the unemployment rate based trigger.
1. Introduction
1.1 Overview
This report presents the findings of the evaluation of the Extended Duration of Employment Insurance Regular Benefits  and Pilot Project Relating to Extended Benefits (Pilot 15). These are two successive Employment Insurance (EI) initiatives geared towards increasing EI entitlement for Canadians filing regular benefit claims, each with different policy objectives.
Budget 2009 introduced several stimulus measures designed to soften the effect of the economic downturn on Canadians. A number of measures were geared specifically towards workers who experienced job separations during that period and were expected to experience job market impacts due to the decrease in labour demand and tightening labour market conditions. One of those measures was the EDB. Following the downturn, Pilot Project No. 15 was introduced to test the impact of extending EI benefits during a period of economic recovery for seasonal claimants who regularly face income gaps after exhausting their EI claim.
2. Description and timeline of initiatives
2.1 Extended duration of employment insurance regular benefits
The EDB was introduced and implemented nationwide as a response to the 2008/2009 economic downturn.  Between May, 2008 and August, 2009, the overall Canadian unemployment rate increased from 6.3 to 8.7 percent.  It was expected that the average duration of unemployment would likewise increase.
The initiative had two policy objectives: 1) to stimulate spending; and 2) to reduce EI exhaustion rate.
More specifically, the rationale for the initiative as stated in the 2009 Budget plan was to respond to a need for additional support in uncertain times, and to:
"…provide all regular EI clients with the reassurance that they will have financial support for a longer period while they find new employment, should it be required.  It will also provide additional income support to unemployed Canadians who would otherwise have exhausted their benefits."
EDB received Royal Assent on March 12, 2009 and came into effect on March 1, 2009.  It extended EI entitlement by five weeks and increased the maximum allowable EI entitlement from 45 to 50 weeks.
The extended benefits applied retroactively to EI claims with benefit periods that did not end prior to March 1, 2009 (i.e. for claims established as early as March 9, 2008) to claims established up to September 11, 2010.  Depending on their insurable hours of employment and the unemployment rate in their regions of residence; some claimants received the additional benefit entitlement after exhausting their original entitlement and prior to finding employment.
2.2 Pilot Project no. 15
Pilot Project No.15 was a two-year re-introduction of Pilot Project No 10.  Pilot No.10 was established for the purpose of testing the costs and impact of extending the number of weeks of benefits in 21 economic regions of relatively high unemployment.  More specifically, it tested whether providing five additional weeks of benefits would reduce the number of seasonal workers facing a gap between the exhaustion of their EI benefits and the resumption of their seasonal employment income and whether there would be associated behavioral effects.
Pilot Project No.15 was introduced from September 12, 2010 to September 15, 2012 based on the same parameters and included in the same 21 EI economic regions (see Appendix A – Pilot Regions), as the previous Pilot Project No.10 to allow for further testing during a period of economic recovery as well as to assess the impact of a regional unemployment rate-based automatic termination trigger.  The automatic termination trigger provision excluded regions from the pilot if their unemployment rate was below 8% for 12 consecutive months.
The three excluded EI regions and the date of exclusion are as follows.
St. John's, excluded from Pilot 15 on September 24, 2011
Chicoutimi-Jonquiere, excluded from Pilot 15 on March 24, 2012
Sudbury, excluded from Pilot 15 on June 23, 2012
Pilot 15 terminated for the remaining 18 regions on September 15, 2012.
2.3 Evaluation approach
This evaluation report is primarily based on the technical study titled: Extended Duration of EI Regular Benefits: Evaluation Technical Study (ESDC, 2015).  A comprehensive discussion on the methodologies as well as detailed econometric results can be found in the technical study.  Also, for an overview of the methodology, see Appendix F – Data, Definitions and Methodology.
The econometric analysis used for this report takes into  account and controls for a number of temporary EI measures in effect during the  EDB and the Pilot 15 initiatives. These temporary EI measures included:
The Extension of EI Regular Benefits for Long-Tenured Workers (EEILTW) which provided, in addition to the EDB, further entitlement in the number of weeks of regular benefits to claimants who had not drawn on benefits extensively in the previous five years, a group of claimants referred as long-tenured workers (LTW).  The EEILTW provided up to 20 weeks of additional regular benefits for claims established between January 4, 2009, and September 11, 2010.
Calculating Benefit Rate Based on Claimant's 14 Highest Weeks of Insurable Earnings Pilot Projects (Pilot Projects Nos. 7, 11 and 16) which were implemented between October 30, 2005 and June 23, 2012. Under the Best 14 Weeks pilots, the average weekly earnings were determined by taking the average of the highest or best 14 weeks of insurable earnings that fell during the qualifying period. If a claimant accepted additional weeks of work beyond the 14 weeks at a lower salary, the level of EI benefits would remain the same.
Pilot Projects Providing Increased Access to Employment and Unemployment Benefits for New Entrants and Re-entrants (NERE) (Pilot 9 and 13) which were implemented between December 11, 2005 and December 4, 2010. NERE pilots tested the labour market impacts of decreasing the number of hours of insurable employment required for new entrants and re-entrants to the labour force to qualify for benefits. The NERE pilot reduced the EI entrance requirements for NEREs from 910 hours to 840 hours and encouraged the use of EI training benefits by marginal NEREs.
Four different working while on claim (WWC) pilot projects (Pilot Projects Nos. 8, 12, 17 and 18) were implemented between July 5, 2005 and March 9, 2013.  Pilot 8, 12 and 17 increased the maximum allowable earnings while on claim without a reduction to benefits from the greatest of $50 or 25% of the weekly benefit amount to the larger of $75 or 40% of the weekly benefit. Pilot 8 was implemented in 23 economic regions from December 11, 2005 to December 6, 2008, where Pilot 12 and 17 were implemented nationwide between December 7, 2008 and August 4, 2012. Under Pilot 18, claimants can keep 50 cents of their EI benefits for every dollar earned, up to 90% of the weekly insurable earnings. Pilot 18 was introduced on August 5, 2012 and concluded on August 1, 2015.
3. Findings
This section discusses the impacts and costs of EDB and Pilot 15 separately. The evaluation's findings are focused on the direct impacts and costs of these initiatives.  It does not pursue additional outcome analysis of claimants following their claim nor does it look at the macro-economic impact of the initiatives.
3.1 Extended duration of employment insurance regular benefits findings
3.1.1 Estimated EDB benefits paid
Evaluation analysis found that claimants, on average, responded to the additional entitlement by increasing the number of weeks of regular EI benefits that they used.  The total benefits paid associated to the EDB includes not just the direct spending of the additional entitlement weeks that were used, but also the benefits of increased use of regular benefit weeks by claimants.  Consequently, the total benefits paid are accounted for by two separate estimates, as presented in Table 1.
Table 1 : Extended duration of EI regular benefits analysis


Table description
Table 1 presents estimated benefits of the Extended Duration of EI Regular Benefits initiative.  The table comprises four columns and six rows. The first column (from the left to the right) lists the descriptive.  Estimated benefits paid are given per beneficiary (second row from the top), per claim (third row), annually (fourth row) and for the total (fifth row); Percentage calculated out of total additional benefits are provided in the sixth row. The second column of table 1 provides estimated benefits of the initiative due to additional entitlement and the third one the estimated benefits due to increased use of regular entitlement. Total estimated additional benefits are given in the fourth column. The fourth column is obtained by summing benefits due to additional entitlement and those due to increased use of regular entitlement.
Source: 10% sample of EI claims from the Status Vector file, restricted to completed pure regular claims filed during EDB period with non-zero benefit, excluding LTW claims beyond 50 weeks of entitlement.
The first estimate, presented in the column A of Table 1, is the amount due to additional entitlement obtained by only counting the additional weeks received by the claimants.  This estimate accurately reflects the additional weeks of benefits paid to claimants; however, it does not reflect the full benefits paid associated with the measure.  Notably, it assumes that the additional entitlement did not impact regular entitlement use among claimants who did not use any of the additional entitlement.
Column B of Table 1 presents the second type of amount paid, which is related to the estimated increased use of the regular entitlement.  Finally, Column C of Table 1 presents the total estimated benefits paid by this initiative, which is the summation of the aforementioned two different use of entitlement.
The amount spent in providing additional EDB weeks was found to be $1.4 billion with $1,517 per beneficiary. The estimated total additional amount associated with EDB is found to be $2.5 billion and 43% of which ($1 billion) is due to the estimated increased use of regular entitlement.
3.1.2 Additional entitlement impact on claimants' behaviour
Benefit usage
Table 2 presents EBD results on the use of additional benefit weeks.  During the EDB period, 34% of pure regular benefit claims used some of the additional weeks, and 76% of these used the entire five weeks.
Table 2: Extended duration of EI Regular Benefits additional week take-up rate


Table description
Table 2 provides an analysis of the take up rate of additional weeks during the Extended Duration of EI Regular Benefits initiative.  The first two columns (from the left to the right) present the number of all claims filed during the EDB period that were selected from the sample and the average number of weeks used.  Numbers of claims using 1 to 5 extra weeks are given in the third to the seventh column. The total number of claims using any extra weeks and the percentages calculated out of all claims filed during EBD period selected for the analysis are given in the eighth and ninth columns respectively.
Source: 10% sample of EI claims from the Status Vector file, restricted to completed pure regular claims filed during EDB period with non-zero benefit, excluding LTW claims.
Further analysis has shown that:
Claimants who are 55 years and older remained on claim longer
Gender differences in EDB take-up rates were minimal
EDB take-up was greatest in British Columbia, Ontario and the Atlantic provinces
The impact of a policy change on an individual’s action is referred to as a behavioural response.  A behavioural response due to a benefit extension can be captured by estimating the change in the usage of regular entitlement while controlling for other factors, not just by the usage of the additional 5 week entitlement.  Benefit usage can be influenced by the entitlement length as well as the economic conditions.  Since the EDB initiative was implemented during the recession, the evaluation can measure the change in benefit usage during the EDB period but cannot isolate the impact of the additional entitlement from the economic downturn.
Econometric analysis (ESDC, 2015) shows an increase of 1.6 weeks on average in the length of claims filed during the EDB period.  Furthermore, increased use of regular entitlement was observed among all claimants during the EDB period, not just among those who used additional weeks of benefits.
Based on previous studies on EI, the EDB can be expected to have affected claimants’ job search behavior and labour market outcomes through its effect on benefit use.  Krueger and Muller (2010) show that the generosity of EI benefits is inversely related to job search intensity.  Benefit use may increase when entitlement periods are extended, as claimants feel less pressure to secure re-employment.  At the same time, extensions to EI benefits may provide enhanced support for unemployed workers by allowing claimants to search more carefully for better reemployment, as suggested in Browning and Crossley (2009) and Bloemen and Stancanelli (2005), and consequently bring about improved quality of job match.  It was not possible to assess in this evaluation whether or not the additional benefit use helped employees realize a better job match resulting in greater productivity since no information (employment, income) was available on claimants’ post EDB experience.
Benefit exhaustion
To determine whether the EBD initiative provided adequate temporary income support to those looking for suitable employment, an analysis of entitlement exhaustion was conducted.  Econometric analysis (ESDC, 2015), controlling for several economic and demographic factors (see Table F.1 of Appendix F), found that the probability of entitlement exhaustion decreased during the EDB period.  The study showed that claims during the EDB pilot encountered on average a 5.3 percentage point lower likelihood of entitlement exhaustion rate.  These findings indicate that the 34.4% of claimants who used additional entitlement under EDB (Table 2) would have been more likely to exhaust their entitlement in the absence of extended week initiatives.
3.2 Pilot project relating to extended benefits (pilot project no. 15) findings
3.2.1 Estimated pilot 15 benefits paid
One of the main conclusions of the evaluation of Pilot Projects Nos. 6 and 10 was that their cost was fairly high in relation to their policy objectives, primarily because the benefits provided reached a larger population than the main population they were supposed to reach: seasonal workers. Pilot 15 total benefits paid are presented in Table 3.
Table 3: Pilot 15 benefits analysis


Table description
Table 3 presents estimated benefits paid of Pilot 15. The table comprises four columns and six rows. The first column (from the left to the right) lists the descriptive.  Estimated benefits are given per beneficiary (second row from the top), per claim (third row), annually (fourth row) and for the total (fifth row); Percentage calculated out of total additional benefits are provided in the sixth row.  The second column of table 3 provides estimated benefits paid due to additional entitlement and the third column the estimated benefits paid due to increased use of regular entitlement. Total estimated additional benefits are given in the fourth column. The fourth column is obtained by summing estimated benefits due to additional entitlement and those due to increased use of regular entitlement.
Source:  10% sample of EI claims from the Status Vector file, restricted to completed pure regular claims filed during Pilot 15 period with non-zero benefit, excluding claims filed in the three regions impacted by the trigger provision.
The estimated benefits paid due to additional entitlement for Pilot 15 was $326 million resulting in an average benefit of $1,432 per beneficiary. The benefits paid due to estimated increased use of entitlement during Pilot 15 was 42% ($233 million) of the total $558 million benefits of Pilot 15.  Therefore, for every dollar spent on providing additional benefits during Pilot 15, there was on average an additional 42 cents spent on providing benefits for regular entitlement.
The analysis on seasonal claims suggests that $17.8 million additional benefit was paid to the seasonal income gappers during Pilot 15, which is 3.2% of Pilot 15 total benefits paid.
3.2.2 Impact of additional entitlement on claimants' behaviour, in particular on seasonal claimants
Similarly to the analysis presented for EDB, the impact of Pilot 15 on the benefit usage is discussed.  The descriptive analysis is presented for all claims in Pilot 15 regions and for claims for seasonal income gappers.  Results from econometric analysis after controlling for economic and demographic factors are provided as well.
Benefits usage – All claims in pilot 15 regions
Table 4 presents Pilot 15 results on the use of additional weeks.  During the Pilot period, 22,627 claims representing 29.6% of pure regular benefit claims from the pilot regions used some of the additional weeks, and 66% of these used the entire five weeks.
Table 4: Pilot 15 additional week take-up rate


Table description
Table 4 provides an analysis of the take up rate of additional weeks during the Pilot 15 period.  The first two columns (from left to right) present the number of all selected claims filed during the Pilot 15 period and the average number of weeks used. Numbers of claims using 1 to 5 extra weeks are provided in the third to the seventh column. The total number of claims using any extra weeks and the percentages out of all claims filed during Pilot 15 period selected for the analysis are given in the eighth and ninth columns respectively.
Source: 10% sample of EI claims from the Status Vector file, restricted to completed pure regular claims filed during Pilot 15 period with non-zero benefit, excluding claims filed in the three regions impacted by the trigger provision.
Further analysis has shown that:
Claimants who are 55 years and older remained on claim longer
Pilot 15 take-up rates were higher among female claimants
Econometric analysis (ESDC, 2015) shows that  claimants residing in the pilot regions during Pilot 15 period remained on  claim 1 week longer on average.
Pilot 15 decreased a claimant's likelihood of exhausting EI benefits by 6.4 percentage points on  average. These findings indicate that  the 29.6% of claimants who used additional entitlement under Pilot 15 (Table 4) would have been more likely to exhaust their entitlement in the absence of extended week initiatives.
Benefits usage – Seasonal income gappers
Since the objective of Pilot Project No. 15 was targeted to  seasonal gappers, an analysis focussing on this subset of EI claims was  conducted.  Table 5 presents key  characteristics of seasonal gappers, non-gappers and claimants in the  pilot regions during the Pilot 15 period, the findings are summarized below.
The proportion of female claimants was higher among the seasonal gappers than the non-gappers.
Seasonal gappers are found to be older than non-gappers. Claimants who were 55 years and older represent 42.6% of the seasonal gappers compared to 30.5% of the seasonal non-gappers in pilot regions.
It is observed that 51% of the seasonal gappers were from Quebec region while 42.5% of non-gappers were from this region. 
It is found that seasonal gappers had significantly a lesser amount of insured hours and earnings than the non-gappers. As a result, seasonal gappers had a lower benefit rate and fewer weeks of entitlement       than the non-gappers.
Notably, seasonal gappers remained on claim longer than the non-gappers despite having fewer entitlement weeks since they all used their entire entitlements and are entitlement exhaustees.
Table 5: Profile of seasonal claimants and gappers in the pilot 15 regions


Table description
Table 5 presents the distribution of seasonal claims from non-gappers and gappers per individual characteristics and some descriptive of these claims. The table comprises four columns. The first column (from the left to the right) provides the list of individual characteristics and claim  descriptive retained for analysis. The distributions of seasonal claims from non-gappers, from gappers and for all seasonal claims are given in the second, third and fourth column respectively.
* Significant difference between seasonal gappers and non-gappers.
Source: 10% sample of EI claims from the Status Vector file, restricted to completed pure regular claims filed during Pilot 15 period with non-zero benefit, excluding claims filed in the three regions impacted by the trigger provision; and those filed in Yukon, Nunavut, and the Northwest Territories.
Table 6 presents the proportion of seasonal claims and gappers, and average seasonal gap length (see the Definitions section in Appendix F) in pilot regions during the Pilot 15 period.  During Pilot 15, 1.4% of the claims from the pilot regions were from seasonal gappers.They experienced an average seasonal gap length of 5.7 weeks.
Table 6: Claim profile


Table description
Table 6 provides a claim profile. The number of all seasonal claims, all claims from gappers, and claims from seasonal gappers are presented along with percentages calculated out of all claims filed during the Pilot 15 selected for the analysis. The percentage of claims from seasonal gappers calculated out of all seasonal claims and the average seasonal gap length are given as well.
Source: 10% sample of EI claims from the Status Vector file, restricted to completed pure regular claims filed during Pilot 15 period with non-zero benefit, excluding claims filed in Yukon, Nunavut, and the Northwest Territories.
Table 7 illustrates that 27.6%  of the seasonal claims from the pilot regions during Pilot 15 used at least one  additional week of benefit.  This  percentage is similar to what was observed among all claimants from the Pilot  15 regions (29.6%).
In addition, Table 7 shows that 12.7% of seasonal claimants with additional weeks of benefits were gappers.  In the absence of Pilot Projet No. 15, the proportion of gappers among seasonal claimants with additional weeks of benefits would have been 24.1%.
Thus, Pilot Projet No. 15 has reduced the number of seasonal gappers by 11.4 percentage points.
Table 7: Seasonal beneficiaries and gappers in pilot regions during Pilot 15


Table description
The columns of table 7 (from the left to the right) present the number of seasonal claims, the additional week take-up rate for seasonal claims, percentages of observed gappers and potential gappers among seasonal beneficiaries, and the percentage points reduction in the number of gappers as a result of Pilot 15. Percentage points reported for claimants who are not gappers anymore are obtained by subtracting the percentage of observed gappers among seasonal beneficiaries (third column) from the percentage of claimants who would have been gappers (fourth column).
Source: 10% sample of EI claims from the Status Vector file, restricted to completed pure regular claims with non-zero benefit filed during Pilot 15 period, excluding claims filed in the three regions impacted by the trigger provision; and those filed in Yukon, Nunavut, and the Northwest Territories.
Controlling for economic and demographic factors
Econometric analysis (ESDC, 2015) suggests that on average, the probability of income gap among the seasonal claims in pilot regions decreased by 3.3 percentage points due to Pilot 15 and that seasonal income gappers, who filed their claims from the pilot regions during the Pilot 15 period, had 2.2 weeks shorter income gap length on average. However, the claims associated with seasonal gappers during the Pilot 15 period represented only 4.6% of claimants that used extra weeks.
Accordingly, despite being broadly targeted, evaluation findings suggest that Pilot 15 was successful in reducing the incidence of income gaps among the seasonal claimants as well as shortening their income gap periods.
3.2.3 Impact of termination trigger in pilot 15
Another feature that distinguishes Pilot 15 from EDB is the inclusion of an unemployment-based automatic termination trigger by which a region was to be excluded from the pilot when its unemployment rate was below 8% for 12 consecutive months.
Associations between the timing of termination trigger and the claim outcome measures of interest were studied to explore the impact of termination trigger on claimants' behaviour (ESDC, 2015).  The outcomes of claims that began just few weeks before the trigger are compared to outcomes of claims that began just a few weeks after the trigger by looking at the trigger-affected regions only.  A regression discontinuity analysis found that the termination trigger reduced the claim length by 5.3 weeks.  On the contrary, the timing of termination trigger does not have any significant effect on the entitlement exhaustion rate and regular entitlement usage rate.  These findings suggest that the termination trigger was successful in terms of its timing and design.
4. Conclusions
The first objective of EDB was to provide extended financial support to EI claimants as a spending stimulus during the uncertainty of the 2008/2009 economic downturn.  Analysis of the benefits paid for EDB suggests that the initiative provided an estimated stimulus of 2.5 billion dollars between March 9, 2008 and September 11, 2010.  During the initiative, increased use was observed among all claimants, not just among those who used additional weeks of benefits.  Furthermore, the EDB initiative was successful in meeting its second objective of reducing the entitlement exhaustion rate by 5.3 percentage points.
Pilot 15 was implemented to allow testing of the effects of providing five extra benefit weeks through a period of economic recovery and to help workers who regularly experience an income gap after exhausting their EI entitlement, before finding subsequent employment.  Pilot 15 was successful in reducing the incidence of income gaps among the seasonal claimants; however, these claimants only represent a small proportion of all claimants who were impacted by the pilot.  The termination trigger of Pilot 15 was successful in terms of its timing and design. In regions affected by the trigger, claimants' exhaustion of benefits and number of weeks used were similar before and after the trigger.  Therefore, the termination trigger is to be considered in the future if extending entitlement based on the unemployment rate.
Bibliography
Angrist , J. D., and Pischke, J. S. (2008). Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Eempiricist's Companion. Princeton University Press.
Bloemen, H. G., and Stancanelli, E. G. (2005). Financial wealth, consumption smoothing and income shocks arising from job loss. Economica, 72(287), 431-452.
Browning, M., and Crossley, T. F. (2009). Shocks, Stocks, and Socks: Smoothing Consumption Over a Temporary Income Loss. Journal of the European Economic Association, 7(6), 1169-1192.
Canada Employment Insurance Commission (CEIC). (2012). 2012 EI Monitoring and Assessment Report.
Canada Employment Insurance Commission (CEIC). (2013). 2012/13 EI Monitoring and Assessment Report.
ESDC. (2014a). Evaluation of the Extension of Employment Insurance Regular Benefits for Long-Tenured Workers.
ESDC. (2014b). Methodology Report on Termination Trigger for EI Pilot Project No. 15. (by Watcher, T. V.) (available upon request).
ESDC. (2015). Extended Duration of EI Regular Benefits: Evaluation Technical Study. (available upon request).
HRSDC. (2010). Evaluation of the Pilot Projects to Extend Employment Insurance Benefits by Five Weeks: 2004-2009. (available upon request).
HRSDC. (2011a). Literature Review for the Evaluation of Two Temporary Measures Extending the Duration of Employment Insurance Regular Benefits – Extension of EI Regular Benefits for Long-Tenured Workers and the Extended Duration of Regular EI Benefits. (by Leonard, P.) (available upon request).
HRSDC. (2011b). Methodology Report for the Intended Impacts of the Extended Duration of Employment Insurance Regular Benefits. (available upon request).
HRSDC. (2012a). Interaction Between Employment Insurance (EI) Measures: Considerations for the Evaluation of the Economic Action Plan (EAP) Measures. (available upon request).
HRSDC. (2012b). Methodology Report on the Behavioural Impacts of the Extended Duration of Employment Insurance Regular Benefits Initiative. (by Galdo, J.) (available upon request).
Imbens, G. W., and Lemieux, T. (2008). Regression Discontinuity Designs: A Guide to Practice. Journal of Econometrics, 142(2), 615-635.
Jacob, R. T., Zhu , P., Somers , M. A., and Bloom, H. (2012). A Practical Guide to Regression Discontinuity. MDRC.
Krueger, A. B. and Mueller, A. (2010). Job search and unemployment insurance: New evidence from time use data. Journal of Public Economics, 94 (3), 298-307.
Wooldridge, J. M. (2010). Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel data. MIT press.
Appendix A – Pilot regions
Table A. 1: EI Economic regions included in extended benefits pilots


Table description
Table A.1 provides a list of EI Economic regions included in extended benefits pilots per province and gives the claims period for each pilot project. The table comprises four columns. Provinces are enumerated in the first column (from the left to the right); economic regions included in Pilot Project No 6 are given in the second column for each of the provinces listed in the first column. For Pilot Project No10 and No15, economic regions are given in the third and fourth columns respectively. Cells are left blank if no economic region, for an identified province, was included in a Pilot Project.
* Pilot Project No. 15 ceased to apply in: St. John's on September 24, 2011; Chicoutimi-Jonquière on March 24, 2012; and Sudbury on June 23, 2012. Claims filed in these regions after these dates have non-pilot entitlements.
Appendix B – Weeks of entitlement by regional rate of unemployment for non-pilot regions and no-extension period
Table B.1: Entitlement weeks for non-pilot regions and the no-extension period


Table description
Table B.1 gives the entitlement weeks in non-pilot regions and for the no-extension period per range of hours of insurable employment and regional rate of unemployment. The table has 13 columns. The first column lists the range of hours of insurable employment starting from 420-454 hours to 1820 and above. The second to the thirteenth column give the range of regional rate of unemployment starting from 6% and under to more than 16%. Entitlement weeks vary from 14 to 45 weeks and increase with the number of insured hours and with the rate of unemployment. Cells are left blank if no entitlement week is available for a combination of a range of hours of insurable employment and an unemployment rate.
Appendix C – Weeks of entitlement by regional rate of unemployment for pilot regions
Table C.1: Entitlement weeks for pilot regions


Table description
Table C.1 presents entitlement weeks in pilot regions per range of hours of insurable employment and regional rate of unemployment. The table has 13 columns. The first column lists the range of hours of insurable employment starting from 420-454 hours to 1820 and above. The second to the thirteenth column give the range of regional rate of unemployment starting from 6% and under to more than 16%. Entitlement weeks vary from 19 to 45 weeks and increase with the number of insured hours and with the rate of unemployment. Cells are left blank if no entitlement week is available for a combination of a range of hours of insurable employment and an unemployment rate.
Appendix D - Weeks of entitlement by regional rate of unemployment for EDB period
Table D.1: Entitlement weeks for the extended duration of EI regular benefit period


Table description
Table D.1 presents entitlement weeks during the Extended Duration of EI Regular Benefit Period per range of hours of insurable employment and regional rate of unemployment. The table has 13 columns. The first column lists the range of hours of insurable employment starting from 420-454 hours to 1820 and above. The second to the thirteenth column give the range of regional rate of unemployment starting from 6% and under to more than 16%. Entitlement weeks vary from 19 to 50 weeks and increase with the number of insured hours and with the rate of unemployment. Cells are left blank if no entitlement week is available for a combination of a range of hours of insurable employment and an unemployment rate.
Appendix E – Evaluation matrix
Table E.1 Evaluation matrix (in text for web version)
EDB evaluation questions
Need for the initiative
Q1. What are the factors underlying the introduction of additional weeks of EI benefits?
Lines of evidence
Literature review
Q2. Was there a need for the additional weeks of benefit entitlement?
Lines of evidence
Literature review
Econometric studies
Achievement of expected outcomes
Q3. What was the  usage of the 5 additional weeks of benefits?
Lines of evidence
Descriptive analysis
Econometric studies
Q4. What impact  does this initiative have on the exhaustion of benefits?
Lines of evidence
Descriptive analysis
Econometric studies
Q5. Do any  specific groups need more help than others? Do groups who require additional help receiving it?
Lines of evidence
Descriptive analysis
Q6. What are the  economic costs of the measure?
Lines of evidence
Econometric studies
Cost study
Pilot 15 evaluation questions
Need for the initiative
Q7. What is the  proportion of EI claimants who are seasonal workers and within these how many experience income gaps?
Lines of evidence
Descriptive analysis
Achievement of expected outcomes
Q8. What is the  take-up rate for the additional weeks of benefits received under the Pilot?
          Lines of evidence
Descriptive analysis
Q9. What impact  do the extended weeks have on the length of claims and the exhaustion of  benefits?
Lines of evidence
Econometric studies
Q10. What impact  does Pilot Project 15 have on the incidence and length of income gap periods?
Lines of evidence
Descriptive analysis
Econometric studies
Cost study
Q11. What is the  impact of the regional unemployment rate-based, automatic termination trigger  on claimant behaviour?
Lines of evidence
Descriptive analysis
Econometric studies
Demonstration of efficiency and economy
Q12. What were  the costs of the measure and were they in-line with initial expectations?
Lines of evidence
Econometric studies
Cost study
Q13. How much of  the benefits paid were to seasonal income gappers?
Lines of evidence
Descriptive analysis
Appendix F – Data, definitions and methodology
F.1 Lines of evidence
A literature review was conducted to address questions related to the rationale of the EDB and Extension of EI Regular Benefits for Long-Tenured Workers (LTW) initiatives.  The full list of questions regarding EDB and Pilot 15 evaluation can be found in Appendix E – Evaluation Matrix.
This evaluation report is primarily based on the technical study "Extended Duration of EI Regular Benefits: Evaluation Study 2014", which is a descriptive and econometric study of a sample of completed EI claims to which only regular benefits were paid.
Three previous technical updates to ESDC, 2015 were also submitted to support the annual EI Monitoring and Assessment Reports (MARs), which only examined the impact of EDB using EI administrative data.  But due to reporting and initiative, timelines were limited to claims completed at the time.
F.2 Data source and restrictions
The administrative data used are from the Status Vector (SV) file, a derivative of the department's Benefits and Overpayments file which is used to administer EI claims, and the Record of Employment (ROE).
The SV includes information on claim applications, bi-weekly claimant reports, and EI Commission claim and benefits decisions.  The data used for this analysis is based on a 10 percent sample of completed EI claims starting from June 5, 2005 to March 9, 2013. Claims receiving regular benefits alone were retained in the sample.  Claims deemed to be LTW are excluded from the data sample when they received a larger entitlement than they would have under the EDB benefit schedule.   In addition, due to the retroactive nature of the EDB initiative, claimants who initiated a claim between March 9, 2008 and November 16, 2008 and who could have experienced a gap in their benefit periods were excluded from the sample (30% of claims during EDB time period).
The ROE is completed by an employer when an employee stops working for that employer and contains information on the employment history of an individual.  Only ROEs that were completed within 52 weeks after the end of the current claim have been considered.
F.3 Definitions
The study of extended week initiatives requires the use of terms and concepts that are not immediately obvious. The following are some of the key terminologies that are used throughout the report.
Profile
Pure regular claims: A claim where only regular benefits were paid.  Other special benefits available through EI at the time include maternity, parental, sickness, and compassionate care leave benefits. Any claims with special benefits received are excluded from the sample.
First-time claims: No regular claims in the 5 year prior to the current claim.
Occasional claims: One or two regular claims in the 5 year prior to the current claim.
Frequent claims: Three or more regular claims in the 5 year prior to the current claim.
Seasonal claims: A subset of frequent claims i.e. those with 3 or more regular claims in the 5 years prior to current claim, all starting within the same eight week calendar period as the current claim.
Entitlement exhaustees: Claims for which all weeks of regular entitlements are paid.
Benefit period exhaustees: Claims that reach the final week of the benefit period before all regular benefits are paid.
Gappers: Entitlement exhaustees who experienced an income gap longer than 1 week between the exhaustion of their regular claim and their first day of work following 52 weeks of the current claim.  An individual exhausting his or her claim on a Friday and starting a new job on the following Monday is considered to have a one week gap; this is due to the calculation of the week code variable in the administrative database.  In order to avoid erroneously assuming these individuals experienced an income gap, only those claimants with an income gap longer than one week were considered to be gappers.  Note that this study considers only seasonal gappers for impact analysis; accordingly gappers were extracted only to identify seasonal gappers.
Seasonal gappers: Gappers who had 3 or more regular claims in the 5 years prior to current claim, all starting at the same eight week calendar period as the current claim.  The definitions of gapper and seasonal gapper are explained in Figure F2.
Figure F2: Gappers' definition


Image description
Figure 2 is a chart used to provide a definition of seasonal gappers (at the bottom of the chart). EI claims (at the top of the chart) are subdivided into pure regular claims and other EI claims. Pure regular claims are selected and subdivided into claims for which EI benefits were not exhausted and claims for which the benefits were exhausted. Only claims with exhausted benefits are relevant to identify gappers. These claims are classified into claims with an income gap of 1 week, claims with an income gap longer than 1 week within 52 weeks following the current claim and claims with an income gap surpasses 52 weeks following the current claim. Claims with an income gap longer than 1 week within 52 weeks following the current claim are gappers. Seasonnal gappers are gappers with 3 or more regular claims in the 5 years prior to current claim, all starting at the same eight week calendar period as the current claim.
Outcome
Additional weeks take-up rate: Percentage of pure regular benefit  claimants who had used some of the extra weeks.
Benefit use: Number of weeks of non-zero regular EI benefits paid to a claimant.
Entitlement exhaustion rate:  Percentage of pure regular benefit claims  for which all weeks of regular entitlements are paid.
Benefit period exhaustion rate:  Percentage of pure regular benefit claims  for which the benefit period ends before the regular weeks of entitlement are  paid.
Rate of occurrence of seasonal gap: Percentage of seasonal gappers among the  seasonal claims.
Regular entitlement usage rate: This rate refers to the percentage of weeks  of regular EI benefits paid over the number of weeks of regular entitlement  (without benefit extension) capped at 100%.   Technically, this percentage can be more than 100% for a number of  claimants who collected extra weeks under any initiative that provides extended  weeks of benefits.  If no extended  benefit weeks would have been available, these claimants would have collected  all of their regular entitlement weeks and their regular entitlement usage would  have been 100%.  This variable is a  measure of relative usage of benefit weeks, where a higher rate indicates  greater usage of regular entitlement and a lower rate indicates more  entitlement than required.
Gap length: Number of weeks of income gap experienced by  gappers.
Additional entitlement cost:This cost is obtained by only counting the additional weeks received by the claimants.   These cost estimates accurately reflects the costs of extended weeks of  benefits paid to claimants; however, it does not reflect all costs of the  measure.
Cost related to the extended use of the regular entitlement: This  estimate incorporates a cost related to the extended use of the regular  entitlement into the calculations.  The  change in the number of benefit weeks used accounts for several labour market factors  that influence the number of benefit weeks a person receives.  This estimate reflects the cost related to  the number of benefit weeks that are directly attributable to the  implementation of the extended benefit initiatives.
F.4 Methodology
Groups of claims were selected prior to, during and after the EDB period from regions included in the extended weeks pilots (pilot regions) and those that were not (non-pilot regions). To assess the impact of the initiatives, the sequence of events is divided into four different time periods in order to control for the large changes in the economic environment.  Table F.1 presents the sequence of events for these two groups.
Table F.1: Sequence of pilot projects and EI initiative related to 5 week extensions




Table description
Table F.1 is divided into two sections. The first section lists the start and end date of the initiative periods for Pilot 6, Pilot 10, Pilot 10 and EDB Retroactivity, EDB, Pilot 15 and the no-extension period. The EDB retroactive start date was March 9th, 2008 and the end date was February 28th, 2009. The Pilot 15 start date was September 12, 2010 and the end date was September 15, 2012.
The second section of Table 1 includes the start and end dates of the analysis period as well as a breakdown in the final two rows as to whether the Pilot region and non-pilot regions experienced extended entitlement or normal entitlement. For the EDB analysis period, the start date was November 16, 2008 and the end date was September 11, 2010. Both the pilot and non-pilot regions had extended entitlement. For the Pilot 15 analysis period, the start date was September 12, 2010 and the end date was September 15, 2012. The pilot region had extended entitlement and the non-pilot region had normal entitlement.
Descriptive results on EI benefit weeks and the proportion of the extra entitlements used are obtained by claim and claimant characteristics.  A linear model is adopted to analyze benefit duration changes and a logit model is used for probability of exhaustions (ESDC, 2015). The following table lists the covariates in the regression model.
Table F. 2: Socio-economic covariates


Table description
Table F.2 enumerates the groups of socio-economic covariates used in the economic analysis along with the characteristics included. The groups are listed in the first column (from left to the right) and the associated characteristics are given the second column.
Difference-in-difference regression methods (Wooldridge, 2010) are applied to measure the impact of the extended week initiatives. Difference-in-difference regression methods are applied over the four periods (Pilot 6 and 10, EDB, Pilot 15 and No-extension) to evaluate the impact of the extended week initiatives. The method compares the average change in EI outcomes in pilot regions with non-pilot regions before and after the policy change. In addition, a regression discontinuity design (Imbens and Lemieux, 2008) has been applied to evaluate the impact of the termination trigger in Pilot 15.  A comprehensive discussion on these methodologies as well as detailed econometric results can be found in the study titled Extended Duration of EI Regular Benefits: Evaluation Technical Study (ESDC, 2015).
