Executive Summary
Evaluation Purpose, Scope and Design
The purpose of the evaluation was to assess the relevance and performance of the First Nations Health Branch Communicable Disease Control and Management Programs (CDCM) for the period of April 2008 to March 2014. The evaluation fulfills the requirement of the Financial Administration Act (for Grants & Contributions) and the Treasury Board of Canada’s Policy on Evaluation (2009), as per Health Canada’s Five-Year Departmental Evaluation Plan.
Evaluation Purpose, Scope and Design
The evaluation assessed the relevance and performance (effectiveness, economy and efficiency) of the CDCM programs. Evaluation findings will support decision making for policy and program improvements.
The CDCM evaluation includes all the First Nations and Inuit Health Branch (FNIHB) CDCM programs and services as defined by the renewed 2011 Authorities (i.e., Immunization, Tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS and Communicable Disease Emergencies including Infection Prevention and Control). For the five years ending March 31, 2013, expenditures for the CDCM programs totalled $139.2 million, including $72.6 million in O&M and $66.6 million in contributions.
The methodologies used in the evaluation included an extensive document and administrative data review, literature review, 41 key interviews with program staff, an online survey with 105 community health representatives and a telephone survey of 15 regional program coordinators. Limitations of the evaluation, specifically those related to the reliability of surveillance data, were mitigated with various lines of evidence and the triangulation of data collected through various sources.
Program Description
The First Nations and Inuit Health Branch (FNIHB) supports the delivery of public health and health promotion services to on-reserve First Nations communities and one Inuit region (Nunatsiavut). The CDCM programs fund, through contribution agreements, initiatives that address immunization, including Vaccine Preventable Diseases (VPD), Blood Borne Diseases and Sexually Transmitted Infections (BBSTIs) focuses mainly on HIV/AIDS, respiratory infections focusing mainly on tuberculosis (TB), and the Communicable Disease Emergencies (CDE) initiative (e.g., pandemic influenza). CDCM also includes the Infection Prevention Control (IPC) Unit initiative (added in 2011/12).
Specific activities include public health measures for identification of risks (e.g., surveillance, reporting); prevention, treatment and control of cases and outbreaks of communicable diseases (e.g. immunization, screening, directly observed therapy); promotion of public education and awareness to encourage healthy practices; and strengthening community capacity (e.g., pandemic plans) to respond to and manage communicable diseases.
Evaluation Key Findings, Conclusions and Recommendations
KEY FINDINGS — RELEVANCE
Continued Need for the Program
Communicable Disease Control (including immunization and pandemic planning) is one of the mandatory programs designed to meet legislated standards such as provincial and territorial public health legislation and health acts that ensures public health and safety. The continuing need for the CDCM program activities is also attributed to the disparities in health outcomes experienced by First Nations living on-reserve in comparison to the general population, and an ongoing need for communicable disease emergency preparedness. The flexible design of the CDCM programs is largely responsive to the varied needs of communities, however, challenges still exist for both regional partners and individual communities to address competing health priorities and the prevalence of other contributing factors such as chronic health conditions and variations in community capacity and ability to plan and manage CDCM programs.
Alignment with Government Priorities
The CDCM objectives and priorities align with the Government of Canada and departmental current priorities and strategic outcomes by increasing access to health care and addressing the health status inequalities affecting First Nations and Inuit communities..
Alignment with Federal Roles and Responsibilities
The CDCM activities align with federal government jurisdictional, mandated and/or legislated roles and responsibilities through fulfilling various policies and authorities enabling the provision of health services for First Nations and Inuit.
KEY FINDINGS — PERFORMANCE
Achievement of Expected Outcomes (Effectiveness)
Immediate Outcomes
CDCM programs have made progress in improving public awareness and knowledge of communicable diseases. Alignment of regional initiatives allowed leveraging with provincial activities and resources. However, the reach and impact of such activities was uneven across the regions and communities and constrained by factors such as competing health priorities with limited human and financial resources.
Overall, most community health staff were satisfied with training, information, data and support provided to build knowledge and skills. Although training opportunities were provided, access varied considerably across regions and many regions were reliant on provincial activities. Investment in community health staff was perceived to be the most important factor contributing to the overall success and continuity of the CDCM programming.
FNIHB’s access to surveillance data on health outcomes has improved and was utilized to varying degrees to support policy development and program planning.  However, differences in key data sources as well as the quality and reliability of surveillance data across programs and regions constrains the utility of the information.
Significant progress has been made in terms of building collaboration and partnerships at the national, regional and community levels to share information and achieve integrated service delivery.  However, engagement and collaboration at the community level was more challenging due to staff turnover in some communities, changes in leadership, competing community priorities, and the political environment.
Intermediate Outcomes
CDCM programs contributed to increased uptake of communicable disease prevention and control measures by implementing various prevention and disease control strategies that enabled increased staff knowledge and skills for improved health care delivery within First Nations communities.
There are some indications that community capacity to manage CDCM programs has begun to increase, however, there are challenges at the community level including governance, accountability and human resource capacity.  Key informants indicated that they perceived community capacity building was critical for ensuring successful future transfer of communicable disease control and management to communities.
Long-term Outcomes
Although it was difficult to measure trends in incidence and prevalence rates, and to assess CDCM contributions to those changes, preliminary data indicated that the incidence of communicable diseases remained fairly stable in most regions and was reduced in some other regions over the period covered under this evaluation.
Demonstration of Economy and Efficiency
A review of the literature demonstrates the inherent economic benefit of programs designed to prevent communicable diseases. FNIHB introduced structural and other program changes that were perceived to have increased efficiency of program operations and introduced more strategic and coordinated approaches in the design and implementation of CDCM programming.
Appropriate Performance Measurement
While access to surveillance information has improved and was utilized to varying degrees to support policy development and program planning, further improvements are needed to increase the usefulness of the surveillance data for ongoing program monitoring, making policy and program decisions and setting priorities.
CONCLUSIONS
The CDCM program continues to fulfill the department’s obligation to delivery health services and meet the continued need to address health disparities.
The evaluation demonstrates that there is a continued need for CDCM program activities due to ongoing health disparities among First Nations related to communicable diseases. The activities within the CDCM program are priorities of the federal government including increasing access to health care and addressing the health status inequalities of First Nations.
While the increased program flexibility and more targeted approach is believed to be more effective in reacting to communicable disease issues, the absence of comparable and reliable information and ongoing surveillance of First Nations health outcomes makes it very challenging to assess the responsiveness to the needs of communities over time.
Although it was difficult to measure trends in incidence and prevalence rates and to assess CDCM contributions to those changes, preliminary data indicated that the incidence of communicable diseases remained fairly stable in most regions and was reduced in some other regions over the period covered under this evaluation.
The CDCM is making progress in addressing the health effects of communicable diseases as evidenced by continued investments in community health resources, ongoing training and collaborative efforts between regional offices and the provinces, and efforts focused on improving community capacity to manage CDCM programs in terms of overall governance, accountability and human resource capacity.
Further, significant progress has been made in terms of building collaboration and partnerships at the national, regional and community levels to share information and achieve integrated service delivery leading to increased uptake of various prevention and disease control strategies and measures.
Although FNIHB’s access to surveillance data on health outcomes has improved and was utilized to varying degrees to support policy development and program planning, the complexity of surveillance data remains a challenge given differences in key surveillance data sources. The access to quality surveillance data and its reliability across programs and regions further constrains the utility of the information.
Recommendations
Recommendation #1
Continue efforts in building community capacity by  ensuring consistency in training and support for community health staff.
Development of community capacity to manage CDCM programs includes various supports which help communities to identify community needs, plan and organize services (including the short and long-term planning of financial and human resources), and maintain and/or improve the quality of services through relevant training for staff and the implementation of evidence-based policy, standards, guidelines, etc. The evaluation found that developing capacity of the community health staff and communities overall is crucial to success and continuity of CDCM programming. While some communities had high level of capacity for planning and management of the CDCM programming, other continued to face challenges with competing priorities and limited human resource capacity, and opportunities to engage with FNHIB regional offices.
Recommendation #2
Strengthen program ability to address diverse ongoing as well as emerging community needs related to communicable diseases.
Program flexibility and targeted programming and investment were considered to be successful in meeting wide range of needs and priorities of communities across and within FNIHB regions. However, challenges remain with respect to Program’s ability to monitor and respond to wide range of needs and factors affecting communicable diseases such as further increasing collaboration and engagement with partners, integration and alignment of programming with other service providers and ensuring program resources are allocated appropriately based on priorities and need within communities.
Recommendation #3
Building on past successes, continue efforts to collect, access and use reliable surveillance data.
Numerous data limitations including issues with quality and reliability, timeliness and the ability to share data among partners and stakeholders remain a significant challenge for the Program and its efforts to increase community capacity to manage CDCM programs. Improved collection, reporting and overall access to surveillance data and health outcomes for First Nations living on-reserve will assist programs to continue to identify needs, planning and managing of programs, develop targeted responses and produce evidence based policies.
Management Response and Action Plan
2.1 Program Profile
The First Nations and Inuit Health Branch (FNIHB) supports the delivery of public health and health promotion services to First Nations on-reserve and and one Inuit region (Nunatsiavut).
The CDCM Program was not administered in the same manner for Inuit as it was for First Nations. First Nations communities receive funds through contribution agreements signed with the First Nations and Inuit Health Branch (FNIHB). For Inuit living in Inuit communities (with the exception of those in Nunatsiavut, Labrador and Nunavik, Quebec), the program is managed directly by the Territorial governments. As a result, when referring to the CDCM in this document, the information largely refers to First Nations and not Inuit, unless specifically mentioned.
CDCM service delivery is intended to occur at the community level through community governance structures, consistent with the principles of health transfer and self-government. Although First Nations communities are responsible for the delivery of CDCM and client service results, the territorial governments of the Northwest Territories and Nunavut are responsible for CDCM service delivery for the First Nations and Inuit living in those territories. Within the CDCM Program, contribution funding is allocated from the FNIHB Regional Office to communities/tribal groups/First Nations.
In Inuit Nunangat (Inuit homeland), which includes all four Inuit regions: Inuvialuit Settlement Region, Nunavut, Nunavik, and Nunatsiavut, programs are administered in a slightly different manner. The Governments of Nunavut and the Northwest Territories deliver their programs to all residents regardless of ethnicity. Health Canada’s Northern Region acts as a coordinating body between Health Canada and the territorial governments. The Nunavik Regional Board of Health and Social Services delivers the program to Inuit in Quebec only. The government of Nunatsiavut delivers the program directly to Inuit residing in that region. Nunavut’s program is administrated through three regional coordination centres located in Cambridge Bay, Rankin Inlet, and Iqaluit with service delivery variations between the centres.
FNIHB delivers CDCM programming to reduce the incidence, spread and human health effects of communicable diseases. CDCM programs focus on vaccine preventable diseases (VPD), immunization, blood borne and sexually transmitted infections (BBSTI including HIV/AIDS), tuberculosis (TB), and communicable disease emergencies (CDE) which includes the Infection Prevention and Control Initiative (IPC). CDCM programs consist of the following four programming areas:
The Vaccine Preventable Diseases (VPD) - Immunization Program aims to improve vaccine coverage rates for routine immunizations and reduce VPD incidence and outbreaks in on-reserve First Nations communities. Through the VPD and Immunization Program, FNIHB works with First Nations partners, provinces/territories and other federal departments/agencies, such as the Public Health Agency of Canada, to support culturally appropriate immunization programming, improve data collection mechanisms, and increase immunization coverage rates on reserves. FNIHB regions work closely with their provincial counterparts to align immunization programs with the goal of ensuring basic immunization services on-reserve are comparable to those delivered by the provincial government to the general population. 
The Communicable Disease Emergencies (CDE) Program (including IPC) works closely with partners such as other government departments, national and regional Aboriginal organizations and provinces to develop a comprehensive and coordinated response to public health emergencies in First Nations on-reserve communities. The CDE Program works closely with the Public Health Agency of Canada (lead organization for public health emergency planning in Canada) as well as Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada (AANDC). ANNDC, the lead organization for all hazards emergency planning in Aboriginal communities, is mandated to ensure the needs and considerations of First Nations communities are reflected in overall federal/provincial/territorial planning and responses to public health emergencies such as influenza pandemics. The CDE Program is also responsible for the development and implementation of Infection Prevention and Control (IPC) activities as outlined in the FNIHB IPC Action Plan. Further, the CDE program provides IPC expertise, guidance, and advice to national and regional staff within FNIHB.
The Blood Borne Diseases and Sexually Transmitted Infections (BBSTI) and HIV/AIDS Program focuses on prevention, education, awareness and community capacity (training) building, and facilitates access to quality diagnosis, care, treatment, and social support. Working closely with partners, FNIHB and the Assembly of First Nations are working towards the creation of a framework to guide and/or complement the delivery of Health Canada’s program components that address BBSTIs in First Nations on-reserve. Given that significant funding for this program originates from the Federal Initiative to Address HIV/AIDS in Canada, led by the Public Health Agency of Canada, the primary focus is on HIV/AIDS. However, work on other BBSTIs does occur at the national and regional level based on needs and priorities identified by communities and stakeholders.
The Tuberculosis (TB) Program works to assure that appropriate and effective TB prevention and control services are available to First Nations on-reserve and in one Inuit region (Nunatsiavut) by either providing services directly or funding communities, provinces and/or regional and First Nations health authorities to provide services. The program promotes access to equitable and culturally appropriate care, including timely diagnosis, treatment, follow-up care, health promotion and TB awareness activities.
2.2 Program Resources
For the five year period ending March 31, 2013, expenditures coded to the CDCM programs were disclosed as totalling $139.2 million, of which about $72.6 million was spent on operations and management, including salaries, and $66.6 million in contributions to communities.
2.3 Program Logic Model and Narrative
The long term expected outcome for the CDCM Programs is to reduce the incidence, spread and health effects of communicable diseases. To achieve this final outcome, CDCM activities focus on five major themes:
The provision of services, focusing on CDCM prevention (health promotion and disease prevention) and control measures (disease management/treatment). Pandemic plans can also be considered as a prevention and control measure. 
Capacity building through the training of staff and community health workers, and public education and awareness as well as community health planning and management support.
Stakeholder engagement and collaboration with provincial and territorial governments, First Nations, other federal organizations, and other stakeholders is critical given the complex and inter-jurisdictional nature of health care in Canada and the influence of multiple factors, such as social determinants of health, which are beyond the sole control of Health Canada.  
Data collection, research and surveillance, which informs the development and refinement of policies, standards, guidelines and frameworks, and supports service delivery.
Policy development and knowledge sharing involving the use ofsurveillance and evidence generated through relevant research and used to inform the delivery of communicable disease-related services on-reserve.
The intended reach for the Program is First Nations reserves, nurses and support workers, provincial governments, Regional Health Authorities, FNIHB regions, and the Public Health Agency of Canada.
In the short term, the outputs associated with these five themes were expected to increase workforce skills, knowledge and expertise in CDCM, increase public awareness and knowledge of prevention and control measures as well as communicable disease health effects, inform service delivery, and increase community and stakeholder engagement and collaboration in policy/program development and service delivery.  In the intermediate-term, it was expected that there will be increased use/uptake of CDCM prevention and control measures as well as increased community capacity to manage CDCM programs. In the long term, the CDCM programs were expected to contribute to reduced communicable disease incidence and prevalence rates.
The connection between these activity areas and the expected outcomes is depicted in the logic model (provided in Appendix 3). The evaluation assessed the degree to which the defined outcomes were being achieved over the evaluation timeframe.
2.4 Program Alignment
The activities of FNIHB contribute to Strategic Outcome #3 of Health Canada: First Nations and Inuit communities and individuals receive health services and benefits that are responsive to their needs so as to improve their health status. Towards that end, FNIHB delivers a suite of programs, services and strategies provided primarily to First Nations and Inuit individuals, families, and communities living on-reserve or in some Inuit communities. CDCM is an activity of Public Health and Promotion, which forms part of the Primary Health Care activity.
3.0 Evaluation Description
3.1 Evaluation Scope, Approach and Design
The evaluation covered CDCM program activities for the period from April 2008 to March 2014. CDCM program activities are provided to First Nations living on-reserve, with some support provided to address TB in one Inuit region (Nunatsiavut).  The evaluation focused primarily on First Nations communities as FNIHB has very limited involvement in direct service provision to Inuit communities.
The evaluation addressed a series of evaluation questions aligned with the five core issues defined under the Treasury Board of Canada’s Policy on Evaluation (2009) including: the continued need for the program, alignment with government priorities, alignment with Federal roles and responsibilities, achievement of expected outcomes and demonstration of efficiency and economy. Specific evaluation questions addressed in this evaluation are presented in Appendix 4. A more detailed description of the evaluation methodology is provided in Appendix 4.
In summary, data for the evaluation was collected using various methods including: document and data reviews; interviews with a cross section of 41 key program staff including 10 from the national office, 24 regional staff members, two representatives of the Public Health Agency of Canada and five national program partners and experts; an online survey with 105 community representatives; a telephone survey of 15 FNIHB regional program coordinators; a literature review including a review of similar programs/initiatives operating in jurisdictions outside of Canada; and, a review of differences in models and practices across regions.  The use and triangulation of multiple lines of evidence was implemented to increase the reliability and credibility of the evaluation findings and conclusions.
The report is structured according to evaluation issues and questions (see Appendix 4 for a full list of evaluation questions). Key summaries of findings are provided for each evaluation question(s), followed by key findings (in bold) and detailed evidence.
For the ease of reporting survey and interview results, the following quantifiers are occasionally used in the report: Most, which refers to over 75% of participants who responded within the particular group; Majority, which refers to between 50% and 75% of  respondents; Nearly half, which refers to between 45% and 50% of respondents; Some, which refers to between 25% and 45% of respondents; and A few, which refers to less than 25% of, or between 1 and 3, respondents.
3.2 Limitations and Mitigation Strategies
Most evaluations face constraints that may have implications for the validity and reliability of evaluation findings and conclusions. The following table outlines the limitations encountered during the implementation of the selected methods for this evaluation. Also noted are the mitigation strategies put in place to ensure that the evaluation findings can be used with confidence to guide program planning and decision making.
