At a Glance: Departmental Evaluation Plan for Health Canada 2020-21 to 2024-25
Download in PDF format
(90 KB, 5 pages)
Published:
2020-09-29
The COVID-19 pandemic has had a significant impact on the  work of Health Canada (HC) as it is at the forefront of the Government of  Canada’s response. To be respectful of the need for branches to focus on the  response, many engagements scheduled to start in 2020-21 were put on hold. In  addition, the Office of Audit and Evaluation (OAE) mobilized staff to assist in  HC critical functions and to remain responsive to management requests for  advice or assistance. The present Departmental Evaluation Plan (DEP) reflects  the response of OAE to these circumstances, by developing a plan that ensures  that evaluation focuses its efforts and resources on emerging priorities.
This document presents the OAE Departmental Evaluation Plan  (DEP) for fiscal years 2020-21 to 2024-25 for HC. While not presented jointly,  OAE also prepared a Risk-Based Audit Plan (RBAP) in parallel to the DEP. Both  plans are updated annually through an extensive consultation process with each  branch in HC as well as a document review. The use of parallel processes  allowed OAE to fully utilize synergies between the audit and evaluation  functions and maximize their combined value.
The DEP is updated annually to  support the allocation of resources to a suite of evaluation projects over a  five-year period, and is focused on Health Canada information needs. The development of this plan complies with  requirements of the Treasury Board (TB)
Policy  on Results
(July 1, 2016). The projects contained within this plan were selected to  ensure compliance with legislation and policy, support information needs, and  consider risks in order to ensure the optimal use of resources.
The  2020-21 to 2024-25 DEP for HC reflects OAE’s commitment to implementing TB’s
Policy on Results (2016)
requirements.  The Departmental Results Framework (DRF), program inventory, and performance  information profile developed by HC have formed the basis for this plan.
Planning for Evaluation
Over the next five years, the OAE plans to conduct  28 evaluations that involve HC: 21 of which will be led by HC while the  remaining seven are horizontal evaluations led by other government departments  or agencies. A yearly breakdown is provided in
Table 1
.
Appendix A
outlines the direct program spending (DPS) by  branch for all scheduled evaluation for the next five years.
Page details
Report a problem on this page
Date modified:
2020-10-05