At a Glance: Departmental Evaluation Plan for Health Canada 2021-22 to 2025-26
Download in PDF format
(200 KB, 5 pages)
Published:
2021-06-28
The Office of Audit and Evaluation (OAE) Departmental Evaluation Plan for Health Canada describes the Program Evaluation Division's scheduled work for the five-year period from 2021-22 to 2025-26. The Plan was developed to meet Health Canada's commitments under the
Policy on Results
(2016), which requires that each department prepare a five-year plan that is updated annually.
The projects included in this Evaluation Plan were selected to ensure full coverage of all Grant and Contribution spending over $5 million annually over a five-year period, prior commitments in Treasury Board Submissions, the information needs of program management, and program risks, and optimal use of resources. The Departmental Results Framework (DRF), program inventory, and performance information profiles developed by Health Canada have formed the basis for this plan.
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to have a significant impact on the work of Health Canada (HC) as it remains at the forefront of the Government of Canada's response. To be respectful of the need for branches to focus on the response, and to respond to other oversight reviews such as those led by the Office of the Auditor General and the Standing Committee on Health, OAE reprioritized work and, as necessary and where possible, shifted the timing of planned evaluations.
The present Departmental Evaluation Plan (DEP) reflects the response of OAE to these circumstances, by developing a plan that ensures that OAE focuses its efforts and resources on emerging priorities while continuing to meet our reporting commitments under the
Financial Administration Act
(FAA).
Planning for Evaluation
Over the next  five years, the OAE plans to conduct 29 evaluations that involve Health Canada:  19 will focus exclusively on Health Canada activities and two evaluations will  examine the activities of both Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of  Canada (PHAC). The remaining eight projects are horizontal evaluations – three  of which are led by Health Canada and the remaining five projects are led by  other government departments or agencies. A yearly breakdown is provided in
Table 1
below.
Table 2
outlines the direct program spending (DPS) by core  responsibility for all scheduled evaluations for the next five years.
Page details
Report a problem on this page
Date modified:
2021-06-30