At a glance: Departmental Evaluation Plan for Health Canada 2023-24 to 2027-28
The OAE Departmental Evaluation Plan for Health Canada describes the Program Evaluation Division's (PED) scheduled work for the five-year period from 2023-24 to 2027-28. The Plan was developed to meet Health Canada's commitments under the
Policy on Results
(2016), which requires that each department prepare a five-year plan, updated annually.
The projects included in this Evaluation Plan were selected to ensure full coverage of all Grants and Contributions spending over $5 million annually over a five-year period, and that prior commitments in Treasury Board (TB) submissions were met, as well as addressing the information needs of program management, coverage of program risks, and optimal use of resources. The Departmental Results Framework, program inventory, and performance information profiles developed by Health Canada have formed the basis for this plan.
With COVID-19 no longer being considered a global health emergency, Health Canada's (HC) work has shifted focus to its ongoing program activities. As such, the present Departmental Evaluation Plan (DEP) ensures that the Office of Audit and Evaluation (OAE) continues to meet its reporting commitments under the
Financial Administration Act (FAA)
and any Treasury Board (TB) submission commitments, while also addressing key risks and senior management and program management information needs. Given the importance of the COVID-19 response, the impact of the pandemic on HC activities will continue to be assessed in most evaluations included in the DEP.
Planning for evaluation
Over the next five years, OAE plans to conduct 33 evaluations that involve Health Canada: 22 will focus exclusively on Health Canada activities, and one evaluation will examine the activities of both Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). The remaining ten projects are horizontal evaluations, three of which are led by Health Canada, and the remaining seven projects are led by other government departments or agencies. A yearly breakdown is provided in Table 1. Table 2 outlines the direct program spending (DPS) by core responsibility for all scheduled evaluations in the next five years.
Footnotes
Footnote 1
To obtain detailed estimates on program budgets, annual data for 2023-24 is presented. This financial data was extracted by the Chief Financial Officer Branch on April 3, 2023. As a result, these budget figures may not fully align with those contained in other corporate reporting documents such as the Departmental Plan, the Departmental Results Report, or the Three-Year Transfer Payment Program Plan.
Return to footnote
1
referrer
Page details
Report a problem on this page
Date modified:
2023-07-31