At a Glance: Departmental Evaluation Plan for Health Canada 2022-23 to 2026-27
The OAE Departmental Evaluation Plan for Health Canada describes the Program Evaluation Division’s (PED) scheduled work for the five-year period from 2022-23 to 2026-27. The Plan was developed to meet Health Canada’s commitments under the
Policy on Results
(2016) which requires that each department prepare a five-year plan, updated annually.
The projects included in this Evaluation Plan were selected to ensure full coverage of all Grant and Contribution spending over $5 million annually over a five-year period, and that prior commitments in Treasury Board (TB) Submissions were met, as well as addressing the information needs of program management, coverage of program risks, and optimal use of resources. The Departmental Results Framework, program inventory, and performance information profiles developed by Health Canada have formed the basis for this plan.
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to have a significant impact on the work of Health Canada (HC) as it remains at the forefront of the Government of Canada’s response. The present Departmental Evaluation Plan (DEP) reflects the response of the Office of Audit and Evaluation (OAE) to these circumstances, as it is a plan that ensures that OAE focuses its efforts and resources on emerging priorities while continuing to meet our reporting commitments under the
Financial Administration Act (FAA)
. In addition, the impact of COVID-19 on HC activities will be looked at as part of program activities in various evaluations in the DEP (i.e., Pharmaceutical Drugs, Medical Devices).
Planning for Evaluation
Over the next five years, OAE plans to conduct 29 evaluations that involve Health Canada: 18 will focus exclusively on Health Canada activities and two evaluations will examine the activities of both Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). The remaining nine projects are horizontal evaluations, three of which are led by Health Canada, and the remaining six projects are led by other government departments or agencies. A yearly breakdown is provided in Table 1. Table 2 outlines the direct program spending (DPS) by core responsibility for all scheduled evaluations for the next five years.
Page details
Report a problem on this page
Date modified:
2022-09-09