Executive Summary
This evaluation covered the activities of the Canadian Patient Safety Institute (CPSI) for the period from 2013-2014 to 2016-2017. The evalation was undertaken in fulfillment of the requirements of the Financial Administration Act and the Treasury Board of Canada’s Policy on Results (2016).
Evaluation Purpose and Scope
CPSI contracted Prairie Research Associates Inc., an independent evaluation firm, to conduct an evaluation of activities carried out under its current Contribution Agreement with Health Canada, which covers the period from 2013–2014 to 2017–2018. The evaluation addressed issues and questions relating to the relevance and continued need for CPSI as a third-party national organization dedicated to improving patient safety in Canada, its effectiveness at achieving its objectives and expected outcomes, and the efficiency and economy with which it operates. Although the evaluation focussed primarily on activities under the current Contribution Agreement, it also examined progress toward outcomes associated with activities undertaken prior to March 31, 2013.
The evaluation used multiple lines of evidence, including literature review, document review, review of administrative and performance measurement data, key informant interviews, a survey of CPSI stakeholders, and three in-depth case studies.
Program Description
The Canadian Patient Safety Institute (CPSI) is a not-for-profit organization, funded by Health Canada, with a mission to “inspire extraordinary improvement in patient safety and quality”.  Since it was established in December 2003, CPSI has worked in collaboration with stakeholders across the health system to promote patient safety in Canada. Its activities include knowledge generation, synthesis, and translation; competence-building; cultivation and strengthening of relationships with stakeholders across the health system; and leveraging the work of other organizations to optimize the use of scarce resources in promoting patient safety in Canada.
CONCLUSIONS - RELEVANCE
Continued Need
This evaluation confirmed an ongoing need to address patient safety in Canada. Recent reports of progress in patient safety in Canada, the US, and the UK concluded that their respective systems have not appreciably moved the mark in patient safety, due to the complexity of the problem. Persistent rates of harm justify an ongoing focus on patient safety within Canada's healthcare system.
More than a decade after patient safety first emerged as a major concern within the Canadian healthcare system, available data indicate that patient safety has not appreciably improved, suggesting an ongoing need to address the issue.
While the need for a national patient safety organization clearly remains, it is less clear what the role of such an organization should be in the current environment. Over the past decade, CPSI has fulfilled a critical need in Canadian healthcare by promoting awareness and knowledge of patient safety issues and providing a diverse range of evidence-based tools, resources, and strategies that could be used by healthcare organizations at the clinical and governance levels to address patient safety. The availability of these tools and resources has been particularly important to smaller organizations and jurisdictions with limited resources.
Alignment with Government Priorities
There is alignment between CPSI and federal priorities, and CPSI priorities are generally perceived by other stakeholders to be well-aligned with their own. While most stakeholders believe CPSI has adjusted effectively to changing needs and circumstances and that its activities address gaps and needs in the patient safety field, concerns were raised that CPSI lacks a clear strategic focus to guide its work.
Alignment with Federal Roles and Responsibilities
CPSI’s mandate and activities are consistent with federal roles and responsibilities and, in particular, with Health Canada’s mandate under the Department of Health Act. CPSI meets expectations that Health Canada has for pan-Canadian health organizations to perform a coordinating function and drive pan-Canadian collaboration.
As a national organization with a mandate to provide a leadership role in building a culture of patient safety and quality improvement in the Canadian health system, CPSI is well-placed to advocate for the importance of patient safety as a priority within the system. This mandate is bolstered by widespread stakeholder support for the continued existence of a national organization specifically dedicated to patient safety.
Stakeholders variously perceive CPSI’s unique value as being, among other things, the pan-Canadian focus it brings to bear on efforts to improve patient safety, its ability to bring together experts and stakeholders from across the country to work collaboratively on shared priorities, and its role as a clearinghouse for evidence-based patient safety resources, tools and best practices. Some stakeholders believe CPSI has had difficulty carving out a clear role for itself within the patient safety landscape.
CONCLUSIONS – PERFORMANCE
Achievement of Expected Outcomes (Effectiveness)
Evidence available to the evaluation indicates that progress has been made toward CPSI’s expected immediate and intermediate outcomes.
CPSI has contributed to an increased evidence base to improve patient safety, primarily by developing tools and resources grounded in national and international research evidence, and stakeholders widely acknowledge and appreciate this work. Some stakeholders argued that CPSI could further contribute to the evidence base through greater emphasis on measurement and rigorous evaluation, including evaluation of its own products and interventions.
CPSI’s work has led to the development of evidence-informed patient safety curricula. A key success has been the integration of the Safety Competencies into the CanMEDS educational framework of the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada and the College of Family Physicians in Canada. As part of the Integrated Patient Safety Action Plan (IPSAP), work is ongoing with many stakeholders and partners to implement the priorities identified by experts via the Patient Safety Education Action Plan. 
CPSI’s work has produced important gains in patient safety awareness and knowledge among stakeholders. Most survey respondents who have either used or implemented specific CPSI programs or resources, participated in CPSI education programs, or read CPSI research reports, reported that doing so has led to increased awareness and knowledge of patient safety issues, either their own, or within their organization.
By spearheading the establishment of National Patient Safety Consortium and the development of the IPSAP, CPSI has strengthened system coordination. These efforts have united a wide range of stakeholders in advancing a common patient safety agenda, while focussing on gaps and avoiding duplication of effort.
Over the past decade, legislative and policy changes related to patient safety have suggested that Canada has been shifting toward a more positive patient safety culture. Most stakeholders believe this shift has occurred, in part, because of CPSI’s work, although many noted that culture change is a lengthy process, and measurement and attribution are difficult.
Canadian healthcare organizations have implemented positive patient safety practices as a result of CPSI activities, with an estimated 88% of eligible acute care facilities and 26% of long-term care facilities in Canada having participated in Safer Healthcare Now! (SHN).
Progress has been made in formal monitoring and reporting on patient safety in Canada. Many survey respondents reported using CPSI resources such as the Canadian Incident Analysis Framework to make changes in their approach to managing patient safety. The collaborative work of CPSI and the Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI) to develop the Hospital Harm Measure is seen as an important step forward.
There is evidence of policies, standards, and requirements of professional associations and accreditation bodies being informed by patient safety evidence. The Safety Competencies and Canadian Disclosure Guidelines, in particular, have been widely used and adopted, and more than one-third of Accreditation Canada’s Required Organizational Practices (ROPs) reference CPSI resources.
CPSI has been a pioneer in advocating for and supporting patient and family involvement in healthcare improvement in Canada and internationally, through its support for Patients for Patient Safety Canada (PFPSC) and other patient engagement activities. The extent of patient and family involvement within the healthcare system and the impact of this involvement for patient safety outcomes, have not been measured or rigorously evaluated.
In the long term, CPSI’s activities are expected to contribute to improved patient safety in Canada. Although there is no objective evidence that patient safety in Canada has improved since CPSI was established, most stakeholders believe that CPSI’s activities have contributed to improved patient safety. Some have argued that, without CPSI, it is conceivable that patient safety in Canada might have lost ground rather than remaining stable — particularly given a context of continuous technological and medical innovation, along with the increasing complexity of, and growing financial pressures on, the healthcare system.
Demonstration of Economy and Efficiency
CPSI has operated in an economical manner over the three years covered by the evaluation. It has taken steps to minimize the cost of inputs by eliminating one office and downsizing another, increasing the number of staff working virtually, and managing staff remuneration, among other measures. Although Health Canada’s contribution is CPSI’s main source of funding, and is likely to remain so in the future, CPSI could continue to explore cost recovery and other revenue-raising potential from sources other than Health Canada, and could articulate a comprehensive pricing model for its products and services.
Likewise, CPSI has taken steps to operate efficiently. It has sought to optimize the quantity and quality of its outputs through the use of web-based technology for information dissemination and stakeholder engagement, as well as leveraging in-kind contributions from stakeholders and external experts. The latter have been critical to CPSI’s ability to undertake its activities and produce high-quality products and services. While some stakeholders identified potential additional areas for future CPSI activity (with little commonality or agreement among them), others raised concern that CPSI is already overextended, given its size, and recommended it focus on fewer, well-defined priorities in order to achieve greater impact. Other key suggestions included more strategic consideration to partnerships and collaborations, an emphasis on defining future directions in patient safety, and greater attention to measurement and evaluation.
External stakeholders perceive CPSI’s activities to have generated considerable value-for-money for their own organization and for others. Furthermore, formal, quantitative value-for-money analysis focussing on CPSI’s medication reconciliation activities suggests that these have generated value-for-money by producing cost savings well in excess of the expenses required to sustain them. Implementation of medication reconciliation in one acute care facility has generated positive net benefits by averting the loss of patient welfare that accompanies preventable adverse drug events.
To the extent that CPSI’s activities have accelerated the uptake of medication reconciliation in Canadian healthcare and ensured implementation in accordance with current best practices, CPSI is likely to have generated additional value-for-money for its stakeholders in terms of improved patient well-being. Assuming that all SHN interventions are designed in accordance with current best practices, it seems reasonable to assume the same is true of CPSI’s activities in relation to SHN interventions in general.
RECOMMENDATIONS
The recipient-led evaluation resulted in five recommendations directed at CPSI which can be found on the CPSI website. There are no recommendations directed at Health Canada.
1.0 Evaluation Purpose
The purpose of the evaluation was to assess the relevance and performance of Canadian Patient Safety Institute’s (CPSI)  activities for the period of 2013-2014 to 2016-2017.
2.0 Program Description
2.1 Program Context
The evaluation addressed issues and questions relating to the relevance and continued need for CPSI as a third-party national organization dedicated to improving patient safety in Canada, its effectiveness at achieving its objectives and expected outcomes, and the efficiency and economy with which it operates. Although the evaluation focussed primarily on activities under the current Contribution Agreement, it also examined progress toward outcomes associated with activities undertaken prior to March 31, 2013.
The evaluation used multiple lines of evidence, including literature review, document review, review of administrative and performance measurement data, key informant interviews, a survey of CPSI stakeholders, and three in-depth case studies. This report integrates the findings from all lines of evidence, draws conclusions, and makes recommendations.
2.2 CPSI Profile
The CPSI is a not-for-profit organization funded by Health Canada with a mission to “inspire extraordinary improvement in patient safety and quality”.  Since it was established in December 2003, CPSI has worked in collaboration with stakeholders across the health system to promote patient safety in Canada. Its activities include knowledge generation, synthesis, and translation; competence-building; cultivation and strengthening of relationships with stakeholders across the health system; and leveraging the work of other organizations to optimize the use of scarce resources in promoting patient safety in Canada.
In 2004, the Canadian Adverse Events (CAE) Study, a large-scale examination of patient safety in Canadian hospitals, was undertaken. The CAE Study followed similar studies carried out internationally, beginning with the landmark report, To Err is Human,  which estimated that preventable medical errors were the eighth leading cause of death in the United States (US), higher than motor vehicle accidents or breast cancer.  The CAE Study defined adverse events as “unintended injuries or complications that are caused by healthcare management, rather than by the patient’s underlying disease, and that lead to death, disability at the time of discharge or prolonged hospital stays”.  The study found that adverse events occurred in 7.5% of hospital admissions, and that of these, 36.9% were preventable. Although extensions of hospital stay or re-admission were the most common outcomes, 20.8% of cases reviewed resulted in the death of the patient.
The CAE Study was the first to provide an empirical demonstration of the prevalence of patient safety issues in Canada. While the Study was underway, the National Steering Committee on Patient Safety (the Committee) authored a comprehensive report on the state of patient safety in Canada that acknowledged that progress in patient safety lagged significantly behind that of peer nations such as the US, the United Kingdom (UK), and Australia (National Steering Committee on Patient Safety, 2002). In light of this evidence, and based on recommendations from the National Steering Committee on Patient Safety, CPSI was established by Health Canada in 2003.
CPSI was established to facilitate an “unprecedented level of collaboration among local, regional, provincial, territorial and federal healthcare sectors” that the Committee believed was necessary to stimulate and preserve system-level change.  CPSI’s first funding agreement with Health Canada was established shortly thereafter, in February 2004.  Its current funding agreement spans the period from 2013–2014 to 2017–2018. Federal funding to CPSI was $7.76 million in 2013–2014 and $7.6 million annually thereafter.
As a national organization funded mainly by Health Canada, CPSI has a mission to “inspire extraordinary improvement in patient safety and quality”.  Its mandate is “to provide a leadership role in building a culture of patient safety and quality improvement in the Canadian healthcare system” through “coordination across sectors, promotion of best practices, and advice on effective strategies to improve patient safety”.  In pursuing its mandate, CPSI collaborates with a variety of stakeholders across the country,including governments, healthcare organizations, healthcare providers, and patient groups, to develop and disseminate evidence-informed products and services, and to coordinate stakeholder efforts relating to patient safety.
Customers and Key Stakeholders
CPSI consults and collaborates with an extensive range of stakeholders in undertaking its activities and producing its outputs, including:
federal, provincial and territorial governments
provincial health quality councils
healthcare organizations across the healthcare delivery continuum
front line healthcare professionals
healthcare leaders and decision-makers
pan-Canadian organizations with an interest in healthcare quality
medical and other healthcare professional schools
national professional associations
national specialty societies
international organizations (e.g., WHO)
patients and their families
2.3 Program Narrative
CPSI combines financial, human, and external resources to carry out a range of activities, including knowledge generation, synthesis, and translation; competence-building; cultivation and strengthening of relationships with stakeholders across the health system; and leveraging the work of other organizations to optimize the use of scarce resources in promoting patient safety in Canada.
These activities result in the production of four broad categories of output: interventions and programs; education; research; and tools and resources, which in turn are expected to generate the following short-term outcomes (i.e., within one to three years of the current funding period):
a growing evidence base to improve patient safety
formulation and delivery of evidence-informed patient safety curricula across health disciplines
increased patient safety awareness and knowledge among healthcare providers, patients, and the public in general
strengthened system coordination related to patient safety
Within three to five years, these short-term outcomes are expected to lead to the following intermediate outcomes:
increased positive patient safety culture
increased positive patient safety practices
formal monitoring of, and reporting on, patient safety
policies, standards, and requirements of strategic partners informed by patient safety evidence
By the fifth year of the funding period (2018), CPSI’s activities are expected to contribute to its long-term outcome of improved patient safety in Canada.
2.4 Program Alignment and Resources
The program’s financial data for the years 2013-2014 through 2015-2016 are presented below (Table 1). CPSI is funded primarily by the Government of Canada, with up to $38,160,000 in funds to support CPSI’s work as outlined in the Contribution Agreement effective April 1, 2013 to March 31, 2018. The percentage of federal funding to CPSI is high, with as much as 97% in 2015-2016. The Government of Canada provided $22.4 million to CPSI over the three years covered by this evaluation (see section 4.5 for further details).
3.1 Evaluation Scope, Approach and Design
The scope of the evaluation covered the period from April 2013 to March 2017 and included an assessment of the Canadian Patient Safety Institute's (CPSI) activities such as knowledge generation, synthesis and translation, competency building, leveraging the work of other organizations and building relationships.
The evaluation issues were aligned with the Treasury Board of Canada's Policy on Results (2016) and considered the five core issues under the two themes of relevance and performance.
The Office of Audit and Evaluation acknowledges the consulting firm of Prairie Research Associates, which conducted the recipient-led evaluation of CPSI's activities.
Data for the evaluation was collected using various methods, including data, document and literature reviews, key informant interviews, survey of CPSI stakeholders, and case studies. More information on data collection and analysis methods is detailed in Appendix 3. In addition, data were analyzed by triangulating information gathered from the different methods listed above. The use of multiple lines of evidence and triangulation were intended to increase the reliability and credibility of the evaluation findings and conclusions.
3.2 Limitations and Mitigation Strategies
Most evaluations face constraints that may have implications for the validity and reliability of evaluation findings and conclusions. The following outlines the limitations encountered during the implementation of the selected methods for this evaluation. Also noted are the mitigation strategies put in place to ensure that the evaluation findings can be used with confidence to guide program planning and decision making.
The most important limitation relates to the difficulty in attributing outcomes to CPSI. Attribution is a common challenge in many evaluations, particularly for intermediate and longer-term outcomes, since a multitude of factors may influence the achievement of outcomes, and experimental or rigorous evaluation designs (i.e., evaluation designs incorporating a counterfactual) are typically not feasible. While it is often possible to isolate the extent to which activities have produced immediate outcomes, which are expected to occur soon after activities are implemented, attribution becomes considerably more difficult as one moves along the results chain, where external factors are likely to impact the intermediate and final outcomes.
In light of this challenge, contribution analysis was used to draw conclusions about the extent to which CPSI activities have contributed to the achievement of intermediate and longer-term outcomes. According to the Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat, contribution analysis holds that "if an evaluator can validate a theory of change and account for external influencing factors, then it is reasonable to conclude that the intervention has made a difference".  Contribution analysis involves assessing whether activities were implemented as planned, assessing whether the expected outcomes were observed, and accounting for the influence of external factors.
The data collection methods employed in the evaluation also had a number of limitations associated with them. For example, the literature review was limited in scope due to time and resource constraints, while the generalizability of the findings from the survey, key informant interviews, and case studies was limited by a non-random, non-representative approach to sampling and the possibility of self-selection bias among respondents. These limitations were mitigated through triangulation; that is, using the findings in conjunction with those from other lines of evidence in order to achieve greater confidence in the results.
Finally, as part of the data review, the data contained in the Patient Safety Metrics (PSM) system, through which CPSI has collected information on approximately 100 process and outcome indicators for Safer Healthcare Now! (SHN) interventions since the inception of SHN in 2005, were examined to determine their potential to contribute to the evaluation. The review determined that, while it would be theoretically possible to analyze these data using these techniques to determine which, if any, interventions were reliably linked to outcome improvements, such an analysis would require considerable time, as well as medical and statistical expertise, and was therefore determined to be outside the scope of the current evaluation.
4.0 Findings
4.1 Relevance: Issue #1 – Continued Need for the Program
More than a decade after patient safety first emerged as a major concern within the Canadian healthcare system, available data indicate that patient safety has not appreciably improved, suggesting an ongoing need to address the issue.
More than a decade after the Canadian Adverse Effects (CAE) Study first shed light on patient safety in the Canadian context and prompted policy-makers to act, the extent to which the Canadian healthcare system is safer for patients remains unclear. A significant challenge in assessing progress in this area — one that is not unique to Canada — is the absence of a single indicator or general measure of patient safety, and the consequent need to examine data pertaining to a range of relatively specific patient safety measures.  The available Canadian data suggest that patient safety has not substantially improved:
A study of patient safety in Canadian children's hospitals showed that in 2008, 9.2% of hospitalized children experienced an adverse event and 3.6% experienced a preventable adverse event.  This compares with 7.5% of hospitalized adults who experienced an adverse event and 2.8% of adults who experienced a preventable adverse event in the 2004 CAE Study.
A recent Canadian study examining adverse events during home care concluded that providing healthcare through home care programs "creates unintended harm to patients".  In particular, the study found an annual adverse event incidence rate of 13.2%, concluding that a significant number of home care patients experience adverse events, of which one-third were preventable.
The hospital standardized mortality rate (HSMR), which measures the number of hospital deaths compared to the expected number of deaths over time, fell from 108 in 2010 to 95 in 2014.  While this is undeniably a positive outcome, the HSMR may not be a sensitive measure of patient safety. 
More granular indicators of patient safety identified by the Canadian Institute of Health Information (CIHI, see Table 2) do not show a pattern of significant improvement over time. Notably, in-hospital sepsis and falls, both of which have been targeted by the Safer Healthcare Now! (SHN) program, have remained relatively constant or have shown slight increasing trends.
4.2 Relevance: Issue #2 – Alignment with Government and Other Stakeholder Priorities
There is alignment between CPSI and federal priorities, and CPSI priorities are generally perceived by other stakeholders to be well-aligned with their own. While most stakeholders believe CPSI has adjusted effectively to changing needs and circumstances and that its activities address gaps and needs in the patient safety field, concerns were raised that CPSI lacks a clear strategic focus to guide its work and that other organizations are active on these issues.
CPSI priorities
CPSI's current strategic goals and priorities have been shaped, to a large extent, as a response to the recommendations of its last evaluation. That evaluation, completed in 2012, recommended that CPSI focus or rationalize its scope of activity, enhance engagement with the system, and embed ownership of major programs and activities within the system.  CPSI's 2013–2018 Business Plan, Patient Safety Forward with Four,  subsequently laid out, in broad strokes, its plan for responding to these recommendations. The Business Plan identified four strategic goals to focus and align CPSI's efforts over the five-year period:
Strategic Goal #1: Provide leadership on the establishment of a National Integrated Patient Safety Strategy
Strategic Goal #2: Inspire and sustain patient safety knowledge within the system, and through innovation, enable transformational change
Strategic Goal #3: Build and influence patient safety capability at organizational and systems levels
Strategic Goal #4: Engage all audiences across the health system in the national patient safety agenda
As a mechanism for achieving its overarching strategic goal of establishing a National Integrated Patient Safety Strategy, and consistent with the recommendation to enhance engagement with the system, CPSI convened the National Patient Safety Consortium (the Consortium) in January 2014. This coalition represents approximately 50 organizations across Canada, including Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), provincial and territorial quality and patient safety councils and ministries of health, professional associations and other national organizations, and patient groups, among others. Its purpose is to drive a shared action plan for safer healthcare, with the desired outcome of safer healthcare in Canada. CPSI serves as the coordinating body for this effort and, as such, is responsible for maintaining overall strategic coherence and coordination of the Integrated Patient Safety Action Plan (IPSAP). The Consortium and the IPSAP are described in detail in Appendix 4.
Federal priorities
Historically, the Government of Canada  has demonstrated its commitment to supporting improvements to patient safety within the Canadian healthcare system through funding to CPSI and the Canadian Medication Incident Reporting and Prevention System, and through its efforts in the area of infection control and prevention and other activities, including development of legislation to improve the safety of medications and other health products.  While there is an annual commitment to provide CPSI with $7.6 million in federal funding, the government's March 2016 Budget did not specifically mention CPSI or patient safety.  Health Canada key informants explained that federal and departmental priorities are currently focussed on broader health system innovation. Within that context, patient safety is closely linked to some current federal priorities, such as legislation to improve medication safety (e.g., Vanessa's Law), but is not a specific priority or area of focus in its own right.
Priorities of other stakeholders
Development of the IPSAP took into account input from a wide range of stakeholders in the field of patient safety, and it was explicitly designed to focus on gaps and areas of high priority, as identified by the field. Results from the survey indicate that CPSI is reasonably well-aligned with the priorities of stakeholders, and is responsive to gaps and needs in the field. A majority (71%) of survey respondents believe CPSI's activities are well-aligned with their or their organization's patient safety priorities. The same proportion believes that CPSI's activities address identified gaps and needs in patient safety, though somewhat fewer (61%) think CPSI responds effectively to changing needs in the field (see Table 3).
4.3 Relevance: Issue #3 – Alignment with Federal Roles and Responsibilities
CPSI’s mandate and activities are consistent with federal roles and responsibilities and, in particular, with Health Canada’s mandate under the Department of Health Act. CPSI meets expectations that Health Canada has for pan-Canadian health organizations to perform a coordinating function and drive pan-Canadian collaboration. However, there has been significant evolution in recent years.
The Constitution Act 1867 outlines provincial and territorial responsibility for delivering healthcare, but also identifies the Government of Canada’s roles and responsibilities in health promotion, disease prevention, knowledge sharing, research funding, and ensuring access to healthcare for specific populations. Health Canada’s funding to CPSI helps fulfill the government’s roles in disease prevention, knowledge sharing, and research funding.
Health Canada funding to CPSI is provided pursuant to its mandate under the Department of Health Act. Section 4 of the Act defines the Minister’s duties to include: the promotion and preservation of the physical, mental, and social well-being of Canadians; their protection against risks to health and the spreading of diseases; investigation and research into public health; the establishment and control of safety standards and safety information on requirements for consumer products; and the collection, analysis, interpretation, publication, and distribution of information relating to public health. More broadly, the Minister’s jurisdiction covers all matters related to the health of Canadians who have not otherwise been assigned by the government to another body.
CPSI describes its vision as “safe healthcare for all Canadians” and its mission as to “inspire extraordinary improvement in patient safety and quality.” As such, CPSI’s vision and mission align with Health Canada’s broad mandate to promote and preserve the physical, mental, and social well-being of Canadians, as described in the Department of Health Act.
In the context of Health Canada’s and CPSI’s broad organizational mandates, CPSI’s performance measurement strategy describes the purpose of Health Canada’s continued support for CPSI as:
to improve the quality of healthcare services by strengthening system coordination related to patient safety, including promoting national collaboration among key healthcare improvement partners. There continues to be a need for coordination and collaboration among the multiple organizations in the healthcare system in order to increase patient safety capacity.
Insofar as CPSI collaborates with a variety of stakeholders across the country to develop and disseminate evidence-informed products and services, and to coordinate stakeholder efforts relating to patient safety, its activities align with Health Canada’s expectations for pan-Canadian health organizations to promote collaboration and coordination. Of course, Health Canada also expects CPSI to fulfill its mandate of improving patient safety, as set out in its policy and funding authorities.
Role and unique value of CPSI
Large majorities of stakeholders agreed that there is a continued need for a dedicated patient safety organization at the national level, and that CPSI brings unique value to the field. Stakeholders variously perceive CPSI’s unique value as being, among other things, the pan-Canadian focus it brings to bear on efforts to improve patient safety, its ability to bring together experts and stakeholders from across the country to work collaboratively on shared priorities, and its role as a clearinghouse for evidence-based patient safety resources, tools, and best practices. Some stakeholders believe CPSI has had difficulty carving out a clear role for itself within the patient safety landscape.
The Canadian patient safety landscape has evolved significantly since CPSI was first established. It is populated at the present time by a considerable number of organizations whose scope of activity encompasses patient safety — some of which, key informants noted, were established with support from CPSI. At the provincial and territorial level, every province except Quebec currently maintains an organization responsible for patient safety, with the Atlantic provinces working together through the Atlantic Health Quality and Patient Safety Collaborative (AHQPSC). Generally speaking, these organizations integrate patient safety into a broader health quality mandate, only the Manitoba Institute for Patient Safety (MIPS) has a mandate uniquely focussed on patient safety. Each provincial organization necessarily has a more local focus than CPSI.
Similarly, at the national level, while an exhaustive inventory of organizational mandates, roles, and responsibilities was beyond the scope of this evaluation, it is clear that numerous organizations are active in the area of patient safety. Some examples are Accreditation Canada, HealthCareCAN, Canada Health Infoway, the Institute for Safe Medication Practices (ISMP) Canada, and the Canadian Foundation for Healthcare Improvement (CFHI), to name just a few.
Recently, the Advisory Panel on Healthcare Innovation, formed by Health Canada in 2014, recognized pan-Canadian healthcare organizations like CPSI as the building blocks for a collaborative approach to healthcare innovation.   However, the Panel recommended amalgamating several of the existing pan-Canadian healthcare organizations, including CPSI, CFHI, and Canada Health Infoway, into a new Healthcare Innovation Agency, in order to “reduce duplication, provide some economies of scale for the federal government, and streamline a crowded pan-Canadian health organization field.”
While the Panel was not tasked with identifying ways to improve patient safety, its report raised questions about whether a national organization dedicated to patient safety is still needed to achieve this outcome. On this issue, the evaluation found widespread agreement among CPSI stakeholders who were surveyed for this evaluation. A large majority of survey respondents (90%) agreed that there is a need for a national organization dedicated to patient safety in Canada; only 2% disagreed, while 4% were neutral, and a similar proportion did not know.
Moreover, a sizeable majority of respondents (72%) believe there are no other organizations in Canada that provide patient safety products and services similar to those offered by CPSI. This belief was significantly stronger in organizations that provide direct patient care (75.3%) than in those that do not (57.4%). The minority (28%) of respondents who disagreed most often mentioned provincial quality or patient safety councils or organizations such as the Institute for Safe Medication Practices (ISMP) Canada, Accreditation Canada, and the MIPS, among others. On the other hand, although 29% of respondents disagreed that another organization would step in and do the same work if CPSI did not exist, almost as many were neutral (25%), agreed (24%), or simply did not know (21%).
When asked about the value of CPSI’s work in specific areas, almost 80% of survey respondents believe the organization makes a valuable contribution to patient safety through its educational courses and programs (79%) and its efforts to encourage organizations to integrate patient safety standards into educational curricula, regulatory requirements, and professional standards (79%). About three-quarters (74%) believe CPSI makes a valuable contribution by promoting and supporting collaboration and coordination among stakeholders in the field (74%). Somewhat fewer, but still a majority (63%), believe CPSI makes a valuable contribution to patient safety through its commissioned research; notably, more than one-fifth of respondents (22%) did not know (see Table 4).
4.4 Performance: Issue #4 – Achievement of Expected Outcomes (Effectiveness)
In this section, we outline the extent to which key program outcomes have been achieved. The main focus of this evaluation is on the immediate and intermediate outcomes. Since 2013, and in response to the recommendations of the previous evaluation, CPSI has oriented its activities toward achieving system-level change through the pursuit of four strategic goals (see Appendix 4 for further details).
4.4.1 To what extent have the immediate and intermediate outcomes been achieved?
Increased evidence base to improve patient safety
Since it was established in 2003, CPSI has made available a range of tools and resources that are based in national and international research evidence, and has contributed to growing the patient safety evidence base through its own research activities. Some stakeholders believe CPSI could further contribute to the evidence base through greater emphasis on measurement and rigorous evaluation, including evaluation of its own products and interventions.
In the immediate term, CPSI’s work is expected to produce an increased evidence base to improve patient safety. CPSI key informants noted that all of the organization’s knowledge products and resources are grounded in national and international research evidence. Indeed, many key informants emphasized the important role that CPSI plays in compiling research evidence and translating it into practical tools and resources that can be used by frontline clinicians and other stakeholders. Between 2012–2013 and 2015–2016, CPSI developed 111 new resources and revised 62 existing resources.
Furthermore, CPSI routinely engages academic faculty in the development of its resources and delivery of its educational offerings, with a view to ensuring that the best possible evidence is used as the foundation for its products and that educational offerings are delivered by those best able to interpret and communicate the significance of this evidence. CPSI’s performance data indicate that in 2015–2016, CPSI engaged faculty in the development of 52 resources and in the delivery of 38 educational offerings.
In addition to its role in the area of knowledge translation, CPSI has also contributed directly to increasing the evidence base through its research activities. Alongside various funding partners, CPSI has commissioned and published 12 research studies (including five in the current evaluation period) on focussed patient safety topics, including patient safety in home care, primary care, emergency, and long-term care settings; the economics of patient safety; drug safety; incident analysis; governance of quality and patient safety in primary care; patient safety pertaining to new oral anticoagulants; and paediatric medical safety. Furthermore, since 2014–2015, CPSI has collaboratively sponsored three annual $50,000 research competitions focussed on contemporary challenges or questions in the field of patient safety.  In addition, $5,000 patient safety studentship awards are offered annually to support student-driven research that directly contributes to the evidence base, while supporting the development of future research capacity.  CPSI awarded four of these awards in 2013–2014 and five in 2014–2015.
CPSI key informants reported that the organization has, in the current funding period, deliberately scaled back its research activities, both in response to the emergence of other sources of funding for patient safety research  and as part of its response to the recommendation of the 2012 evaluation to focus the scope of its activities. Accordingly, since 2013, CPSI has been more deliberate in targeting its funding and resources to its priority areas. Its most recent calls for commissioned research, for example, have focussed on the home care sector, while its studentship research focusses on advancing the work of the Integrated Patient Safety Action Plan
(IPSAP) and SHIFT to Safety priorities.
Survey respondents and key informants generally agreed that CPSI has contributed to an increased evidence base through its work. Among survey respondents, almost two-thirds (63%) agreed that the evidence base needed to improve patient safety has increased because of CPSI’s work, while only 1% disagreed and almost one-quarter did not know.
As for key informants, most believe that CPSI’s work has contributed to increasing the evidence base needed to improve patient safety, and some identified CPSI’s role as a clearinghouse for evidence-based resources and best practices as the unique value that CPSI brings to the patient safety field. However, several key informants offered a different view, arguing that although CPSI’s products are informed by published evidence, the organization itself has not contributed significantly to the evidence base. It was also pointed out that none of CPSI’s products have been rigorously evaluated for their impact on patient safety, which a few key informants considered a missed opportunity for CPSI to make a material contribution to the evidence base.
Although these key informants did not specifically define the term “rigorous evaluation”, they appeared to be referring to evaluation designs that enable comparison of outcomes achieved as a result of a program to outcomes achieved in the absence of the program (i.e., evaluation designs that incorporate a counterfactual). As a specific example, it was observed that through Patient Safety Metrics (PSM), CPSI has collected data on more than 100 process and outcome measures pertaining to Safer Healthcare Now! (SHN) interventions since the inception of that program in 2005, but has not, to date, published any analysis of these data in the peer-reviewed literature that could speak to the effectiveness of SHN interventions at improving patient safety.  As another example, it was noted that CPSI has not rigorously evaluated Patients for Patient Safety Canada (PFPSC) and its activities to increase patient and family involvement in the health system.  These key informants were of the view that CPSI should place a stronger emphasis on rigorous measurement and evaluation, including measurement and evaluation of its own products and interventions, as well as greater emphasis on the ongoing measurement of progress toward the long-term outcome of improved patient safety. The Hospital Harm Measure was identified as a positive step in this direction.
Evidence-informed patient safety curricula
Over the period covered by this evaluation, patient safety curricula across health disciplines have been increasingly informed by CPSI’s work. A key success has been the integration of the Safety Competencies into the CanMEDS educational framework of the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada and the College of Family Physicians in Canada. As part of the IPSAP, a national Patient Safety Education Action Plan has been developed.
In the immediate term, CPSI’s work is expected to result in the formulation and delivery of evidence-informed patient safety curricula across health disciplines. CPSI has contributed to this outcome directly by creating a variety of learning modules on patient safety topics, which are targeted at undergraduate and graduate students, as well as practicing medical professionals, and are offered free through CPSI’s website and in-person learning sessions.
In addition, CPSI completed 15 curriculum mappings of the Safety Competencies Framework  with nursing, pharmacy, and medical faculties, one specialty school, and seven national medical accreditation organizations, the purpose of which was to identify gaps in medical education surrounding patient safety.  To date, the Competencies have been endorsed by a number of professional and health organizations, including the Canadian Nurses Association, the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada, the Manitoba Institute for Public Safety (MIPS), the College of Licensed Practical Nurses of Alberta, the Canadian Physiotherapy Association, and the Canadian Association of Schools of Nursing (CASN).
One of the most important outcomes of the mappings has been the integration of the Safety Competencies into the CanMEDS educational framework of the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada, as well as the College of Family Physicians of Canada. As a result, the CanMEDS 2015 Framework will be embedded into the accreditation of all Canadian residency programs for medical and surgical specialties and family medicine, as well as in the training of undergraduate medical students, as part of the accreditation standards set by the Association of Faculties of Medicine of Canada.  In addition, CASN has adopted key elements derived from the Safety Competencies into its accreditation standards for nursing education in Canada.
According to CPSI, a number of health professions schools have used the Safety Competencies Framework as a roadmap for curriculum development in patient safety, and it has anchored the design of faculty development and professional development programs, including PSEP) in Canada. Researchers have reportedly used the Framework to develop assessment tools such as the Health Professionals Education in Patient Safety Survey, and the Framework has served as the foundation for patient safety Objective Structured Clinical Examination scenarios, or simulation scenarios, which determine whether learners can actually demonstrate key patient safety competencies such as disclosing a patient incident or enacting graded assertiveness in unsafe situations.
Additional examples of progress toward the outcome of evidence-informed patient safety curricula are provided below.
In partnership with CASN, CPSI will be delivering an introductory-level webinar series that provides faculty members and nursing education administrators with information on how to integrate concepts of patient safety into curricula. The course will introduce faculty to the definitions and concepts of patient safety, educational programs, information, resources, and strategies intended to assist in the integration of meaningful learning experiences for students in all years of their nursing program and clinical practice. In addition, an advisory committee has been established with the task of developing guidelines for addressing patient safety in nursing curricula.
In partnership with the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada, CPSI offers the Advancing Safety for Patients in Residency Education (ASPIRE) program to medical educators and residents. ASPIRE focusses on incorporating patient safety, quality improvement, and resource stewardship content into residency training and faculty development; developing skills to lead educational change and integrate patient safety, quality improvement, and resource stewardship training in residency programs; and creating an educational plan for patient safety, quality improvement, and resource stewardship that can be implemented within programs or organizations.
The Canadian Patient Safety Officer Course (CPSOC), in partnership with the former Accreditation Canada International, has been customized for the international community. The two-day education program employs various teaching methodologies while adhering to adult learning principles and is delivered by peer trainers. Participants of the Patient Safety Officer Course (PSOC) International education program are typically healthcare professionals who have a responsibility for disseminating patient safety principles and programs throughout their organization, as well as clinical educators who can develop and implement improvements, and have the capacity to provide training within their organization. These participants are given education materials that include a binder, as well as a USB toolkit with various CPSI tools and resources.
CPSI has worked with the First Nations and Inuit Health Branch (FNIHB) of Health Canada to support the development of policies and procedures for the introduction of new incident reporting structures and a dashboard for monitoring patient safety incidents. CPSI is in discussions with the FNIHB Patient Safety Working Group to assist in the delivery of educational offerings in 2017.
Key informants representing a variety of organizations and jurisdictions reported having accessed PSEP training, or being master PSEP facilitators which, within the PSEP HUB delivery model, allows them to provide PSEP training within their jurisdictions.
The University of Toronto’s Centre for Quality Improvement and Patient Safety developed and introduced a Master of Science degree in Quality Improvement and Patient Safety, which key informants reported draws on CPSI resources.
CPSI, together with a variety of partners, continues to work toward the goal of embedding patient safety within curricula. In order to accelerate a consistent approach to patient safety and quality improvement education, CPSI hosted, in January 2015, a Patient Safety Education Roundtable that included 54 participants representing academic, accrediting, certifying and regulatory bodies, as well as provincial and national organizations interested in the education of health professionals. As part of the IPSAP, the Patient Safety Education Action Plan resulting from the roundtable includes goals that aim to strengthen faculty development on how to teach key concepts around partnering with patients and embed them into curricula, provides a Patient Safety and Quality Improvement content framework that enables educators to select from a menu of topics necessary for competency-based curricula, and identifies key educational elements required for senior leaders to purposefully influence a culture of patient safety.
Another primary goal of the roundtable was to lay the foundation for a National Patient Safety Education Network. In February 2016, CPSI hosted a second Patient Safety Education Roundtable to establish consensus on the future vision, purpose, and development of the proposed network. An Advisory Group composed of Roundtable participants has subsequently been convened to continue to connect the community of patient safety educators across the country and to develop a mechanism for knowledge translation and exchange of patient safety and quality improvement content, resources, and tools to inform health professional curricula.
Patient safety awareness and knowledge
Although the evaluation did not directly test stakeholder awareness and knowledge of patient safety issues, participants in the evaluation agreed that CPSI’s work has produced important gains in patient safety awareness and knowledge among stakeholders.
In the immediate term, CPSI’s work is expected to lead to increased knowledge and awareness of patient safety issues within the Canadian healthcare system. Since it is typically not feasible during the course of an evaluation to directly measure changes in stakeholder awareness and knowledge (i.e., by administering an objective test of awareness and knowledge at two or more points in time), proxy or indirect measures of change must be examined.
One way of indirectly measuring this outcome is by examining the reach of CPSI products. As shown in Table 6, performance measurement data maintained by CPSI show that its products, learning sessions and events were reaching stakeholders throughout the period covered by the evaluation. While none of the indicators show an increase, and others show variability or declines, a variety of possible explanations may account for these patterns. For example, CPSI introduced a charge in 2014–2015 for Canadian Patient Safety Week (CPSW) packages, which likely impacted the number of registrations the following year. It should be noted that following website architecture upgrades, an improved and more conservative reporting methodology for website downloads came into use in 2015–2016. Due to a lack of comparability, data pertaining to downloads of CPSI research reports and other resources are presented for 2015–2016 only.
4.5 Performance: Issue #5 – Demonstration of Economy and Efficiency
The Treasury Board of Canada's Policy on Results (2016) and guidance document entitled Assessing Program Resource Utilization When Evaluating Federal Programs (2013), define the demonstration of economy and efficiency as an assessment of resource utilization in relation to the production of outputs and progress toward expected outcomes. This assessment is based on the assumption that departments have standardized performance measurement systems and that financial systems link information about program costs to specific inputs, activities, outputs, and expected results.
Observations on Economy
CPSI has operated in an economical manner over the three years covered by the evaluation. It has taken steps to minimize the cost of inputs by eliminating one office and downsizing another, increasing the number of staff working virtually, and managing staff remuneration, among other measures. CPSI could continue to explore cost recovery and other revenue-raising potential from sources other than Health Canada, and could articulate a comprehensive pricing model for its products and services.
As previously seen in section 2.4, CPSI's agreement with Health Canada allows it to carry forward up to 10% of any unused Government of Canada contributions in a given year to the following year, until the end of the Contribution Agreement. In addition, CPSI is entitled to retain surpluses from revenues raised from sources other than the Government of Canada contribution, provided that Government of Canada funds have not been used to pay for directly related expenses. As a result, CPSI's use of government funds has varied from the annual $7.6 million contribution due to the use of the carry forward provision, and it has also run small surpluses in some years by retaining surpluses arising from other revenue sources.
The accounting statement net income is adjusted to the basis on which CPSI reports to Health Canada. Under the Contribution Agreement, CPSI reports on a capital expenditure basis, so it backs out depreciation and includes capital expenditure in its reporting to Health Canada. The result is a difference in timing between the bottom line result shown in the accounting statements as compared to what is reported to Health Canada.
Several points and trends are worth noting in the financial information above. First, Health Canada's contribution constitutes a significant proportion of CPSI revenues: 97% in 2015–2016. Annual Health Canada funding declined from $8.00 million in 2012–2013 to $7.76 million in 2013–2014, and to $7.60 million for the two subsequent years (i.e., 2014–2015 to 2015–2016). It is expected to remain at this level for the remainder of the current funding agreement.
Secondly, CPSI's revenues from other sources are highly variable and declining. Although revenues from sponsorships and registration are not insubstantial, amounting to $792,764 in 2013–2014, $578,013 in 2014–2015, and $190,444 in 2015–2016, they do appear to be highly variable.  This likely limits their value as a source of predictable funds to support CPSI's operations. CPSI staff indicate that, though there may be untapped sources of potential sponsorships, the long-term decline is impacted by broader structural and environmental factors, including the economic climate, fiscal retrenchment among governments, and the end of the SHN campaign mode and the integration of its regional nodes within CPSI. The development of an updated approach to raising other revenues, including sponsorships, is being considered alongside the development of a new strategic plan for the next funding period, as revenue-raising opportunities will depend highly on the particular strategies and lines of business emphasized in CPSI's next funding period.
Finally, as Government of Canada contributions have been held constant or reduced, and other revenues have declined, the difference has been made up by reductions in total expenses. Program expenses accounted for between one-quarter and one-third of all CPSI expenditures over the three years under consideration. Program expenses increased from 2013–2014 to 2015–2016; given that total revenues fell over the same period, this was made possible by a decline in operational expenses. CPSI's operational expenses consist largely of salary wages and benefits and other operating costs, as well as professional services, capital depreciation, costs associated with the Board of Directors, and travel and meetings. Staff compensation accounts for nearly two-thirds of all operating expenses.
Operating costs fell significantly over the period. Part of this decline was due to an internal accounting change that moved travel costs from the corporate budget to program budgets in order to encourage greater accountability for program-related staff travel. However, even after adjusting for this change, operation costs fell by $680,526 over the period. The biggest contributors included a 46% drop in office space and supply costs, a 49% decline in professional service costs, a 31% drop in corporate travel costs, and a 4% decline in salary wage and benefit costs. The two biggest contributors in absolute terms were the $319,279 decline in office space and supply costs, and the $147,714 decline in salary costs over the period.
CPSI Board members and staff, as well as Health Canada representatives, reported that several measures have been carried out over the evaluation period to minimize the cost of inputs:
CPSI eliminated its Toronto office and downsized its Edmonton office; it currently maintains offices in Ottawa, where it shares space with other national organizations, and in Edmonton. Although CPSI has contemplated closing the Edmonton office altogether, CPSI key informants reported that the potential cost savings associated with closing this office would be relatively small compared to the benefits of maintaining it (including the ability to retain talented staff).
CPSI has increased the number of staff working virtually (approximately eight or nine at the present time), which has reduced the need for office space, despite increasing the required investment in virtual infrastructure.
Steps have been taken to manage remuneration for staff, including executives. CPSI staff indicated that salary reviews are undertaken every two to three years by an external evaluation consultant to ensure that compensation is in line with comparable private, non-profit, and public sector positions. The filling of several vacant positions was deferred, given CPSI's fiscal constraints. The senior management team was downsized by one position, and Board members further reported that they had consciously sought to limit the size of the retainer for the new CEO, as well as to streamline the organization's management structure.
CPSI has moved to electronic distribution of Board and stakeholder resources to save on office supply costs, and has taken steps to control benefit costs and economize on travel.
A number of Board members and staff asserted that CPSI has already taken advantage of the most attractive opportunities to economize on its use of resources in carrying out its work. That said, CPSI has explored opportunities to finance its activities from non-Health Canada sources over the evaluation period. For instance, CPSI is examining the potential for cost recovery in relation to international stakeholders and clients. At present, some established educational programs delivered with partners, such as the Canadian Patient Safety Officer Course (CPSOC), are priced to recover all direct non-staffing costs, plus generate a small surplus to offset direct staffing costs.
Other courses, such as Patient Safety Education Program (PSEP)-Canada, are delivered primarily to recover direct non-staffing costs only, either through charges to the delivering partner or through direct participant registrations. Program development costs for the education programs are generally not recovered.
With respect to CPSI's other products, in some cases CPSI charges a nominal cost to partially offset delivery costs, such as in the case of the SHN learning series delivered in prior years. More recently, CPSI piloted a user fee for registration in Canadian Patient Safety Week (CPSW), but found that the fee proved a significant barrier to broad participation. In 2016, CPSW returned to a free pricing model, which is the approach used for most CPSI products and services that are intended to broadly be made available to the entire healthcare field, including all of its tools, resources, and research papers.
To some extent, the range of pricing reflected above, from cost recovery to free distribution, reflects the differentiation of products between those that are provided and customized for individual client benefit, versus those that are intended to be public resources; however, a pricing model has not been comprehensively enumerated or applied across CPSI.
CPSI representatives were somewhat ambivalent about expanding the scale or scope of cost recovery in relation to CPSI products and services. Some Board members argued that the potential benefits from cost recovery (i.e., revenue generation) must be balanced against the risk that this could cause other stakeholders to question the organization's commitment to patient safety. Both Board members and external key informants also argued that the current accessibility of CPSI products and services has significantly affected, in a positive manner, the perceived value-for-money proposition associated with their use and application. That said, CPSI could continue to explore revenue-raising potential from sources other than Health Canada, including cost recovery, and could articulate a comprehensive pricing model for its products and services.
Observations on Efficiency
CPSI has taken steps to optimize the quantity and quality of its outputs, including use of web-based technology for information dissemination and stakeholder engagement, and leveraging of in-kind contributions from stakeholders and external experts. The latter have been critical to CPSI's ability to undertake its activities and produce high-quality products and services. Some external stakeholders are concerned that CPSI is overextended, given its size, and recommended it focus on fewer, well-defined priorities in order to achieve greater impact. Other key suggestions included more strategic consideration to partnerships and collaborations, an emphasis on defining future directions in patient safety, and greater attention to measurement and evaluation.
CPSI representatives indicated that organizational resources have been allocated in ways designed to maximize the quantity and quality of the organization's outputs. For example, CPSI has used web-based technology to disseminate information (e.g., through improvements to CPSI's website, as well as expansion into social media) and to engage stakeholders (e.g., Canada's Virtual Forum on Patient Safety and Quality Improvement).
CPSI has also leveraged substantial participation and in-kind contributions from stakeholder organizations and external experts to work toward common objectives. For example, the work of the National Patient Safety Consortium is a coalition of the willing, relying heavily upon involvement from and engagement with dozens of stakeholders across Canada. CPSI has also leveraged provincial and local organizations to deliver education and training programs in particular jurisdictions while maintaining control over course content (the "hub and spoke" model), and routinely engages external experts in the design and review of its products and delivery of its educational offerings. As a final example, Patients for Patient Safety Canada (PFPSC) members are volunteers rather than paid staff.
While in-kind contributions from stakeholders appear to be quite significant — and probably even critical — to CPSI's ability to undertake a variety of its activities, the organization has not, to date, made any attempt to quantify these contributions. Tracking the amount of time contributed by stakeholders would enhance CPSI's ability to demonstrate the extent to which it has successfully strengthened coordination within the system, as well as its ability to demonstrate that it is operating in an efficient manner to produce high-quality outputs.
CPSI representatives did not identify additional opportunities to further increase the volume or quality of outputs produced, given the organization's available resources. Indeed, they suggested that the organization is already producing a large volume of outputs relative to its size and budget; a view that is also shared by some external key informants.
External key informants identified a number of opportunities to improve the achievement of CPSI's organizational outcomes. Four main recommendations emerged: 1) choose depth over breadth; 2) give more strategic consideration to partnerships; 3) focus on defining future directions for patient safety in Canada; and 4) emphasize measurement and evaluation.
Choose depth over breadth
Some key informants argued that CPSI should focus its efforts and limited resources on a small number of well-defined issues or priority areas, cautioning that the organization may be overextended at the present time, or may simply lack the requisite expertise or resources to generate measurable impact in any particular area.
The current four areas of focus are large buckets. My most important message is that they need to be focussed in their efforts if they want to have an impact. More intense focus on fewer areas.
There's patient safety, patient-centred care, and quality of patient care, and they are not the same thing. CPSI needs to more carefully articulate their part of that space. They can't do everything, especially with the resources that they've got. Dabbling is dangerous. Pick an area and do a really good job of that.
They have to be choosy in what they decide to do. Make a strategic decision on areas to focus on improving, or decide to work on understanding why we are so bad in certain areas. Tackle based on where the most harm is being done. Healthcare is a $220 billion operation — we are talking about CPSI tackling a huge issue with $8 million per year. You have to be pretty targeted to be able to see something for your efforts.
Notably, the perception that CPSI may be stretched too thin exists among some stakeholders, despite the organization's efforts to focus and rationalize its scope of activity in response to the findings and recommendations of the 2012 evaluation.
However, many external interviewees identified issues that have not, to date, received significant attention from CPSI, and that could be the focus of its activities in the future. These included, but were by no means limited to, public health (e.g., antimicrobial stewardship), primary care, palliative care, community support services (programs that provide assisted living, supportive housing, attended care, transportation, nutrition, hospital-to-home services, and friendly visiting services), and patient safety in relation to Indigenous populations.
Overall, few obvious common themes emerged, and stakeholders' suggestions for future areas of focus in many cases aligned with their own areas of work and interest. Although most external stakeholders did not perceive that CPSI is currently active in any areas in which it should not be engaged, a few questioned the appropriateness of, or expressed surprise to learn about, CPSI's involvement in certain areas, such as home care and mental health. Again, there was no obvious consistency in these responses. The diversity of perspectives that stakeholders offered regarding the appropriate future focus for CPSI's activities likely reflects the size and scope of the patient safety field in Canada.
In this context, it is important to note that key informants were asked general, open-ended questions about priorities, and that neither they nor survey respondents were asked to rank, prioritize, or choose from among possible areas of focus for CPSI. Nor were they asked if, in general, they supported a more restricted or an expanded role or scope of activity for CPSI. The responses to these questions could provide a clearer picture of stakeholder priorities. Such questions could be posed as part of stakeholder consultations undertaken to support a future strategic planning exercise.
More strategic consideration of partnerships
Related to the argument that CPSI should adopt a narrower focus for its work, some key informants argued that CPSI should give more strategic consideration to its partnerships, with a view to prioritizing those which are most relevant and most likely to advance patient safety.
We think CPSI should be more strategic. Rather than gathering up loads of partners, it would be more effective if they have a good understanding of why they are partnering with a certain organization and for what purpose. Usually it's better to have a narrow group of partners that are aligned, working together on something.
In addition, some external interviewees noted that there remain instances in which CPSI is perceived to be duplicating work being carried out by other organizations. The most frequently mentioned example was infection prevention and control,  as well as patient experience mapping and standardized case definitions. These key informants argued that CPSI should improve coordination with stakeholders, so that it can work with or rely on stakeholders without alienating them.
When other partners are already in that space, they should respect that space. They don't have to lead on everything.
Define future directions
Some external stakeholders argued that CPSI should attempt to set the overall strategic direction for patient safety in healthcare in Canada, as embodied by the following assertions:
CPSI [needs] to be slightly ahead of our time — they need to push us from where we're comfortable to where we need to be in a few years.
CPSI has the opportunity to know where we should invest our time and energy two to five years from now. So it is actually setting the stage for improvement with regard to safety. There is a role for a national organization, CPSI in particular, to help define future directions.
To date, they've been responding to perceived or observed needs in healthcare rather than driving some of the advance of the field. They operate more on an enabling level. They develop tools and education and documents that people use, but I don't know that they are setting a tone or strategy that is needed in a national organization in patient safety. I would challenge them to be more of a strategic player, and to say, "Here are the top two or three priorities," and move people in that direction.
What Canada needs is a national vision for quality and safety that each of the provinces can endorse and move forward on. CPSI has not been able to lead this effort. They have been more successful with safety 101 education. They have basic expertise but we need a next generation of patient safety experts to make strong system changes that are required to foster better quality and safety.
Emphasize measurement and evaluation
Finally, some key informants suggested that CPSI should focus on improved measurement and evaluation of patient harm, patient safety interventions, and safety culture within healthcare organizations, with the explicit aim of articulating the impact of patient safety interventions, including its own.
We have never had a good impact analysis of any of these programs individually or collectively and I think that's one of the key things that's missing here — an evaluation.
CPSI should be paying more attention to evaluation, measuring outcomes, as a result of getting out into the marketplace with their different products. [So] they and the rest of us can learn about where we are getting the best outcomes and how their interventions lead to better outcomes.
There's not a vacuum in tools or training, there's a vacuum in measuring harm and knowing how safe people are. We could do more to really measure safety culture directly and to measure harm directly.
The whole idea of measurement is something that CPSI could have a big impact on if they were to champion that.
One key informant linked the concepts of greater strategic focus, strategic partnerships, and measurement by noting the following:
The more tightly you define what you are working on, the easier it is to develop partnerships and the approach to measurement.
As already noted elsewhere in this report, a majority of interviewees, as well as survey respondents, believe there continues to be a need for a dedicated national patient safety organization, even if, as the discussion above makes clear, there are varying perspectives on precisely what its strategic priorities should be.
Value for money
External stakeholders perceive CPSI's activities to have generated considerable value-for-money for their own organization and for others. Quantitative value-for-money analysis focussing on CPSI's medication reconciliation activities suggests that these have generated value-for-money by producing cost savings well in excess of the expenses required to sustain them. Implementation of medication reconciliation in one acute care facility has generated positive net benefits by averting the loss of patient welfare that accompanies preventable adverse drug events.
To the extent that CPSI's activities have accelerated the uptake of medication reconciliation in Canadian healthcare and ensured implementation in accordance with current best practice, CPSI is likely to have generated additional value-for-money for its stakeholders in terms of improved patient well-being. Assuming that all SHN interventions are designed in accordance with current best practices, it seems reasonable to assume the same is true of CPSI's activities in relation to SHN interventions more generally.
Generally speaking, external interviewees perceived value-for-money for their own organizations and other stakeholders from CPSI activities. Although key informants commonly remarked upon the challenges involved in quantifying the value generated by CPSI activities, some explicitly reasoned that the financial benefits associated with these activities, in terms of reduced patient harm (e.g., reduced length of stay), likely outweigh the costs of participation, particularly as many of CPSI's products and services require no financial outlay. The value-for-money of CPSI's products and services for smaller jurisdictions was specifically highlighted.
There just aren't the resources within the province to do some of these things. They either don't get done at all or they don't get done very well. So it's a valuable organization and money very well spent.
Specific examples of CPSI activities perceived to have generated value-for-money for external stakeholders include the following:
Training and education: Among those individuals who referred to CPSI's activities related to training and education, there appears to be a strong sense that these activities provide value-for-money in the sense that the financial costs required to provide these services, or access them from alternate suppliers, would have been considerably higher.
Tools and resources: CPSI tools and resources (e.g., SHN, Disclosure Guidelines) are highly regarded for both their quality and their accessibility.
Miscellaneous: A few respondents highlighted other CPSI activities they perceived to have generated value-for-money over the evaluation period. These included CPSI's role in raising awareness of patient safety issues, in convening healthcare stakeholders to discuss and address these issues, and in drawing attention to the patients' experiences with, and perspectives on, safety incidents.
A few key informants asserted that although CPSI activities had generated substantial value-for-money in the past, this could become more difficult in the future, since much of CPSI's early work is now being undertaken by other organizations, or could be undertaken by these organizations if CPSI did not exist.
To supplement stakeholders' qualitative perceptions of the value-for-money associated with CPSI activities, the evaluation carried out a quantitative value-for-money analysis. One aspect of the analysis focussed specifically on examining the value generated by CPSI's medication reconciliation activities over the evaluation period, as they pertain to acute care facilities in Canada.  This analysis conservatively assumed that:
cost savings that acute care facilities realize due to the availability of CPSI's medication reconciliation tools, resources, and supports constitute the sole source of value stemming from CPSI's activities in this area;
if CPSI had not provided these tools, resources, and supports, Canadian acute care facilities would have acquired some of them from alternative sources [such as the Institute for Healthcare Innovation (IHI) in the US],  but would have incurred additional costs (i.e., above and beyond those associated with the use of CPSI tools, resources, and supports) to preserve applicability and relevance to Canadian healthcare providers; and
implementation of medication reconciliation is discontinued in a proportion of acute care facilities each year.
Based on these assumptions, the baseline value-for-money analysis determined that the present value of the benefits (i.e., cost savings) associated with CPSI's medication reconciliation activities over the period from 2013–2014 to 2015–2016 was approximately $8.1 million, while the present value of costs was about $0.3 million. This implies a net present value of $7.8 million for the evaluation period.
It is important to acknowledge that focussing on the cost savings attributable to the use of CPSI tools, resources, and supports arguably reflects a very narrow conceptualization of the value generated by CPSI's medication reconciliation activities in the context of acute care (as well as its activities more generally).For instance, the discussion of the results of the key informant interviews above underscores the belief among certain stakeholders that in the absence of CPSI activities, some organizations may not have implemented certain patient safety interventions, or may have done so less effectively than they currently do. This, in turn, implies that these activities may have generated additional value for stakeholders by accelerating the uptake of patient safety measures in Canadian healthcare and ensuring implementation is carried out in accordance with current best practices. The value-for-money analysis does not account for either of these possibilities.
In addition to examining the value-for-money of CPSI's activities relating to medication reconciliation, the evaluation also included a value-for-money analysis of implementing medication reconciliation at Edmundston Regional Hospital (ERH), a medium-sized acute care facility located in northwestern New Brunswick. This analysis examined the impact of the interventions undertaken by ERH on the facility's costs, as well as on the incidence of preventable adverse drug events (pADEs) and, by extension, on the well-being of its patients.
For the purpose of this analysis, patient welfare was expressed in terms of quality-adjusted life years (QALYs), a construct commonly used in economic evaluations of healthcare programs that summarizes the impact of interventions upon both the length and quality of patients' lives.  Implicit in the use of QALYs in this and many other economic evaluations is the notion that both length and quality of life are factors for which people and decision-makers are willing to sacrifice other things, which is to say that they are valued. Furthermore, such valuations are typically substantial: in a Canadian context, for example, thresholds ranging from $20,000/QALY to $100,000/QALY have been proposed.
The value-for-money analysis found that implementing medication reconciliation at ERH is expected to reduce the number of pADEs occurring at the facility by an average of about 26 each year. Most of these incidents (~80%) would not have resulted in lasting harm to patients. However, a small number may have been life-threatening or fatal, or may have resulted in permanent injury. Despite the fact that severe, life-threatening, or fatal pADEs are relatively uncommon, they account for the vast majority of QALYs lost as a result of medication errors.
Medication reconciliation at ERH does not appear to be cost-saving. That is, from a financial standpoint, the costs of implementation to ERH ($151,770 in one-time costs, $179,829 in annual costs) are expected to exceed any savings it may enjoy due to reduced incidence of pADEs (estimated to be about $79,180 each year). However, upon accounting for the impact of pADEs on patient welfare, the analysis concluded that the present value of net benefits associated with the intervention is approximately $5.5 million for the period from 2007 to 2016, inclusive.
This indicates that although implementing medication reconciliation may not be cost-saving (in at least some settings), it is highly likely to generate value-for-money.  It also suggests that to the extent that CPSI's medication reconciliation activities succeeded in accelerating the uptake of medication reconciliation in Canadian healthcare and ensuring that implementation is carried out in accordance with current best practices, CPSI is likely to have generated additional value-for-money for its stakeholders in terms of improved patient well-being. To the degree that all SHN interventions are designed in accordance with current best practice in the field of patient safety, it seems reasonable to assume the same is true of CPSI's activities in relation to SHN interventions more generally. With its recent transition away from SHN, and in light of potential future adjustments to its activities, CPSI will need to find new ways to generate and demonstrate value-for-money to stakeholders.
Observations on the Adequacy and Use of Performance Measurement Data
CPSI has taken steps to improve its approach to performance measurement, with an emphasis on identifying ways to measure its long-term impact on patient safety and enhancing its internal evaluation function. There are opportunities to further clarify and refine the theory or theories of change underlying its activities, and to make corresponding adjustments to the logic model and performance measure framework in order to facilitate performance reporting and demonstration of impact.
CPSI developed its current logic model and performance measurement strategy when it entered its current funding agreement with Health Canada. Within the strategy, the performance measurement framework identifies both output and outcome measures, and, based on a review of internal and external facing performance reporting, CPSI has done a good job of consistently tracking and reporting on these measures over the last three years.
CPSI key informants observed that while the organization has been able to identify appropriate indicators for its short- and medium-term outcomes, it has been considerably more challenging to develop suitable indicators to measure its long-term impact on patient safety. They reported that the organization is currently undertaking several initiatives with a view to enhancing its ability to track and report on the extent to which patient safety has improved over time.
First, CPSI is working with external partners to access systems data in order to help shed light on long-term improvements in patient safety. In particular, CPSI and the Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI) have worked collaboratively to develop the Hospital Harm Measure, which is based on existing administrative data that hospitals already collect on a routine basis. As already described, this initiative aims to provide a pan-Canadian framework for measuring patient safety across the entire care spectrum.
In addition, CPSI has incorporated indicators of impact into its approach to performance measurement that draw on Accreditation Canada Required Organizational Practice (ROP) compliance data. In particular, CPSI has formalized reporting of indicators related to its stated outcomes of increasing positive patient safety culture and increasing positive patient safety practices, using ROP compliance data from Accreditation Canada. Patient safety culture is monitored using ROP compliance data relating to patient safety incident disclosure and patient safety incident management, while patient safety practices are monitored using ROP compliance data related to safe surgery checklists, medication reconciliation, home safety risk assessment, hand hygiene compliance, and client safety education. CPSI began formal reporting on these indicators in Q2 2016–2017.
Finally, CPSI is working to enhance its internal program evaluation function and capacity in preparation for the next funding cycle.
While CPSI has made commendable efforts to improve its approach to performance measurement, there are opportunities to further clarify and refine the theory or theories of change underlying its activities, as well as its logic model and performance measure framework, to facilitate performance reporting and demonstration of impact.
5.0 Conclusions
5.1 Relevance Conclusions
5.1.1 Continued Need
This evaluation confirmed an ongoing need to address patient safety in Canada. Recent reports of progress in patient safety in Canada, the US, and the UK have concluded that their respective systems have not appreciably moved the mark in patient safety, due to the complexity of the problem. Persistent rates of harm justify an ongoing focus on patient safety within Canada's healthcare system.
More than a decade after patient safety first emerged as a major concern within the Canadian healthcare system, available data indicate that patient safety has not appreciably improved, suggesting an ongoing need to address the issue.
While the need for a national patient safety organization clearly remains, it is less clear what role such an organization should play in the current environment. Over the past decade, CPSI has fulfilled a critical need in Canadian healthcare by promoting awareness and knowledge of patient safety issues and providing a diverse range of evidence-based tools, resources, and strategies that could be used by healthcare organizations, at the clinical and governance levels, to address patient safety. The availability of these tools and resources has been particularly important to smaller organizations and jurisdictions with limited resources.
However, many external interviewees identified issues that have not to date received significant attention from CPSI, and that could be the focus of its activities in the future. These included, but were by not limited to: public health (e.g., antimicrobial stewardship), primary care, palliative care, community support services (programs that provide assisted living, supportive housing, attended care, transportation, nutrition, hospital-to-home services, and friendly visiting services), and patient safety in relation to Indigenous populations.
5.1.2 Alignment with Government Priorities
There is alignment between CPSI and federal priorities, and CPSI priorities are generally perceived by other stakeholders to be well-aligned with their own. While most stakeholders believe CPSI has adjusted effectively to changing needs and circumstances and that its activities address gaps and needs in the patient safety field, concerns were raised that CPSI lacks a clear strategic focus to guide its work.
5.1.3 Alignment with Federal Roles and Responsibilities
CPSI's mandate and activities are consistent with federal roles and responsibilities and, in particular, with Health Canada's mandate under the Department of Health Act. CPSI meets expectations that Health Canada has for pan-Canadian health organizations to perform a coordinating function and drive pan-Canadian collaboration.
As a national organization with a mandate to provide a leadership role in building a culture of patient safety and quality improvement in the Canadian health system, CPSI is well-placed to advocate for the importance of patient safety as a priority within the system. This mandate is bolstered by widespread stakeholder support for the continued existence of a national organization specifically dedicated to patient safety.
Stakeholders variously perceive CPSI's unique value as being, among other things, the pan-Canadian focus it brings to bear on efforts to improve patient safety, its ability to bring together experts and stakeholders from across the country to work collaboratively on shared priorities, and its role as a clearinghouse for evidence-based patient safety resources, tools, and best practices. Some stakeholders believe CPSI has had difficulty carving out a clear role for itself within the patient safety landscape.
5.2 Performance Conclusions
5.2.1 Achievement of Expected Outcomes (Effectiveness)
Evidence available to the evaluation indicates that progress has been made toward CPSI's expected immediate and intermediate outcomes.
CPSI has contributed to an increased evidence base to improve patient safety, primarily by developing tools and resources grounded in national and international research evidence, and stakeholders widely acknowledge and appreciate this work. Some stakeholders argued that CPSI could further contribute to the evidence base through greater emphasis on measurement and rigorous evaluation, including evaluation of its own products and interventions.
CPSI's work has led to the development of evidence-informed patient safety curricula. A key success has been the integration of the Safety Competencies into the CanMEDS educational framework of the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada and the College of Family Physicians in Canada. As part of the Integrated Patient Safety Action Plan (IPSAP), work is ongoing with many stakeholders and partners to implement the priorities identified by experts via the Patient Safety Education Action Plan.
CPSI's work has produced important gains in patient safety awareness and knowledge among stakeholders. Most survey respondents who have used or implemented specific CPSI programs or resources, participated in CPSI education programs, or read CPSI research reports, reported that doing so has led to increased awareness and knowledge of patient safety issues, either their own, or within their organization more generally.
Through spearheading the establishment of National Patient Safety Consortium and the development of the IPSAP, CPSI has strengthened system coordination. These efforts have united a wide range of stakeholders in advancing a common patient safety agenda, while focussing on gaps and avoiding duplication of effort.
Over the past decade, legislative and policy changes related to patient safety have suggested that Canada has been shifting toward a more positive patient safety culture. Most stakeholders believe this shift has occurred, in part, because of CPSI's work, although many noted that culture change is a lengthy process, and measurement and attribution are difficult.
Canadian healthcare organizations have implemented positive patient safety practices as a result of CPSI activities, with an estimated 88% of eligible acute care facilities and 26% of long-term care facilities in Canada having participated in Safer Healthcare Now! (SHN).
Progress has been made in formal monitoring and reporting on patient safety in Canada. Many survey respondents reported using CPSI resources such as the Canadian Incident Analysis Framework to make changes to their approach to managing patient safety. The collaborative work of CPSI and CIHI to develop the Hospital Harm Measure is seen as an important step forward.
There is evidence of policies, standards, and requirements of professional associations and accreditation bodies informed by patient safety evidence. The Safety Competencies and the Canadian Disclosure Guidelines, in particular, have been widely used and adopted, and more than one-third of Accreditation Canada's Required Organizational Practices (ROPs) reference CPSI resources.
CPSI has been a pioneer in Canada in advocating for and supporting patient and family involvement in healthcare improvement in Canada and internationally through its support for Patients for Patient Safety Canada (PFPSC) and other patient engagement activities. The extent of patient and family involvement within the healthcare system and the impact of this involvement for patient safety outcomes has not been measured or rigorously evaluated.
In the long term, CPSI's activities are expected to contribute to improved patient safety in Canada. Although there is no objective evidence that patient safety in Canada has improved since CPSI was established, most stakeholders believe that CPSI's activities have contributed to improved patient safety. Some argued that without CPSI, it is conceivable that patient safety in Canada might have lost ground rather than remaining stable, particularly given a context of continuous technological and medical innovation, along with the increasing complexity of, and growing financial pressures on, the healthcare system.
5.2.2 Demonstration of Economy and Efficiency
CPSI has operated in an economical manner over the three years covered by the evaluation. It has taken steps to minimize the cost of inputs by eliminating one office and downsizing another, increasing the number of staff working virtually, and managing staff remuneration, among other measures. Although Health Canada's contribution is CPSI's main source of funding and is likely to remain so in the future, CPSI could continue to explore cost recovery and other revenue-raising potential from sources other than Health Canada, and could articulate a comprehensive pricing model for its products and services.
Likewise, CPSI has taken steps to operate efficiently. It has sought to optimize the quantity and quality of its outputs through the use of web-based technology for information dissemination and stakeholder engagement, and leveraging in-kind contributions from stakeholders and external experts. The latter have been critical to CPSI's ability to undertake its activities and produce high-quality products and services. While some stakeholders identified potential additional areas for future CPSI activity (with little commonality or agreement among them), others raised concern that CPSI is already overextended, given its size, and recommended it focus on fewer, well-defined priorities in order to achieve greater impact. Other key suggestions included more strategic consideration to partnerships and collaborations, an emphasis on defining future directions in patient safety, and greater attention to measurement and evaluation.
External stakeholders perceive CPSI's activities to have generated considerable value-for-money for their own organization and for others. Furthermore, formal, quantitative value-for-money analysis, focussing on CPSI's medication reconciliation activities, suggests that these have generated value-for-money by producing cost savings well in excess of the expenses required to sustain them. Implementation of medication reconciliation in one acute care facility has generated positive net benefits by averting the loss of patient welfare that accompanies preventable adverse drug events.
To the extent that CPSI's activities have accelerated the uptake of medication reconciliation in Canadian healthcare, and ensured implementation in accordance with current best practices, CPSI is likely to have generated additional value-for-money for its stakeholders in terms of improved patient well-being. Assuming that all SHN interventions are designed in accordance with current best practices, it seems reasonable to assume the same is true of CPSI's activities in relation to SHN interventions more generally.
6.0 Recommendations
The recipient-led evaluation resulted in five recommendations directed at CPSI which can be found on the CPSI website. There are no recommendations directed at Health Canada.
Appendix 1 – CPSI's activities
CPSI's logic model identifies four broad categories of outputs that are expected to result from the organization's activities, namely interventions and programs, education, research and tools and resources.
Interventions and Programs
Over the period covered by this evaluation, CPSI established several major interventions and programs to assist individuals and organizations in reducing patient harm.
Safer Healt care Now! CPSI's flagship program, Safer Healthcare Now! (SHN) was established in 2005. It was a national program to support Canadian healthcare organizations in improving patient safety through the use of quality improvement methods and integration of evidence in practice. It had three primary goals: reducing harm, improving healthcare, and protecting Canadians. It accomplished these goals by developing and aiding in the implementation of a suite of evidence-based and empirically validated patient safety interventions for primary healthcare providers. The focus of SHN was on the implementation of interventions supported by measurement and evaluation. Each intervention had a corresponding Getting Started Kit, which was intended to serve as a comprehensive and pragmatic toolkit or change package for launching the intervention. Implementation was further supported by topic-specific information webinars, learning and action series, and improvement collaboratives. Discussions and documents could be accessed in online videos, tools, and resources.
In 2016, CPSI redirected some previous SHN resources to create and launch a new program called SHIFT to Safety. The change was prompted by evolving circumstances and needs in the practice environment, including the fact that many SHN interventions had become Accreditation Canada required practices and therefore had largely become embedded into routine practice across the country, the growing evidence that large-scale change requires systems-oriented approaches, and the recognition that patients and families must be positioned as full partners in care.
SHIFT to Safety is intended to be the source for patient safety information in Canada for members of the public, healthcare providers, and healthcare leaders. SHIFT to Safety is described further in Appendix 4, along with CPSI's other major new initiatives that have been implemented since 2013.
Global Patient Safety Alerts. Global Patient Safety Alerts was launched in 2011 and is maintained in collaboration with the World Health Organization (WHO) and international partner organizations from Australia, Canada, Denmark, England, Wales, the European Union, Hong Kong, Japan, and the US. It collects and stores publicly posted accounts of patient safety incidents, as well as lessons learned from those incidents and recommendations for actions to avoid or mitigate the consequences of such incidents. The database is available through a searchable web portal that supports advanced search filtering and browsing by category, and is also accessible via a free iOS application.
Patient Safety and Incident Management Toolkit. Launched in 2012, the toolkit provides practical strategies and resources to manage incidents effectively and keep patients safe. It integrates key CPSI resources, including the Canadian Disclosure Guidelines, Incident Analysis Framework, Global Patient Safety Alerts, and others. Co-designed with patient partners and drawn from the best available evidence and expert advice, the toolkit is intended for those responsible for managing patient safety, quality improvement, risk management, and staff training in any healthcare setting. There are three sections to the toolkit: 1) incident management — the actions that follow patient safety incidents (including near misses), 2) patient safety management — the actions that help to proactively anticipate patient safety incidents and prevent them from occurring, and 3) system factors — the factors that shape and are shaped by patient safety and incident management (legislation, policies, culture, people, processes and resources).
Canada's Hand Hygiene Challenge. Originally launched in 2007 as the Hand Hygiene Campaign, this initiative was relaunched as Canada's Hand Hygiene Challenge in 2010. It provides implementation tools to help reduce patient risk through increased hand hygiene. The Hand Hygiene Toolkit includes educational and promotional materials to promote hand hygiene. The Human Factors Toolkit includes tools organized around contemporary research on the human factors influencing compliance. The Patient and Family Guide informs and coaches patients on taking an active role in hand hygiene. A 15-minute online training module, with an associated certificate, has been completed by more than 14,000 healthcare workers and students across Canada. A variety of other materials including videos, scholarly articles, and advocacy links is also available on the webpage.
In addition to Canada's Hand Hygiene Challenge, CPSI is the Canadian host to the WHO Global Campaign, SAVE LIVES: Clean Your Hands. Each year on May 5, in partnership with Accreditation Canada, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), and Infection Prevention and Control Canada (IPAC), CPSI hosts STOP! Clean Your Hands Day. On average, over 1,000 Canadian organizations register each year for the event.
Patients for Patient Safety Canada (PFPSC). Initiated in 2005 after the WHO convened the first Patient for Patient Safety workshop, PFPSC was formed in 2006 and formally launched in 2007, with the goal of representing the patient perspective in patient safety improvements at all system levels. Patients are defined broadly to include clients, residents, customers, and family members (as specified by patients). The PFPSC membership is composed of volunteer patients or family members, many of whom have directly or indirectly experienced safety incidents stemming from avoidable patient safety issues. They represent the patient perspective in speaking engagements, working groups, committees, research consultations, and a variety of other fora. CPSI partners with patients in internal processes, such as recruitment of executives and strategic planning, and in external offerings. Several other organizations, across Canada and internationally, have requested PFPSC volunteers to partner in the design, development and delivery of their own programs.
Education
CPSI offers education and professional development to practicing professionals, as well as graduate and undergraduate students through several programs, as summarized below.
Effective Governance for Quality and Patient Safety (EGQPS) provides a toolkit and educational sessions to support safe and effective governance of healthcare organizations.  Targeted at Board members and trustees, the course is offered on a cost-recovery basis at a cost of approximately $600 per participant.
The Canadian Patient Safety Officer Course (CPSOC), delivered in partnership with HealthcareCAN, provides an introduction to the techniques and tools required to advance patient safety for healthcare professionals responsible for administering or disseminating safety agendas within their organizations. The interactive course is available face-to-face or online using webinars, discussion fora, and access to faculty consultations.
The Patient Safety Education Program (PSEP) – Canada is a Canadian adaptation of a program that began at Northwestern University and is now managed in the US by MedStar Health System. It aims to provide inter-professional teams with the tools necessary to become patient safety implementers and trainers within their own organizations — a 'train-the-training-team' approach. Over 35 separate modules are available, all of which are mapped to Accreditation Canada standards and CPSI's Safety Competencies Framework. Initial training is delivered at a conference by a team of Master Facilitators, and follow-up support is provided through online communities.
Advancing Safety for Patients in Residency Education (ASPIRE) is an adaptation of the PSEP – Canada program and is a four-day workshop co-designed with the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada to integrate with the established residency programs. It targets medical educators and residents with an interest in championing the pedagogy of patient safety by integrating process improvement and resource stewardship perspectives into patient safety education, fostering the skills development required to assume leadership roles to change education in residency programs, and formulating an education plan that promotes patient safety during residency.
The Incident Analysis Learning Program is a set of learning modules that explore each of the eight sections of the Canadian Incident Analysis Framework. They are hosted on CPSI's website and provided free of charge.
CPSI also hosts and attends a variety of healthcare events across Canada, including lectures, panel discussions, public awareness campaigns, and workshops. Two large-scale annual events are Canadian Patient Safety Week (CPSW) and Canada's Virtual Forum on Patient Safety and Quality Improvement. CPSW is a national annual campaign started in 2005 to inspire improvement in patient safety and quality. Health facilities and health organizations across Canada participate in the week by holding events and activities to increase awareness of patient safety in their local area. The campaign is targeted at everyone involved in healthcare delivery in Canada, as well as those receiving care, including current and future healthcare professionals, decision-makers, patients, clients, and their families. CPSI provides participants with a CPSW package containing promotional products and materials to support local campaigns.
Research
CPSI supports research directly related to patient safety via competitions and collaborative funding, and indirectly by disseminating research findings, forming partnerships, and creating advisory panels. Since 2014–2015, CPSI has offered research funding through three posted competitions for $50,000.  It also provides grants to students in health and allied disciplines for applied patient safety research.  In addition to competitions, CPSI has commissioned 12 research projects, published between 2006 and 2014 (including five in the current evaluation period), that focus on understanding specific patient safety topics to inform its work.
Tools and Resources
Finally, the CPSI website is a free, searchable repository of tools and resources such as toolkits, guides, frameworks, reports, checklists, presentations, and patient stories. Some examples include the Canadian Incident Analysis Framework, the Incident Management Toolkit, the Safety Competencies Framework, the Canadian Framework for Teamwork and Communication, and the Canadian Disclosure Guidelines, to name just a few.
A recent addition to CPSI's tools and resources was the publication, in October 2016, of a joint national report by CPSI and the Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI) entitled Measuring Patient Harm in Canadian Hospitals.  This report provided the first results of a new patient safety measure, the Hospital Harm Measure, developed collaboratively by CIHI and CPSI in an effort to provide a national picture of patient safety. The measure uses data on discharges from Canadian acute care hospitals found in CIHI's Discharge Abstract Database, and captures hospitalizations with at least one unintended occurrence of harm that could potentially be prevented by implementing known evidence-informed practices. It includes 31 clinical groups based on four categories of harm, but excludes Quebec and select mental health diagnoses.
The measure provides, for the first time, a general measure of patient safety in acute care settings in Canada. The process of developing and refining the measure occurred in consultation with facilities and experts across Canada over a four-year period.
To complement the Hospital Harm Measure, CPSI has developed the Hospital Harm Improvement Resource (the Improvement Resource). Released in conjunction with the Measuring Patient Harm in Canadian Hospitals report, this resource links measurement and improvement by providing evidence-informed resources to support patient safety improvement efforts for each of the 31 clinical groups included in the measure. The Improvement Resource is intended to make information on improving patient safety easily available, so that teams spend less time researching and more time optimizing patient care. In partnership with CIHI, CPSI is supporting organizations in using the Hospital Harm Measure through briefings with stakeholders prior to the launch, a public launch of the national report with an expert patient safety panel, and subsequent national calls focussed on applying the measure and the Improvement Resource to patient safety improvement at the organizational level. CPSI consulted with clinical experts, Accreditation Canada, and patient advisors in the development of this resource.
Appendix 2 – Logic Model
Long descripiton - Logic Model

According to the program logic model for CPSI, the inputs (financial resources: Health Canada contribution agreement and other funding sources; human resources: staff across Canada; and external resources: Faculty Network, other organizations and patients and families) should lead to the following activities: knowledge generation: identifying gaps in knowledge about patient safety issues, funding research, and creating high-quality patient safety knowledge; competency building: pre-service education and professional development; knowledge synthesis and translation: gathering knowledge from others, assessing the quality of knowledge and developing tools/resources to address patient safety priorities; leveraging the work of other organizations: influencing patient safety priorities, recommending regulatory and/or financial levers to promote system level patient safety improvement, and supporting integrated approaches to improve patient safety; and relationship building: engaging audiences across the health system and facilitating strategic alignment across health system audiences. These activities will produce the following outputs: education; research; tools and resources; and interventions and programs. The activities are expected to lead to the following immediate, intermediate and long-term outcomes. Immediate outcomes: a growing evidence base to improve patient safety; evidence-informed patient safety curricula across health disciplines; increased patient safety – awareness and knowledge; and strengthened system coordination related to patient safety. Intermediate outcomes: increase in positive patient safety culture; increase in positive patient safety practices; patient safety is formally monitored and reported; and policies, standards and requirements of strategic partners are informed by patient safety evidence. Long-term outcome: patient safety in Canada is improved.
Appendix 3 – Evaluation Description
An evaluation matrix was developed to address key questions of interest to senior management within CPSI and Health Canada and to align with the Treasury Board’s 2016 Policy on Results. The evaluation considered the five core Treasury Board issues under the two themes of relevance and performance (effectiveness, efficiency, and economy). Corresponding to each of the core issues, specific questions were developed based on program considerations, and these guided the evaluation process.
The evaluation drew on multiple lines of evidence, including a literature review, a review of documents and data, key informant interviews, a survey of CPSI stakeholders, and three in-depth case studies. A brief description of each of these data collection methods is provided below.
Literature, document, and data review
The literature review addressed evaluation questions relating primarily to relevance (i.e., continued need), while the document and data review provided historical and contextual information for CPSI’s activities and responded directly to virtually all of the evaluation questions. Relevant literature and documents were provided by CPSI or were accessed from publicly available sources. The data review considered financial information, as well as performance measurement data tracked by CPSI through its performance measurement framework.
Key informant interviews
Two rounds of interviews were conducted to support the evaluation. In the first round, 10 CPSI staff and Board members were interviewed in order to inform evaluation planning and design. In the second round, 40 individuals were interviewed, including CPSI staff and Board members (n=9); Health Canada representatives (n=3); and external stakeholders (n=28). External key informants represented a range of stakeholders, including provincial and territorial government organizations (e.g., ministries of health and quality councils), national and regional partner organizations, professional associations, healthcare providers, patient organizations, and academics. Many external key informants had multiple affiliations and fell into more than one of these stakeholder categories. Key informants were selected by CPSI for their knowledge of, and experience with, CPSI or the patient safety field in Canada. Interviews were digitally recorded with the permission of key informants to ensure the accuracy of the information collected.
Survey of CPSI stakeholders
A bilingual web-based survey of CPSI stakeholders was conducted. CPSI supplied the survey sample based on contacts within its contact database. All contacts within the database were included, with the exception of vendors, media, and CPSI personnel, resulting in a sample of 10,342 email addresses.
Overall, the survey achieved 596 completions, representing a completion rate of 6%. This is similar to response rates achieved in stakeholder surveys conducted by Prairie Research Associates of similar pan-Canadian organizations in the health field.  Overall, 90% of respondents (n=535) completed the survey in English, while 10% (n=61) completed it in French.
The survey results were analyzed using SPSS and R, two statistical data analysis software packages commonly used in social science research. Analysis consisted primarily of basic frequency tabulations. In addition, key questions were analyzed for differences among sub-groups based on respondents’ current positions or roles, the type of work they do in their organizations, the types of organization, and whether their organizations provide direct care to clients.  For categorical outcomes, Chi-squared analysis was employed for single predictors or logistic regression in the case of multiple predictors. For ranked outcome variables (e.g., Likert scales), Kruskall-Wallis tests were employed with follow-up Mann-Whitney U tests. Where appropriate, Bonferroni corrections were made for multiple comparisons. Results significant at α = .05 are reported in the relevant sections.
Open-ended survey questions were analyzed using thematic analysis and tabulated in SPSS where the number of responses was sufficient to warrant it.
Case studies
Three case studies were conducted of organizations that had engaged with CPSI or implemented CPSI interventions, products, and resources. Three organizations of varying size and in different jurisdictions were selected by CPSI for case study: St. Michael’s Hospital in Toronto, Ontario; Vitalité Health Network in New Brunswick; and Alberta Health Services.
In all three cases, data collection consisted of document and data review, as well as a small number of interviews with organizational representatives. In addition, the case study of Vitalité Health Network included a quantitative value-for-money analysis, focussing on the value-for-money generated by CPSI’s medication reconciliation activities in acute care facilities. A detailed description of the methodology used to complete the value-for-money analysis is included in the Vitalité case study report.
Individual study reports were prepared for each organization and approved by the organizations prior to being submitted to CPSI. Key findings have been integrated into this report.
Appendix 4 – Major activities and response to previous evaluations
Since 2013, and in response to the recommendations of the previous evaluation to focus or rationalize its scope of activity, enhance engagement with the system and embed ownership of major programs and activities within system, CPSI has oriented its activities toward achieving system-level change through the pursuit of four strategic goals. Evidence suggests that CPSI has experienced challenges in achieving the increased focus or rationalization of activity called for by the previous evaluation. CPSI scaled back or even discontinued some existing program areas and activities, but it also realigned some existing activities under its new strategic goals and introduced several new initiatives, effectively increasing, rather than decreasing, the breadth of its programming. CPSI representatives noted that the organization has been in transitional phase since the last evaluation as it has worked to rationalize or focus its scope of activity.
As described in section 4.2, CPSI responded to the recommendations of the previous evaluation – to focus or rationalize its scope of activity through enhancing engagement with the system and embedding ownership of major programs and activities within system – by articulating a vision for increased focus on system-level change through the pursuit of four strategic goals. Its major activities in the evaluation period, including the development of the Consortium and the Integrated Patient Safety Action Plan (IPSAP), the transition from Safer Healthcare Now! (SHN) to SHIFT to Safety, and the development of the HUB model, have been oriented around these four strategic goals, and these activities are described below.
Development of the Consortium and the IPSAP
CPSI’s overarching strategic goal since 2013 has been the development of a National Patient Safety Strategy. As already described, CPSI spearheaded the development of the National Patient Safety Consortium in January 2014 as a mechanism for achieving this goal.  Accordingly, CPSI is responsible for maintaining the overall strategic coherence and coordination of the IPSAP, which brings together six separate but interlocking areas of focus for patient safety into a three-year action plan affirmed by the Consortium. Four initial areas of focus have been identified, each with associated action plans: medication safety, surgical care safety, infection prevention and control and home care safety. In addition, the IPSAP includes action plans relating to patient safety education and the National Patient Safety Consortium itself. The IPSAP is depicted in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Integrated Patient Safety Action Plan
Long Description - Integrated Patient Safety Action Plan

Figure 2 depicts the Integrated Patient Safety Action Plan which brings together six separate but interlocking areas of focus for patient safety into a three-year action plan affirmed by the Consortium: National Patient Safety Consortium Action Plan; Surgical Care Safety Action Plan; Medication Safety Action Plan; Home Care Safety Action Plan; Infection Prevention and Control Action Plan; and Patient Safety Education Action Plan. These six areas of focus center around the following themes: patients and families; providers, leaders and policymakers; measuring and learning to improve; and communicating.
While the IPSAP began to take shape after the January 2014 Consortium meeting, the implementation horizon for the three-year plan runs predominantly from April 2015 to March 2018. Reflecting the collaborative nature of the IPSAP, a wide range of organizations from across Canada provide direct leadership or contribute actively as partners in the actions.
The Consortium is subject to a collaborative governance model proposed by CPSI and implemented by the collective. The governance model is comprised of various entities, key among which are a Steering Committee of executive leaders from partner organizations; Leads Groups to lead the planning, implementation, and coordination of IPSAP actions; and Action Teams, which are responsible for implementing the IPSAP actions.
The Consortium and the IPSAP will undergo a separate evaluation beginning in early 2017, based on an evaluation plan that was developed in fulfillment of an IPSAP action calling for evaluation of the work. Progress reporting on the IPSAP indicates that progress has been made in implementing all of the IPSAP action plans.  Overall, by the third quarter of its second year (i.e., by December 2016), 40% (n=34) of the 93 IPSAP actions were completed, 27% (n=23) were started, 32% (n=31) were scheduled to start at a later time, and 1% (n=1) were expected to start, but were delayed. Although progress appears to vary by action plan (see Table 16), it is important to note that action plans were created at different points in time over a 15-month period. Furthermore, Leads Groups had the flexibility to define their own actions, resulting in substantial variation in the number and complexity of actions across and within action plans. Finally, many of the actions identified in the IPSAP are laid out sequentially, necessitating the completion of some before others can begin.
The establishment of the Consortium and the subsequent development of the IPSAP as a coordinated national effort to address patient safety were central elements of CPSI’s response to the recommendations of the previous evaluation to enhance stakeholder engagement and focus its scope of activity.  In pursuing this initiative, CPSI consulted with provincial and territorial jurisdictions and partners across the country to identify and validate system priorities, created a national collaborative governance and shared leadership structure, and secured the participation and commitment of a diverse range of organizations. Although CPSI reports that some challenges remain such as finding the best means to balance comprehensive involvement of partners with simplicity in governance and building a truly collective commitment (as demonstrated through financial investment by partners and strategic/operational plan alignment), it seems clear that advances in stakeholder engagement have been made through this initiative.
It is less clear whether or not the Consortium and the IPSAP represent a rationalization or focusing of CPSI’s activity. While it is certainly the case that the IPSAP addresses specific priorities and gaps identified through the consultative process – and can be thought of as “focussed” in that sense – CPSI representatives acknowledged that in many ways, the Consortium and the Action Plan were an add-on to CPSI’s other existing activities, and therefore increased, rather than decreased, the breadth of its programming.
Transition from Safer Healthcare Now! to SHIFT to Safety
Another major activity for CPSI in the evaluation period has been the development and launch of a new program, called SHIFT to Safety, to replace its long-standing flagship program, SHN. Launched on July 20, 2016, SHIFT to Safety is a primarily web-based resource that curates best practice information from around the world for three target groups: patients and their families, healthcare providers, and leaders. CPSI key informants explained that, both in Canada and internationally, it had become evident that although clinical interventions such as SHN, which mostly targeted providers in acute care hospitals, were important, they alone were not sufficient to bring about desired improvements in patient safety, and that a broader approach targeting patients, families, and leaders, as well as healthcare providers, in a variety of settings, was necessary in order to have a real impact on patient safety.
SHIFT to Safety aims to answer the most pressing questions in patient safety, namely: 1) How do I prevent harm?, 2) How can I respond to harm when it happens?, and 3) How can I learn from harm that has already happened? The program offers evidence-based resources focussed on improving teamwork, communication, leadership, and patient safety culture and targeted at the specific needs of its three target audiences. Resources for the public are designed to empower patients and families to advocate for healthcare safety. Resources for providers are designed to encourage providers to prioritize safety, work as a team, respond effectively to patient safety incidents, and reduce the risk of patient injury. Resources targeting leaders are designed to assist leaders in taking steps to engender a positive patient safety culture.  SHIFT to Safety is consistent with recent recommendations in the literature to foster a systems approach to safety that focusses on teamwork, culture, and measurement as key elements of safe systems.
SHIFT to Safety is envisioned by CPSI as an aspect of its transition toward an increasingly systems-based approach to change, and in this sense is a major element of CPSI’s response to the recommendations of the previous evaluation to focus its scope of activity and enhance engagement with the system. The development and implementation of SHIFT to Safety represented a significant change of direction for CPSI and was supported primarily by the scaling back and phasing out of CPSI’s long-standing flagship initiative, SHN, and the Patient Safety Metrics (PSM) system.
Development of the HUB model
A third major activity during the period covered by the evaluation has been the development of the HUB/Affiliation model for delivery of CPSI’s educational offerings. Development of the model was prompted by a desire to achieve greater reach, sustainability, and system embedment of these offerings. Under the HUB model, agreements between CPSI and partner organizations transfer most of the responsibilities for the planning and delivery of a mature educational offering to the partner organization, while CPSI retains responsibilities for maintaining core curricula, ensuring quality control, and monitoring overall program evaluation.
To date, CPSI has two national educational programs that have HUB offerings: Effective Governance for Quality and Patient Safety (EGQPS) and the Patient Safety Education Program (PSEP) – Canada. These programs have been licenced out to five organizations. The Association of Family Health Teams of Ontario and the Ontario Hospital Association (OHA) have agreements with CPSI to deliver EGQPS, while Queen’s University, the Manitoba Institute for Public Safety (MIPS), and the OHA have agreements to deliver PSEP – Canada. CPSI has an additional agreement with the Canadian Armed Forces to deliver PSEP – Canada.
CPSI reports that the organization is currently in the process of negotiating an agreement with Alberta Health Services (AHS) that would see AHS become a PSEP – Canada Affiliate in 2017, and is working with the New Brunswick Department of Health to establish a HUB affiliate partnership for EGQPS.
CPSI key informants reported that the development of the HUB model has been the primary way through which the organization has sought to address the previous evaluation’s recommendation to embed ownership of major programs and services within the system. Through the HUB model, partners have provided increased access to CPSI’s intended audience and allowed CPSI to further meet demands from the field, which would otherwise not be possible given CPSI’s resources and capacity. While the HUB model has realized success, CPSI key informants noted that it has been challenging to identify potential HUB affiliate organizations and vet potential partners. In addition, they noted that work remains to be done to ensure clarity regarding CPSI’s use of resources dedicated to HUB partnerships and to standardize some of the processes related to the HUB model while retaining flexibility in partnership arrangements. At present, according to CPSI, significant CPSI resources are required to support HUB partners, negating much of the resource savings gained from transferring the program out of CPSI’s direct control. While CPSI support requirements are reduced as HUB partnerships mature, allowing CPSI to shift its focus away from program delivery toward maintenance of curriculum and data collection related to session delivery, not all HUB affiliates reach this level of maturity at the same rate or as quickly as anticipated. Thus, the level of CPSI support required can vary from partner to partner. Moving forward, CPSI aims to ensure greater clarity regarding its ongoing role in supporting HUB partners in future partnership agreements. 
While CPSI has introduced HUB offerings for the EGQPS and PSEP for the reasons explained above, the organization continues to offer pan-Canadian access to these programs through its traditional delivery model.
Overall success in responding to the previous evaluation
CPSI responded to the recommendations of the previous evaluation – to focus or rationalize its scope of activity, enhance engagement with the system, and embed ownership of major programs and activities within the system – by developing its 2013–2018 Business Plan. The Business Plan laid out a vision for increased focus on system-level change through the pursuit of four strategic goals. In the evaluation period, CPSI has oriented its major activities, including the development of the Consortium and the IPSAP, the transition from SHN to SHIFT to Safety, and the development of the HUB model, around these four strategic goals. 
Despite the formulation of strategic goals to guide its work, CPSI has encountered challenges in achieving the increased focus or rationalization of activity called for by the previous evaluation. During the funding period, CPSI eliminated activity in two notable areas: suspension of Canada’s Forum on Patient Safety and the decommissioning of SHN and the PSM system. For the most part, however, CPSI scaled back existing program areas and activities or realigned them under its new strategic goals, rather than discontinuing them altogether, and it also introduced several new initiatives. Arguably, the overall effect was to increase, rather than decrease, the breadth of its programming.
In reflecting on CPSI’s efforts to respond to the recommendations of the 2012 evaluation, CPSI representatives noted that the organization wrestled internally with how to balance a more strategic orientation with historical programs that had been successful and were seen as crucial components of patient safety. In addition, they noted that CPSI’s establishment of internal operational divisions within each strategic goal, called Goal Areas, may have mitigated against achieving greater focus. Once included within a Goal Area, all programs were by definition seen as contributing to the larger strategic goal. As a result, the strategic goals could be, and evidently were, read very broadly to include almost any program activities.
Endnotes

Footnote i Some of the seminal work on patient safety originated in the US, beginning with the landmark report, To Err is Human. The ubiquitous nature of the problem was revealed in further studies of healthcare systems around the world, and the mounting evidence moved policy makers to act. In the United Kingdom (UK), the publishing of An Organization with a Memory (National Health Service, 2000), shaped the National Health Service’s response to the patient safety challenge. In Australia, the Quality in Australian Health.
Return to footnote i referrer
 Footnote ii The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality in the US has developed a set of 26 patient safety indicators (Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 2006), while the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) currently collects internationally comparable data for five patient safety indicators.
Return to footnote ii referrer
 Footnote iii Published studies have led to conflicting conclusions. One major concern is that the proportion of preventable deaths may be too small to meaningfully influence the HSMR (Goodacre, Campbell, & Carter, 2013). In the CAE Study, for example, only 0.0056, or one half of one percent, of hospital admissions examined resulted in a fatal, preventable, adverse event (Baker et al., 2004).
Return to footnote iii referrer
 Footnote iv The Panel was mandated to identify promising areas of innovation that have the potential to sustainably reduce growth in health spending while leading to improvements in the quality and accessibility of care. The Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of CPSI was a member of the Panel.
Return to footnote iv referrer
 Footnote v Due to methodological changes that CPSI introduced with the intention of addressing the possibility of counting the same individuals more than once, the evaluation could not compare changes in these indicators over the period of time covered by the evaluation. It is also important to note that the potential for double-counting individuals remains under the current approach.
Return to footnote v referrer
 Footnote vi Prior to 2013, there were fewer sources of funding for patient safety research in Canada. By funding such research, CPSI was supporting the development of important evidence in a relatively new field while assisting academic researchers and students in developing a research agenda focussed on patient safety.
Return to footnote vi referrer
 Footnote vii While it is true that CPSI has not published analyses of the impact of SHN interventions in the peer-reviewed literature, it has carried out and published audits examining compliance with various SHN interventions based on PSM data (including falls prevention, VTE, medication reconciliation, hand.
Return to footnote vii referrer
 Footnote viii CPSI conducted an evaluation of PFPSC in 2014. However, the PFPSC evaluation would not qualify as a “rigorous” evaluation from the perspective of these key informants.
Return to footnote viii referrer
 Footnote ix Curriculum mapping is the creation of a visual representation of a course curriculum followed by the application of expert scrutiny and review to identify gaps and improvement opportunities (Jacobs, 1997).
Return to footnote ix referrer
 Footnote x Nevertheless, as shown in Table 13, hand hygiene and medication reconciliation are two ROPs experiencing relatively lower rates of compliance.
Return to footnote x referrer
 Footnote xi For the purpose of these indicators, collaboration is defined as a relationship for which an agreement (contract, memorandum of understanding) has been signed between CPSI and the collaborating partner. CPSI informants indicated that collaborations are counted at the end of each period, and since formal collaborations often expire at the end of the fiscal year, even formal relationships can be under-represented while agreements are formally being renewed for the following fiscal year. In addition, CPSI informants indicated that after collecting data on agreements using this strict definition for several years, many important partnerships were not represented in the data, since much of CPSI’s collaborative work is not governed by formal agreements. In 2015–2016, the organization introduced a new indicator to measure informal collaborations.
Return to footnote xi referrer
 Footnote xii A number of survey measures of patient safety culture have been developed, but they vary in psychometric validity (Singla, Kitch, Weissman, & Campbell, 2006) and there is comparatively little data on how well.
Return to footnote xii referrer
 Footnote xiii A more definitive statement about CPSI’s influence on legislation change might have been possible had CPSI undertaken activities explicitly aimed at influencing such change in the jurisdictions in question, such as submissions to or appearances before legislative committees.
Return to footnote xiii referrer
 Footnote xiv That said, the validity of using compliance data for measuring safety culture could be questioned. When the consequence of non-compliance is the potential loss of accreditation status, an organization’s motivation for achieving compliance may not necessarily be related to the existence of a safety culture. In this regard, it is important to note that CPSI originally intended to use Accreditation Canada survey data to measure changes in patient safety culture, but recently elected not to do so, for reasons related to data quality.
Return to footnote xiv referrer
 Footnote xv CPSI indicates that the proportion of home care facilities participating in SHN is challenging to estimate, since there is no readily available count of the number of public and private home care facilities.
Return to footnote xv referrer
 Footnote xvi CPSI tracked the proportion of health teams that met implementation goals set for themselves, in relation to various indicators within PSM. Tracking takes place over a period of 24 months, to allow for the establishment of a sufficient baseline from which to observe change. Success is reported if the team reached and maintained their goal for three consecutive submissions within six months during the 24-month window.
Return to footnote xvi referrer
 Footnote xvii These results are somewhat lower than the performance data reported by CPSI, which indicate that between 2013–2014 and 2015–2016, an average of 90% of organizations that took part in a CPSI training session reported having incorporated practices or tools that were introduced during the session.
Return to footnote xvii referrer
 Footnote xviii In open-ended questions, a small number of respondents to the stakeholder survey expressed dissatisfaction with CPSI’s decision to discontinue PSM.
Return to footnote xviii referrer
 Footnote xix CPSI has held a seat on seven advisory committees to inform ROPs and standards. CPSI reported that it routinely engages Accreditation Canada on its working groups, and provides ad hoc consultations during both organizations’ product development and revision phases.
Return to footnote xix referrer
 Footnote xx CPSI indicates that when Accreditation Canada began reviewing its Qmentum accreditation program in 2013 to better integrate principles of client- and family-centred care, CPSI was consulted on how to approach the review and gave advice on the composition and terms of reference for a working group to include a representative and robust sample of patient/family advisors. A working group was established to guide enhancements to the standards content and development process, as well as other aspects of the accreditation process related to client- and family-centred care. CPSI and four representatives of PFPSC participated in this working group.
Return to footnote xx referrer
 Footnote xxi CPSI’s financial projections for the 2012–2013 to 2017–2018 period forecasted income from registrations and sponsorships to be $949,000 in 2014–2015 (CPSI, 2013a), nearly $371,000 more than was actually generated from these sources in that year.
Return to footnote xxi referrer
 Footnote xxii CPSI has, in fact, already begun to address some of these areas, including Indigenous health and the broader spectrum of care, including home care, long-term care, emergency medical services, and primary care.
Return to footnote xxii referrer
 Footnote xxiii CPSI representatives noted that the Hand Hygiene human factors toolkits and the online hand hygiene training module was transitioned to Infection Prevention and Control (IPAC) Canada around March 31, 2017. CPSI’s IPAC faculty was recently tasked with reviewing existing IPAC resources for currency and relevance. The faculty recommended removing CPSI from this space and winding down associated resources, which includes the divestment of resources to update the hand hygiene training module. CPSI was then approached by IPAC Canada, which requested the rights to the online hand hygiene module and hand hygiene kits. CPSI regards this as a positive transition, as it views IPAC Canada as better positioned to ensure ongoing updates to these resources.
Return to footnote xxiii referrer
 Footnote xxiv The value-for-money analysis was necessarily limited in scope to medication reconciliation, due to the high data requirements needed to complete it.
Return to footnote xxiv referrer
 Footnote xxv Some of these tools, most notably Patient Safety Metrics (PSM), are unique to CPSI. It was assumed that Canadian acute care facilities would have been required to design and implement these tools internally if they had not been available from CPSI.
Return to footnote xxv referrer
 Footnote xxvi That said, it is critical to recognize that such cost savings, when and where they occur, can in principle  be reinvested in ways that produce non-pecuniary benefits for the organization’s stakeholders. For example, such savings could potentially be reallocated to other interventions that improve patient health.
Return to footnote xxvi referrer
 Footnote xxvii The results of the sensitivity analysis suggest that medication reconciliation at Edmundston Regional Hospital is anticipated to generate positive net benefits nearly all the time (95.1%).
Return to footnote xxvii referrer
 Footnote xxviii CPSI has, in fact, already begun to address some of these areas, including Indigenous health and the broader spectrum of care, including home care, long-term care, emergency medical services, and primary care.
Return to footnote xxviii referrer
 Footnote xxix Like all CIHI measures, the quality of the underlying clinical data can affect results, and therefore, the Hospital Harm Measure is intended to be used in conjunction with other sources of information, such as patient safety incident report and learning systems, patient experience surveys, infection control data, and global trigger tool data to make hospitals safer. Since the Hospital Harm Measure is a new measurement tool, additional precautions must be taken when interpreting the results.
Return to footnote xxix referrer
 Footnote xxx For example, four stakeholder surveys conducted by Prairie Research Associates in 2010, 2012, and 2015 for the Institute of Safe Medication Practices (ISMP) Canada and the Canadian Centre on Substance Abuse (CCSA) — all of which, like the CPSI stakeholder survey, were broadly targeted to the organizations’ stakeholders — achieved response rates ranging between 8% and 18%.
Return to footnote xxx referrer
 Footnote xxxi Sub-group analyses were based on questions 4, 5, 6, and 7 of the survey. Since questions 4, 5, and 6 contained a large number of response categories, response categories were combined in an effort to create sufficiently large sub-groups for analysis. Despite this effort, for these questions, sample sizes remained insufficient to achieve statistically reliable inferences given the number of sub-groups. Sample size was sufficient to achieve statistically reliable inferences only for sub-group analysis based on question 7 (that is, whether respondents’ organizations provided direct care to clients).
Return to footnote xxxi referrer
 Footnote xxxii CPSI key informants noted that a national integrated strategy for improving patient safety was first called for in 2003–04 in CPSI’s founding document, Building a Safer System.
Return to footnote xxxii referrer
 Footnote xxxiii It was beyond the scope of this evaluation to carry out a detailed examination the implementation of the IPSAP action plans or draw conclusions about the impact of the Consortium or the IPSAP. As noted, the Consortium and the IPSAP will be the subject of a focussed evaluation in 2017.
Return to footnote xxxiii referrer
 Footnote xxxiv It is important to note that CPSI has endeavoured to enhance stakeholder engagement in other ways as well. CPSI key informants reported, for example, that the organization has spent time meeting with the senior leadership of virtually all pan-Canadian health organizations to identify collaborative opportunities to move patient safety forward, and, in 2016, completed a strategic partnership analysis and stakeholder map with the intent of proactively assessing and prioritizing key partner organizations, nurturing and growing existing relationships, forging new relationships, and determining necessary strategic alliances and partnerships (CPSI, 2016k).
Return to footnote xxxiv referrer
 Footnote xxxv CPSI reports that the Consortium and related work was funded through scaling back of the Research budget after 2011; changes in SHN funding stemming from a transition away from the regional structure, a reduced role for clinical intervention leads, and discontinuation (in 2016–17) of the PSM system; and increased focus on the HUB model.
Return to footnote xxxv referrer
 Footnote 1 CPSI. (2015a). About CPSI. Retrieved October 23, 2015, from http://www.patientsafetyinstitute.ca/en/About/Pages/default.aspx
Return to footnote 1 referrer
 Footnote 2 CPSI. (2015a). About CPSI. Retrieved October 23, 2015, from http://www.patientsafetyinstitute.ca/en/About/Pages/default.aspx
Return to footnote 2 referrer
 Footnote 3 Kohn, L. T., Corrigan, J. M., & Donaldson, M. S. (2000). To Err Is Human: Building a Safer Health System. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press. Retrieved from http://www.nap.edu/catalog/9728
Return to footnote 3 referrer
 Footnote 4 Baker, G. R., Norton, P. G., Flintoft, V., Blais, R., Brown, A., Cox, J., … others. (2004). The Canadian Adverse Events Study: the incidence of adverse events among hospital patients in Canada. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 170(11), 1678–1686.
Return to footnote 4 referrer
 Footnote 5 National Steering Committee on Patient Safety. (2002, September 20). Building a Safer System: A National Integrated Strategy for Improving Patient Safety in Canadian Health Care. Retrieved from http://www.royalcollege.ca/portal/page/portal/rc/common/documents/advocacy/building_a_safer_system_e.pdf
Return to footnote 5 referrer
 Footnote 6 CPSI. (2013b). Health Canada Contribution to the Canadian Patient Safety Institute: Performance Measurement Strategy (Final).
Return to footnote 6 referrer
 Footnote 7 CPSI. (2015a). About CPSI. Retrieved October 23, 2015, from http://www.patientsafetyinstitute.ca/en/About/Pages/default.aspx
Return to footnote 7 referrer
 Footnote 8 CPSI. (2013a). CPSI Business Plan, 2013-18.
Return to footnote 8 referrer
 Footnote 9 Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat. (2012). Theory-Based Approaches to Evaluation: Concepts and Practices. Retrieved January 25, 2017, from http://www.tbs-sct.gc.ca/hgw-cgf/oversight-surveillance/ae-ve/cee/tbae-aeat/tbae-aeat05-eng.asp#toc4
Return to footnote 9 referrer
 Footnote 10 Matlow, A. G., Baker, G. R., Flintoft, V., Cochrane, D., Coffey, M., Cohen, E., … Nijssen-Jordan, C. (2013). Adverse events among children in Canadian hospitals: The Canadian paediatric adverse events study. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 184(13), E709–E718. https://doi.org/10.1503/cmaj.112153
Return to footnote 10 referrer
 Footnote 11 Sears, N., Baker, G. R., Barnsley, J., & Shortt, S. (2013). The incidence of adverse events among home care patients. International Journal for Quality in Health Care, 25(1), 16–28. https://doi.org/10.1093/intqhc/mzs075
Return to footnote 11 referrer
 Footnote 12 CIHI. (2016a). Hospital Deaths (HSMR) · CIHI. Retrieved September 13, 2016, from http://yourhealthsystem.cihi.ca/hsp/inbrief?lang=en#!/indicators/005/hospital-deaths-hsmr/;mapC1;mapLevel2;/
Return to footnote 12 referrer
 Footnote 13 CIHI. (2014). International Comparisons: A Focus on Quality of Care (p. 27). Canadian Institute for Health Information. Retrieved from https://secure.cihi.ca/free_products/OECD_AFocusOnQualityOfCareAiB_EN.pdf
Return to footnote 13 referrer
Footnote 14 CIHI. (2016b). Measuring Patient Harm in Canadian Hospitals: Technical Report. Ottawa, ON: CIHI. Retrieved from https://www.cihi.ca/sites/default/files/document/hospital_harm_technical_notes_en.pdf
Return to footnote 14 referrer
 Footnote 15 Baker, G. R., & Black, G. (2015). Beyond the Quick Fix: Strategies for Improving Patient Safety. Institute of Health Policy, Management and Evaluation, University of Toronto. Retrieved from http://ihpme.utoronto.ca/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/Beyond-the-Quick-Fix-Baker-2015.pdf
Return to footnote 15 referrer
 Footnote 16 Hayes, C. W., Batalden, P. B., & Goldmann, D. (2014). A “work smarter, not harder” approach to improving healthcare quality. BMJ Quality & Safety, bmjqs-2014-003673. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjqs-2014-003673
Return to footnote 16 referrer
 Footnote 17 Baker, G. R., Denis, J.-L., Pomey, M.-P., & Macintosh-Murray, A. (2010). Effective Governance for Quality and Patient Safety in Canadian Healthcare Organizations. Ottawa, ON: Canadian Health Services Research Foundation and Canadian Patient Safety Institute. Retrieved from http://www.cfhi-fcass.ca/Migrated/PDF/ResearchReports/CommissionedResearch/11505_Baker_rpt_FINAL.pdf
Return to footnote 17 referrer
 Footnote 18 Baker, G. R., & Black, G. (2015). Beyond the Quick Fix: Strategies for Improving Patient Safety. Institute of Health Policy, Management and Evaluation, University of Toronto. Retrieved from http://ihpme.utoronto.ca/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/Beyond-the-Quick-Fix-Baker-2015.pdf
Return to footnote 18 referrer
 Footnote 19 NPSF. (2015). Free from Harm: Accelerating Patient Safety Improvement Fifteen Years after To Err Is Human (p. 59). National Patient Safety Foundation. Retrieved from http://www.palomarhealth.org/media/BoardMeetings/min_20160321_2250.pdf
Return to footnote 19 referrer
 Footnote 20 Baker, G. R., & Black, G. (2015). Beyond the Quick Fix: Strategies for Improving Patient Safety. Institute of Health Policy, Management and Evaluation, University of Toronto. Retrieved from http://ihpme.utoronto.ca/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/Beyond-the-Quick-Fix-Baker-2015.pdf
Return to footnote 20 referrer
 Footnote 21 Yu, A., Flott, K., Chainani, N., Fontana, G., & Darzi, A. (2016). Patient Safety 2030. London, UK: NIHR Imperial Patient Safety Translational Research Centre. Retrieved from http://www.imperial.ac.uk/media/imperial-college/institute-of-global-health-innovation/centre-for-health-policy/Patient-Safety-2030-Report-VFinal.pdf
Return to footnote 21 referrer
 Footnote 22 SECOR Consulting. (2012, June 21). Independent Evaluation of the Canadian Patient Safety Institute. Retrieved from http://www.patientsafetyinstitute.ca/en/About/Documents/CPSI%20Evaluation.pdf
Return to footnote 22 referrer
 Footnote 23 CPSI. (2013a). CPSI Business Plan, 2013-18.
Return to footnote 23 referrer
 Footnote 24 CPSI. (2013b). Health Canada Contribution to the Canadian Patient Safety Institute: Performance Measurement Strategy (Final).
Return to footnote 24 referrer
 Footnote 25 Government of Canada. (2016). Budget 2016: Chapter 5 - An Inclusive and Fair Canada. Retrieved October 28, 2016, from http://www.budget.canada.ca/2016/docs/plan/ch5-en.html#_Toc446106794
Return to footnote 25 referrer
 Footnote 26 CPSI. (2013b). Health Canada Contribution to the Canadian Patient Safety Institute: Performance Measurement Strategy (Final).
Return to footnote 26 referrer
 Footnote 27 Advisory Panel on Healthcare Innovation. (2015). Unleashing Innovation: Excellent Healthcare for Canada: Final Report of the Advisory Panel on Healthcare Innovation.
Return to footnote 27 referrer
 Footnote 28 CPSI. (2016d). CPSI Research Competition Results. Retrieved October 2, 2016, from http://www.patientsafetyinstitute.ca/en/toolsResources/Research/cpsiResearchCompetitions/Pages/default.aspx
Return to footnote 28 referrer
 Footnote 29 CPSI. (2016l). Studentships. Retrieved October 2, 2016, from http://www.patientsafetyinstitute.ca/en/toolsResources/Research/studentships/Pages/default.aspx
Return to footnote 29 referrer
 Footnote 30 CPSI. (2009). Safety Competencies: Enhancing Patient Safety Across the Health Professions. Retrieved October 18, 2016, from http://www.patientsafetyinstitute.ca/en/toolsResources/safetyCompetencies/Documents/Safety%20Competencies.pdf
Return to footnote 30 referrer
 Footnote 31 CPSI. (2016h). Report on the integration of the safety competencies framework into health professions education programs in Canada (p. 59). CPSI.
Return to footnote 31 referrer
 Footnote 32 CPSI. (2016h). Report on the integration of the safety competencies framework into health professions education programs in Canada (p. 59). CPSI.
Return to footnote 32 referrer
 Footnote 33 CPSI. (2016h). Report on the integration of the safety competencies framework into health professions education programs in Canada (p. 59). CPSI.
Return to footnote 33 referrer
 Footnote 34 Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Quality of Health Care in America. (2001). Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the 21st Century. Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US). Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK222274/
Return to footnote 34 referrer
 Footnote 35 Sammer, C. E., Lykens, K., Singh, K. P., Mains, D. A., & Lackan, N. A. (2010). What is Patient Safety Culture? A Review of the Literature. Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 42(2), 156–165. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1547-5069.2009.01330.x
Return to footnote 35 referrer
 Footnote 36 QCIPA Review Committee. (2014). QCIPA Review Committee Recommendations. Retrieved February 14, 2017, from http://www.health.gov.on.ca/en/common/legislation/qcipa/docs/qcipa_rcr.pdf
Return to footnote 36 referrer
 Footnote 37 CPSI. (2016i). Safer Healthcare Now! Impact Newsletter. CPSI. Retrieved from http://www.patientsafetyinstitute.ca/en/About/Programs/SHN/Documents/Safer_Healthcare_NowBooklet_ONLINE%20EN.pdf
Return to footnote 37 referrer
 Footnote 38 Canadian Patient Safety Institute, & Accreditation Canada. (2014). Making Care Safer from Hospital to Home Care: A Collaborative Report from Accreditation Canada and the Canadian Patient Safety Institute. Ottawa: Accreditation Canada. Retrieved from http://public.eblib.com/choice/publicfullrecord.aspx?p=3292259
Return to footnote 38 referrer
 Footnote 39 CPSI. (2016i). Safer Healthcare Now! Impact Newsletter. CPSI. Retrieved from http://www.patientsafetyinstitute.ca/en/About/Programs/SHN/Documents/Safer_Healthcare_NowBooklet_ONLINE%20EN.pdf
Return to footnote 39 referrer
 Footnote 40 CPSI. (2016b). Canadian SSI Prevention Audit. Retrieved from http://www.patientsafetyinstitute.ca/en/toolsResources/Presentations/2016-Calls/Pages/Results-from-Canadian-SSI-Prevention-Audit.aspx
Return to footnote 40 referrer
 Footnote 41 CPSI. (2016f). Hospital Harm Measure. Retrieved September 23, 2016, from http://www.patientsafetyinstitute.ca/en/toolsResources/Hospital-Harm-Measure/pages/default.aspx
Return to footnote 41 referrer
 Footnote 42 CPSI. (2016h). Report on the integration of the safety competencies framework into health professions education programs in Canada (p. 59). CPSI.
Return to footnote 42 referrer
 Footnote 43 CPSI. (2016h). Report on the integration of the safety competencies framework into health professions education programs in Canada (p. 59). CPSI.
Return to footnote 43 referrer
 Footnote 44 Wu, A. W., Boyle, D. J., Wallace, G., & Mazor, K. M. (2013). Disclosure of Adverse Events in the United States and Canada: An Update, and a Proposed Framework for Improvement. Journal of Public Health Research, 2(3). https://doi.org/10.4081/jphr.2013.e32
Return to footnote 44 referrer
 Footnote 45 Accreditation Canada. (2015b, February 19). Required Organizational Practices: Handbook 2016. Retrieved from https://accreditation.ca/sites/default/files/rop-handbook-2016-en.pdf
Return to footnote 45 referrer
 Footnote 46 World Health Organization. (2009). Conceptual framework for the international classification for patient safety version 1.1: final technical report January 2009. Retrieved from http://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/70882
Return to footnote 46 referrer
 Footnote 47 Canadian Patient Safety Institute, & Accreditation Canada. (2014). Making Care Safer from Hospital to Home Care: A Collaborative Report from Accreditation Canada and the Canadian Patient Safety Institute. Ottawa: Accreditation Canada. Retrieved from http://public.eblib.com/choice/publicfullrecord.aspx?p=3292259
Return to footnote 47 referrer
 Footnote 48 WHO. (2016). WHO | Patients for Patient Safety Champions. Retrieved October 3, 2016, from http://www.who.int/patientsafety/patients_for_patient/regional_champions/en/
Return to footnote 48 referrer
 Footnote 49 Tazim Virani & Associates. (2014). Patients for Patient Safety Canada (PFPSC) - Five Years Later - What Has Been the Impact? (Final Report). Patients for Patient Safety Canada and the Canadian Patient Safety Institute.
Return to footnote 49 referrer
 Footnote 50 CPSI. (2013a). CPSI Business Plan, 2013-18.
Return to footnote 50 referrer
 Footnote 51 Drummond, M. F., Sculpher, M. J., Claxton, K., Stoddart, G. L., & Torrance, G. W. (2015). Methods for the Economic Evaluation of Health Care Programmes (Fourth Edition edition). Oxford, United Kingdom ; New York, NY, USA: Oxford University Press.
Return to footnote 51 referrer
 Footnote 52 Cape, J. D., Beca, J. M., & Hoch, J. S. (2013). Introduction to cost-effectiveness analysis for clinicians. University of Toronto Medical Journal, 90(3). Retrieved from http://utmj.org/index.php/UTMJ/article/view/1493
Return to footnote 52 referrer
 Footnote 53 Baker, G. R., Denis, J.-L., Pomey, M.-P., & Macintosh-Murray, A. (2010). Effective Governance for Quality and Patient Safety in Canadian Healthcare Organizations. Ottawa, ON: Canadian Health Services Research Foundation and Canadian Patient Safety Institute. Retrieved from http://www.cfhi-fcass.ca/Migrated/PDF/ResearchReports/CommissionedResearch/11505_Baker_rpt_FINAL.pdf
Return to footnote 53 referrer
 Footnote 54 CPSI. (2016e). Current Competitions. Retrieved April 22, 2016, from http://www.patientsafetyinstitute.ca/en/toolsResources/Research/pages/currentcompetitions.aspx
Return to footnote 54 referrer
 Footnote 55 CPSI. (2016a). 2014-2015 Patient Safety Studentships. Retrieved April 22, 2016, from http://www.patientsafetyinstitute.ca/en/toolsResources/Research/studentships/Pages/Studentships-2014.aspx
Return to footnote 55 referrer
 Footnote 56 CPSI. (2016c). Commissioned Research. Retrieved April 22, 2016, from http://www.patientsafetyinstitute.ca/en/toolsResources/Research/commissionedResearch/Pages/default.aspx
Return to footnote 56 referrer
 Footnote 57 CIHI. (2016b). Measuring Patient Harm in Canadian Hospitals: Technical Report. Ottawa, ON: CIHI. Retrieved from https://www.cihi.ca/sites/default/files/document/hospital_harm_technical_notes_en.pdf
Return to footnote 57 referrer
 Footnote 58 CPSI. (2016j). SHIFT to Safety. Retrieved October 28, 2016, from http://www.patientsafetyinstitute.ca/en/About/Programs/shift-to-safety/Pages/default.aspx
Return to footnote 58 referrer
Appendix 3 – Evaluation Description
An evaluation matrix was developed to address key questions of interest to senior management within CPSI and Health Canada and to align with the Treasury Board’s 2016 Policy on Results. The evaluation considered the five core Treasury Board issues under the two themes of relevance and performance (effectiveness, efficiency, and economy). Corresponding to each of the core issues, specific questions were developed based on program considerations, and these guided the evaluation process.
The evaluation drew on multiple lines of evidence, including a literature review, a review of documents and data, key informant interviews, a survey of CPSI stakeholders, and three in-depth case studies. A brief description of each of these data collection methods is provided below.
Literature, document, and data review
The literature review addressed evaluation questions relating primarily to relevance (i.e., continued need), while the document and data review provided historical and contextual information for CPSI’s activities and responded directly to virtually all of the evaluation questions. Relevant literature and documents were provided by CPSI or were accessed from publicly available sources. The data review considered financial information, as well as performance measurement data tracked by CPSI through its performance measurement framework.
Key informant interviews
Two rounds of interviews were conducted to support the evaluation. In the first round, 10 CPSI staff and Board members were interviewed in order to inform evaluation planning and design. In the second round, 40 individuals were interviewed, including CPSI staff and Board members (n=9); Health Canada representatives (n=3); and external stakeholders (n=28). External key informants represented a range of stakeholders, including provincial and territorial government organizations (e.g., ministries of health and quality councils), national and regional partner organizations, professional associations, healthcare providers, patient organizations, and academics. Many external key informants had multiple affiliations and fell into more than one of these stakeholder categories. Key informants were selected by CPSI for their knowledge of, and experience with, CPSI or the patient safety field in Canada. Interviews were digitally recorded with the permission of key informants to ensure the accuracy of the information collected.
Survey of CPSI stakeholders
A bilingual web-based survey of CPSI stakeholders was conducted. CPSI supplied the survey sample based on contacts within its contact database. All contacts within the database were included, with the exception of vendors, media, and CPSI personnel, resulting in a sample of 10,342 email addresses.
Overall, the survey achieved 596 completions, representing a completion rate of 6%. This is similar to response rates achieved in stakeholder surveys conducted by Prairie Research Associates of similar pan-Canadian organizations in the health field.  Overall, 90% of respondents (n=535) completed the survey in English, while 10% (n=61) completed it in French.
The survey results were analyzed using SPSS and R, two statistical data analysis software packages commonly used in social science research. Analysis consisted primarily of basic frequency tabulations. In addition, key questions were analyzed for differences among sub-groups based on respondents’ current positions or roles, the type of work they do in their organizations, the types of organization, and whether their organizations provide direct care to clients.  For categorical outcomes, Chi-squared analysis was employed for single predictors or logistic regression in the case of multiple predictors. For ranked outcome variables (e.g., Likert scales), Kruskall-Wallis tests were employed with follow-up Mann-Whitney U tests. Where appropriate, Bonferroni corrections were made for multiple comparisons. Results significant at α = .05 are reported in the relevant sections.
Open-ended survey questions were analyzed using thematic analysis and tabulated in SPSS where the number of responses was sufficient to warrant it.
Case studies
Three case studies were conducted of organizations that had engaged with CPSI or implemented CPSI interventions, products, and resources. Three organizations of varying size and in different jurisdictions were selected by CPSI for case study: St. Michael’s Hospital in Toronto, Ontario; Vitalité Health Network in New Brunswick; and Alberta Health Services.
In all three cases, data collection consisted of document and data review, as well as a small number of interviews with organizational representatives. In addition, the case study of Vitalité Health Network included a quantitative value-for-money analysis, focussing on the value-for-money generated by CPSI’s medication reconciliation activities in acute care facilities. A detailed description of the methodology used to complete the value-for-money analysis is included in the Vitalité case study report.
Individual study reports were prepared for each organization and approved by the organizations prior to being submitted to CPSI. Key findings have been integrated into this report.
Appendix 4 – Major activities and response to previous evaluations
Since 2013, and in response to the recommendations of the previous evaluation to focus or rationalize its scope of activity, enhance engagement with the system and embed ownership of major programs and activities within system, CPSI has oriented its activities toward achieving system-level change through the pursuit of four strategic goals. Evidence suggests that CPSI has experienced challenges in achieving the increased focus or rationalization of activity called for by the previous evaluation. CPSI scaled back or even discontinued some existing program areas and activities, but it also realigned some existing activities under its new strategic goals and introduced several new initiatives, effectively increasing, rather than decreasing, the breadth of its programming. CPSI representatives noted that the organization has been in transitional phase since the last evaluation as it has worked to rationalize or focus its scope of activity.
As described in section 4.2, CPSI responded to the recommendations of the previous evaluation – to focus or rationalize its scope of activity through enhancing engagement with the system and embedding ownership of major programs and activities within system – by articulating a vision for increased focus on system-level change through the pursuit of four strategic goals. Its major activities in the evaluation period, including the development of the Consortium and the Integrated Patient Safety Action Plan (IPSAP), the transition from Safer Healthcare Now! (SHN) to SHIFT to Safety, and the development of the HUB model, have been oriented around these four strategic goals, and these activities are described below.
Development of the Consortium and the IPSAP
CPSI’s overarching strategic goal since 2013 has been the development of a National Patient Safety Strategy. As already described, CPSI spearheaded the development of the National Patient Safety Consortium in January 2014 as a mechanism for achieving this goal.  Accordingly, CPSI is responsible for maintaining the overall strategic coherence and coordination of the IPSAP, which brings together six separate but interlocking areas of focus for patient safety into a three-year action plan affirmed by the Consortium. Four initial areas of focus have been identified, each with associated action plans: medication safety, surgical care safety, infection prevention and control and home care safety. In addition, the IPSAP includes action plans relating to patient safety education and the National Patient Safety Consortium itself. The IPSAP is depicted in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Integrated Patient Safety Action Plan
