Results at a Glance-Evaluation of the Workplace Hazardous Products Program 2014–15 to 2018–19
Program  Context
Health Canada’s  Workplace Hazardous Products Program (WHPP) is responsible for the Hazardous  Products Act (HPA), the Hazardous Materials Information Review Act (HMIRA) and  their associated regulations. WHPP regulates Canadian industry, including  importers, manufacturers, and suppliers, and requires them to communicate  hazards associated with products through the provision of supplier labels and  safety data sheets via the standardized Workplace Hazardous Materials  Information System (WHMIS).
Implementation of  WHMIS relies on a complex system of interactions between partners, including  provinces and territories, and other stakeholder groups, such as suppliers of  workplace chemicals, employers, and workers.
The annual  budget is approximately $3M, with 32 Full-time Equivalents (FTEs); an  additional 10 FTEs are being paid by the Directorate outside of Program  allocations.
Evaluation  Approach/Methods
This evaluation  examined the results, efficiency, and sustainability of WHPP for the period of  2014-15 to 2018-19.
Document  and File Review
Literature  Review
Survey  of P/T partners (Inspectors)
Data  Analysis
Key  Informant Interviews
International  Comparison
Financial  Data Review
Case  Study
What  the Evaluation Found
Within a  complex and interlocking multijurisdictional system such as WHMIS, engagement  and coordination with various partners and stakeholders is essential. WHPP’s  engagement with stakeholders is viewed as one of its strengths. Strong  engagement with partners also helped WHPP increase the number of HPA inspections  being conducted since 2017 by provincial and territorial (P/T) inspectors, and  Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC), as the occupational health and  safety authority in federally regulated workplaces, at no additional cost to  the Program.
WHPP  successfully led the modernization of the HMIRA, which enabled it to streamline  the process for confidential business information (CBI) claims review. This  work allowed WHPP to make significant progress in addressing its CBI backlog,  and enabled it to take a calibrated risk approach to reviewing future CBI  claims.
However,  supplier compliance with HPA requirements is low (e.g., compliance with safety  data sheet and label requirements), and more could be done to inform and  promote the safe use of hazardous products in the workplace. The current level  of compliance and enforcement activities does not appear to be sufficient given  the rates of non-compliance observed. WHPP’s inspection capacity remains  limited, as it relies extensively on P/T capacity and ESDC. While this  arrangement is cost-effective, it presents challenges in terms of capacity  for inspection activities and consistency in  implementation. Compliance enforcement tools currently available also limit  WHPP’s ability to address compliance issues in a timely manner.
Consumer  chemical products excluded from the HPA were found to be a growing concern for  worker safety. In  particular, the  evaluation found that these products are being increasingly used in the  workplace, but without adequate hazard information to allow workers to protect  themselves from extended and repeated use.
Additional  communication and engagement with suppliers on HPA requirements appear to be  needed, considering the poor compliance results to date. Data identified that  small suppliers faced more barriers to awareness and understanding, and that  currently, engagement of small suppliers by WHPP is limited and could be  expanded.
The evaluation  also found that there is a lack of baseline data on workplace hazardous  products for assessing Program impact.
Given WHPP’s  limited capacity and resources, the Program will not be in a position to  address the challenges it faces unless there are fundamental changes.
Recommendations
Consider means  to increase compliance and enforcement activities, and explore an expanded  range of enforcement tools.
Enhance  communication and guidance material on excluded products for all WHPP  stakeholders and partners.
Expand  communication and engagement with suppliers, in particular with small  suppliers.
Explore means  to improve measurement of Program impact.