Executive Summary
This  evaluation covers the Territorial Health Investment Fund (THIF) for the period  of 2014-15 to 2016-17, and is required in accordance with section 42.1 of the  Financial Administration Act.
Evaluation Purpose and Scope
The  purpose of the evaluation was to assess the relevance and performance of the  THIF contribution agreement. The evaluation scope includes activities funded  during the three-year period of 2014-15 to 2016-17, as well as activities that  took place in 2017-18 due to funding carry-over.
While  federal program evaluations typically cover a five-year period, this evaluation  covered three years due to the time-limited nature of the contribution  agreement. As a result, the evaluation did not review THIF’s predecessor, the  Territorial Health System Sustainability Initiative (THSSI), or activities  under the renewed THIF grant, which began in 2017-18. However, the evaluation  does refer to the design of the grant where appropriate.
The  grant agreement included significant changes to the design and delivery of  THIF, informed by the results of an external review of the program completed in  2017. In consideration of changes already introduced to the funding program, no  recommendations were included in this evaluation. Instead, the evaluation sought  to highlight results achieved to date, as well as the successes and challenges  of administering THIF within the three territories.
Program Description
The  Government of Canada introduced THIF in 2014 to replace THSSI, which aimed to  build capacity by investing in territorial health care systems, supporting  health promotion activities, and improving access to health care services. The  objective of THIF was to support territorial governments’ efforts to innovate  and transform their health care systems, and ultimately ensure Northerners have  access to the health care they need. To accomplish this,  THIF provided a contribution of $70 million dollars over three years to  Canada’s three territories to support the provision of quality health care. THIF projects received funding through three proposal-based streams: (i) mental  wellness, (ii) chronic disease management, and (iii) children’s oral health.  THIF also funded pan-territorial initiatives and supported the provision of  medical travel through a declining subsidy over the three-year period.
The  First Nations and Inuit Health Branch (FNIHB) at Health Canada administered the  THIF contribution agreement during the period covered by the evaluation;  however, following the FNIHB transition to Indigenous Services Canada, the  Strategic Policy Branch at Health Canada took over responsibility for THIF in  December 2017.
Conclusions – Relevance
There  continues to be a need for funding to support territorial initiatives that  address high health care costs and lower health outcomes. THIF is aligned with  previous government priorities to increase services in key health areas and  reduce reliance on medical travel and outside health care systems. The  contribution agreement reflected a targeted, time-limited initiative aimed at  addressing health gaps identified by federal and territorial governments. As  federal priorities have shifted, the new THIF grant is expected to allow  territorial governments greater flexibility in allocating resources to a wider  variety of initiatives.
Although  provinces and territories are responsible for administering health care for  most residents within their jurisdiction, a federal subsidy for the increased  medical costs associated with health care in the North is consistent with the  Government of Canada’s role under the Canada Health Act (CHA) principle of  ‘Accessibility.’
Conclusions – Performance
THIF  has enabled some systems-level changes, which are expected to increase the  ability of territorial governments to manage their health services within  existing resources, though it is too early to determine impact. The evaluation  found that the expected result of a reduction in medical travel could not  realistically be achieved during THIF’s three-year timeframe.
THIF  funding has contributed to improved services related to key health gaps by  facilitating professional development activities and the hiring of service  coordinators, as well as introducing pilot projects targeting innovative  technologies. It is too early to assess the extent to which THIF-funded  activities have affected overall health outcomes in the territories.
The  design of the THIF contribution agreement introduced additional reporting  requirements that created additional administrative work for both Health Canada  and territorial governments. The design of the new THIF grant is expected to  improve efficiency by removing some reporting requirements to allow for more  flexibility on the part of funding recipients. Remote service delivery  technologies may help ensure that Northern health care providers have access to  a similar level of diagnostic and screening options as are available elsewhere  in Canada. Though it is not possible to eliminate the need for medical travel,  further investments in innovative service delivery methods and technologies may  enable territories to connect clients more efficiently to necessary care  options.
Additionally,  further investments in remote service delivery technologies and telehealth are  expected to increase the availability of routine health care services in  communities, such as screening, diagnostic, and treatment services. As  screening and diagnosis options improve, there may be an increased demand for  access to medical services both in and out of territory, though they may, in  time, also reduce the need to travel to access some of these services.
1.0 Evaluation  purpose
The  purpose of the evaluation was to assess the relevance and performance of the  THIF for the period of 2014-15 to 2016-17. This evaluation is required in  accordance with section 42.1 of the Financial Administration Act.
2.0 Program  Background
In  2005, the Federal Government introduced the THSSI to support sustainable  management of health systems in Canada’s three northern territories. THSSI’s  overall objectives were to build capacity by investing in territorial health  care systems, support health promotion activities, and improve access to health  care services. Grant funding was allocated for an operational secretariat,  medical travel, and the Territorial Health Access Fund, which dedicated funding  to support health care reform that would strengthen community-level services  and promote the ability to provide services in-territory. The program was  limited to five years in duration, but was extended by two years in 2010, and  again in 2012.
Budget  2014 announced the THIF as a replacement for THSSI. The objective of the THIF  contribution agreement was to support territorial governments’ efforts to  innovate and transform their health care systems, and ultimately ensure  Northerners have access to the health care they need. To accomplish this,  THIF provided a transfer of $70 million to Canada’s three territories to  support the provision of quality health care from 2014-15 to 2016-17. THIF’s terms and  conditions were extended by one year with no additional funds until March 2018,  in order for the territories to complete projects that were already underway.
THIF  provided proposal-based funding to Yukon, Nunavut and the Northwest Territories  to address gaps in health care programming for their residents in three  targeted areas:
chronic disease;
children’s oral health; and 
mental wellness.
During the  period covered by this evaluation, Health Canada provided THIF funding through  three streams:
The Territorial Stream, which allocated $4.33 million per  territory each fiscal year to fund projects to strengthen health services  in-territory for the identified target areas; 
The Pan-Territorial Stream, which provided $2 million per  fiscal year for collaboratively developed projects addressing health systems  challenges with innovative solutions; and
The Medical Travel Stream, which provided a  subsidy to support medical transportation costs. The medical travel subsidy  declined over the three-year period, from $12 million in 2014-15 to $5 million  in 2016-17. This subsidy was designed to incentivize territories to reduce  reliance on transportation and increase service capacity in-territory.
While  THIF was initially intended as a time-limited program, the Government of Canada  proposed an additional $108 million investment over four years, beginning in  2017-18, to renew and expand THIF in the 2017 Budget, albeit this time as a  grant.
2.1 Program Alignment and Resources
THIF  is aligned under Health Canada’s Program Alignment Architecture under 1.1  ‘Canada Health System Policy’ and the sub-program 1.1.1 ‘Health System Policy.’  THIF supports the Department’s overall strategic outcome: “a health system  responsive to the needs of Canadians.” During the period covered  by this evaluation, Health Canada’s FNIHB managed the THIF contribution  program. With FNIHB’s transition to Indigenous Services Canada, the Strategic  Policy Branch at Health Canada took over responsibility for the renewed THIF in  December 2017.
THIF’s  financial data for the years 2014-15 through 2016-17 are presented below (Table  1). Overall, THIF had a budget of approximately $70 million over three years.
3.0 Evaluation  Description
3.1 Evaluation Scope, Approach and Design
The  scope of the evaluation covered the period from April 2014 to September 2017.  The evaluation reviewed activities conducted and projects delivered under the  THIF initiative occurring throughout this period. Activities or projects  delivered under the predecessor THSSI were out of scope for this evaluation.
The  evaluation assessed the relevance, performance, efficiency, and economy of  THIF's activities during the period included in its scope. The THIF  contribution agreement ended in 2017-18 and was replaced with a grant  agreement. The new grant agreement introduced significant changes in the design  and delivery of THIF based on the recommendations of an external review. In  consideration of these recent changes, no recommendations were included in this  evaluation. Instead, the evaluation sought to highlight results achieved to  date, as well as the successes and challenges of administering THIF within the  three territories.
Evaluation  questions were developed with consideration of the core issues identified under  the Treasury Board of Canada's Policy on Results (2016).
The evaluation team  collected evidence using complementary research methods, including:
Document Review: Evaluators reviewed a total of 54 internal  documents. The FNIHB provided internal program documentation, which evaluators  supplemented with publically available grey literature. Documents included THIF  funding proposals, THIF recipient annual reports, federal budget plans, federal  mandate letters, and Health Canada's performance information reporting,  including Departmental Performance Reports (DPR) and Departmental Reports on  Plans and Priorities (RPP). Where relevant, evaluators also consulted  peer-reviewed publications to supplement information provided in internal  documents.  
Review of Financial Data: Evaluators reviewed financial information provided  by the Department's Chief Financial Officer Branch. Evaluators also considered  activity-based financial information provided by funding recipients through  THIF annual reports.  
Key Informant Interviews: Evaluators conducted a small number of key  informant interviews with senior management responsible for delivering  THIF-funded programming in Nunavut, Yukon, and the Northwest Territories. Key  informants were selected based on their unique insight into the successes and  challenges of administering THIF within the three territories.
By  using multiple lines of evidence, evaluators were able to triangulate the  findings to increase their reliability.
3.2 Limitations and Mitigation Strategies
Most  evaluations face constraints that may have implications for the validity and  reliability of their findings and conclusions. The following table outlines the  limitations encountered during the implementation of the selected methods for  this evaluation. Also noted are the mitigation strategies put in place to  ensure that the evaluation findings can be used with confidence to guide  program planning and decision making.
4.0 Findings  – Relevance
4.1 Continued Need for the Program
Finding: There continues to be a need for funding to  support territorial initiatives that address high health care costs and lower  health outcomes in Nunavut, the Yukon, and the Northwest Territories.
Similar  to other circumpolar regions, there are substantial differences in health costs  and health outcomes in the North compared to more southerly regions in Canada. The unique demographic and geographic features of the territories, as well as  limited health human resources in the North, contribute to these differences.
The  demographic and geographic features of the territories differ greatly from the  rest of Canada. The three northern territories have a broad geography with a relatively  small population. In addition to low population density, many communities,  particularly in Nunavut and the Northwest Territories, are rural and isolated.  Many of these communities have limited, seasonal, or no road access to urban  centres. In addition, a high proportion of the total population in the three territories  are Indigenous. In the Yukon, 23% of the total population is Indigenous, while  in the Northwest Territories the proportion is 51%. In Nunavut, 85% of the  population is Inuit. This is in contrast to Canada as a whole, where Indigenous  people make up approximately 5% of the population, and Inuit less than 1%.
Territorial  health systems must also cope with lower access to primary care physicians and  specialists. The doctor-to-patient ratio (Table 3) for both primary and  specialist caregivers is markedly lower in the territories than the Canadian  average. For example, in 2015 the average number of primary care physicians per  100,000 residents in Canada was 228, while in Nunavut there were 27 doctors per  100,000 residents. All three territories have a markedly lower  specialists-to-residents ratio when compared to the rest of Canada.
It  is important to note that northern health care services use a nurse-based  system of primary care delivery outside of regional centres, whereby there are  networks of health centres staffed with nurses and community health  representatives, and supported by visiting physicians. Therefore, it is  reasonable to conclude that the use of physician services is lower under this  model when compared to the Canadian average. Considering this, the gap in  access to care is somewhat narrower, though it is still markedly lower than  elsewhere in Canada. For example, the proportion of Inuit people in Nunavut who  had contact with a family doctor or nurse in the previous year was 65%, as  opposed to 44% who had contact with a doctor alone. This is well below the  average for non-Indigenous people in that territory (76%) and the national  average of 80%.
Anecdotal  evidence from key informants suggests that territorial governments also  experience high job vacancy and turnover rates within health human resources,  which presents additional challenges for health care delivery and health  promotion over time. Because of these factors, territorial health care systems  tend to make use of medical travel, both within the territory to an urban  centre, and outside the territory to a neighbouring province, to connect  clients with appropriate care options.
THIF  addresses a continued need to accommodate elevated health costs in the  territories while addressing persistent gaps in health outcomes for residents.  Health care costs in territories are significantly higher than the Canadian  average. In 2014, the per-capita cost for health care in the Yukon was $10,000  (1.7 times the average), in the Northwest Territories it was $13,000 (or 2.1  times the average), and in Nunavut it was $14,000 (2.3 times the average). Medical travel can be a significant cost driver for territorial health care  costs, particularly in Nunavut and the Northwest Territories. In Nunavut,  medical travel accounted for up to $1,500 of per-capita health care costs, an  amount that is expected to continue to rise in the future.
While  territories experience the reality of elevated health care costs, they must  also manage persistent health gaps and challenges in achieving comparable  health outcomes with other Canadian provinces. Residents in the territories  generally experience lower health outcomes related  to mental wellness, chronic diseases, and oral health among children.
Mental Illness
Mental illness has remained an area of acute  need in Canada’s North, particularly among Indigenous peoples. While the rates  of diagnosed mood disorders in the territories are similar to those observed  elsewhere in Canada, the rates of suicide and hospitalization for intentional  self-harm are significantly higher. Inuit youth in particular are at risk: suicide rates for Indigenous youth in  the North are nearly six times higher than elsewhere in Canada. Among Inuit  youth aged 10 to 19 living in Inuit Nunangat, rates of acute care  hospitalization for intentional self-harm are 101 per 100,000 people and the  proportion of Inuit youth who die by suicide is nearly 11 times the national  average. In Nunavut, suicide is the cause of approximately 64 of every 100,000  deaths. If Nunavut were its own country, it would have the highest suicide rate  in the world. Taken together, these statistics indicate a need for improved access to  prevention and treatment options to promote mental wellness among residents in  the territories, and to address underlying socio-economic disparities  contributing to these outcomes.
Chronic Disease      
 As with other areas in Canada, chronic  illness is a significant cause of death in the territories. However, mortality  rates associated with chronic disease, including diabetes, heart disease, and  cancer, tend to be higher in the territories when compared to the rest of  Canada. In Nunavut, cancer mortality was two times higher than the national  rate. Chronic disease accounts for 7 out of 10 deaths in the Northwest Territories. In the Yukon, rates of hospitalization for chronic illness tend to be higher  than the rest of Canada. In 2014, the rate of hospitalizations associated with  chronic illness was 414 per 100,000 hospitalizations, compared to the Canadian  average of 283. These statistics indicate a continued need for improved screening and  management options for chronic illnesses in the territories. 
Children’s Oral Health      
Children’s oral health remains an important  area of concern in the territories, particularly in Nunavut. Between 2010-11  and 2013-14, approximately 111 children per 1,000 under the age of four in  Nunavut underwent surgery to treat cavities each year, followed by 47.6 per  year in the Northwest Territories and 24.3 in the Yukon. For Nunavut, this rate is nearly 10 times the national average of approximately  12.1 per 1,000 each year. Inuit children had significantly elevated rates of  dental caries. According to the most recent data available, 85% of Inuit preschoolers were  affected by dental caries, and for many these went untreated into adolescence. Inuit are also less likely than other Canadians to have accessed dental care.In Nunavut, oral health outcomes are  influenced by the fact that many residents do not have regular access to dental  care, as well as poor nutrition and limited prevention activities for many  communities.  When THIF was introduced in 2014, there were over 600 children on a waiting  list to undergo dental surgery in Nunavut and in most of these cases, medical  travel was required.
THIF  responds to these challenges by providing dedicated funding to implement  strategic improvements to territorial health care systems designed to improve  access to services. Furthermore, the Medical Travel Stream addresses a  continued need to connect residents to necessary care, both inside and outside  of their territory.
4.2 Alignment with Government Priorities and Strategic Outcomes
The THIF contribution agreement was aligned with  previous government priorities to increase services in key health areas and  reduce reliance on medical travel and outside health care systems. As federal  priorities have shifted, the THIF grant will allow for more flexibility.
The  THIF contribution program was well aligned with Government of Canada priorities  and strategic outcomes when initiated in 2014. The Government of Canada  announced funding to support activities in the priority area “Asserting  Canada’s Sovereignty by Investing in the North” in Budget 2014. The Budget  proposed a contribution-based program, which would provide $70 million over  three years in a targeted and time-limited fund to increase health services in  three priority areas for Nunavut, the Northwest Territories, and the Yukon.  THIF was designed to deliver on this priority.
Over  time, THIF has remained in alignment with the goals and priorities of the  Government of Canada. Health Canada’s 2017 Report on Plans and Priorities  includes THIF as a component of the sub-program 1.1. ‘Canadian Health Systems  Policy.’ Through grants and contribution agreements with key health partners,  the Canadian Health Systems Policy sub-program aims to support improvements in  health care systems to help Canadians maintain and improve their health. By providing financial support and guidance to partners, this program  contributes to Health Canada’s strategic outcome of achieving “a health system  responsive to the needs of Canadians.” Furthermore, a  2017 independent review of THIF’s performance found that it continues to be  well aligned with the priorities of the territorial governments, and has  enabled them to dedicate scarce resources to system-wide changes which would  otherwise by overshadowed by other urgent priorities.
According  to internal documentation, THIF was created to support territorial governments’  ability to deliver necessary health care services within existing resources. A  diminishing Medical Travel Stream between 2014 and 2017 also signalled the  Government of Canada’s intent to reduce territorial reliance on medical travel.
As  of 2017-18, funding for THIF went from a contribution agreement to a grant. To  reflect changing federal priorities towards innovation and lessons learned from  the first three years of THIF, the grant is expected to deliver funding through  an Innovation Stream and provide stable medical travel funding over a four-year  period through a Medical Travel Stream. Furthermore, while the grant will  continue to allocate project-based funding, it will no longer specify specific  health areas where funding must be spent. This model is expected to allow  territorial governments more flexibility to respond to issues related to social  determinants of health, complex health care delivery, and unique local needs.  The pan-territorial funding stream was also eliminated.
4.3 Alignment with Federal Roles and Responsibilities
Although provinces and territories are  responsible for administering health care for most residents within their  jurisdiction, a federal subsidy for increased medical costs associated with  health care in the North is consistent with the Government of Canada’s role  under the CHA principle of ‘Accessibility.’
The  Government of Canada does not provide direct service delivery of health care in  the provinces and territories; however, it does have a mandate to support  access to care under the CHA. Additionally, Health Canada in particular has a  mandate to ensure availability of, and access to, health services for  Indigenous communities.
Under  the CHA, provinces and territories are responsible for the administration and  delivery of health services within their jurisdiction. The Government of Canada  provides support for these activities through fiscal transfers and programming:
The Canada Health Transfer (CHT), which provides long-term predictable funding  for health care in support of the principles in the CHA. The value of the CHT  for each province is calculated on an equal-per-capita basis;
The Territorial Formula Financing (TFF) transfer, which provides  an additional unconditional transfer for the purpose of financing essential  public services in Canada’s three territories, based on a recognition of the  elevated costs associated with service provision in the North. The TFF for each  territory is calculated based on the difference between the individual  territory’s financial capacity to generate revenue, and a proxy for its  expenses; and 
The Non-Insured Health Benefits (NIHB) Program is a national  program that provides insurance coverage for registered First Nations and  recognized Inuit for medically necessary services that are not covered by other  plans and programs. This includes financial support for medical transportation  to access medically necessary services.
The  CHA further states that health care delivery within the provinces and  territories must meet five principles, including “Accessibility.” Accessibility  is interpreted as ensuring all residents have access to medically necessary  services. Provinces and territories must provide these services based on  medical need, not ability to pay.
While  the CHT and TFF transfers provide funding to ensure that territories are able  to provide medical care to their residents, the transfers do not include  specific funding to address known health gaps, nor do they provide dedicated  funding for the purposes of medical travel. Though the NIHB program does  provide specific funding for medical travel to eligible beneficiaries, it is  provided on a case-by-case basis and is not available to all residents of the  territories. Key informants described the THIF program as highly complementary to existing  transfer programs between the federal and territorial governments.
5.0 Achievement  of Expected Results
5.1 Improved Capacity to Deliver Health Care In-Territory
THIF enabled some strategic and systems-level  changes, which are expected to increase the ability of territorial governments  to manage their health services within existing resources, although it is too  early to determine impact. The evaluation found that the expected result of a  reduction in medical travel was not realistic in the short term.
A  key objective of THIF during this period was to enable territorial governments  to introduce strategic changes which would improve their capacity to provide  health care services within existing resources. Territorial proposals for THIF  funding identified a range of activities to meet that objective. Key informants  stated that THIF funding was incredibly valuable, allowing the governments to  invest in strategic or systems-level changes without diverting resources away  from other key areas, such as service delivery.
For  example, the Yukon used THIF funding to operate working groups in support of  the Forward Together mental wellness strategy, as well as working groups to  facilitate access to spirometry, wound care, and home health monitoring. In Nunavut, residential treatment coordinators were hired to help connect  residents to out-of-territory mental health and addiction treatment services,  and the territorial government established a client database to enhance discharge  planning and monitoring of clients. In the Northwest Territories, THIF funding  was used to design and implement changes to the Health and Social Services  Administration Act, wherein the territorial government consolidated six  separate health care administration systems into one. This is expected to  reduce fragmentation in health care services across the territory.
That  being said, feedback from key informants and information contained in  territorial annual activity reports indicate that there was slow progress in  implementing some of the THIF proposed activities due to three main factors.  Firstly, territories faced difficulties recruiting and retaining qualified  human resources to implement programs. This was particularly challenging in  Nunavut, where there is typically a vacancy rate of approximately 30% in public  administration and high reliance on temporary contracts with employees from the  south or other countries. Nunavut also faces challenges recruiting and  retaining oral health service providers, which contributes to gaps in access to  services.  In Canada, there is an average of 60 licensed dentists per 100,000 residents,  while Nunavut has 34 per 100,000.
Secondly,  funding for year one of THIF (2014-15) was not released until January 2015, as  the territories and the Government of Canada signed the contributions late in  the fiscal year. This left very little time for territories to begin planned  activities outlined in THIF proposals. As a result, funding was carried over to  the following fiscal year. This resulted infunding  carry-overs over the following years.
Finally,  some planned activities were delayed or cancelled due to changing priorities  for territorial governments and their key partners. Territorial administrators  responded by reallocating funding to activities that generally aligned with the  three key health gap areas.
While  the territories faced delays in implementing some of the proposed activities in  key strategic areas, they were able to spend the total allocated funds for  medical travel in the three fiscal years without needing to carry over funds.  As shown below (Table 4), expenditures on medical travel in each territory  continued to increase each year, while the value of funding provided through  THIF to subsidise medical travel expenses declined on schedule. The anticipated  goal of reducing expenditures on medical travel in the territories was not  achieved and is not expected to be attained in the near future.
The  continued rise in medical travel costs over the short term is attributed to two  key factors. First, the improved outreach to underserved communities in the  North can be expected to result in an increased need for medical travel, as  these clients are connected to care options earlier. Second, the population  base in the territories is too small to support access to a full range of  health care services, particularly outside of regional centres in the  territories. Limited infrastructure is a particular challenge for Nunavut,  whose medical travel expenditures increased by nearly 10% from year one to  three of THIF. According to Nunavut’s annual activity reports, “Nunavut’s  population, vast territory, lack of access by road and rail, limited health  infrastructure, and lack of access to specialist medical services contribute to  the growing need for medical travel benefits. At current service levels, the  medical travel costs are expected to continue increasing.” To access  equitable care, some level of medical travel will be required until remote  service delivery options become more easily available.
It  is important to note that if THIF was to be discontinued, in particular the  medical transportation subsidy component, there is a possibility that this  would result in increased NIHB medical travel costs for First Nations and Inuit  populations in the Northwest Territories and Nunavut. In Nunavut and the  Northwest Territories, territorial governments pay most of the air  transportation costs for all residents, including Indigenous persons, and  charge individuals requiring air transportation a $250 co-pay charge,  regardless of the total cost associated with the individuals’ travel. For eligible  Indigenous residents, this co-pay charge is reimbursed by NIHB. Without  dedicated medical travel funding from the Government of Canada, these two  territories could treat First Nations and Inuit populations as separate in  regards to medical travel cost, and request that Canada pay the total cost of  airfare associated with medical travel, rather than the co-pay amount covered  by the NIHB program. In this case, program estimates indicate that the NIHB  costs for medical travel in the Northwest Territories could increase from $7.5M  to $16.4M per year, and from $27.4M to $83.8M in Nunavut.
5.2 Improved Ability to Address Key Health Gaps in the Territories
THIF funding has contributed to improved  services related to key health gaps by facilitating professional development  activities and the hiring of service coordinators, as well as introducing pilot  projects using innovative technologies. It is too early to assess the extent to  which THIF-funded activities have affected health outcomes in the territories.
Another  key goal of THIF was to improve health outcomes for territorial residents in  the areas of mental wellness, chronic disease management, and children’s oral  health. Each territory identified activities aligned with these key health gaps  in their proposals for THIF funding. Territories also implemented  pan-territorial initiatives using innovative approaches to address mental  wellness collaboratively. Due to the delays in funding release for the first  year of the THIF contribution, most projects remained in planning, engagement,  and implementation phases. For this reason, there is limited evidence to assess  each territory’s progress against stated objectives.
Annual  reports demonstrate that all territories used a portion of THIF funding on  professional development to improve the skills of existing front-line service  providers and supporting staff. Training was provided on a range of topics  related to caring for clients with chronic diseases and mental illnesses, as  well as the delivery of culturally appropriate care. For example, Nunavut  delivered two four-week training sessions on non-violent crisis intervention to  front-line mental health staff in 2015-16, and provided 12 employees with  one-day training on the same topic in 2016-17. Annual reports indicate that,  due to high staff turnover, ongoing training in non-violent crisis intervention  is important to maintain skills for staff. Similarly, to  support their Children’s Oral Health initiative, the Northwest Territories  Department of Health and Social Services used THIF funding to develop draft  protocols and training materials to support the provision of fluoride therapy,  and tested these protocols with community health representatives to ensure they  were effective. During the three-year period, the Yukon offered a total of 48 training sessions  with over 850 participants, more than 100 of which participated in communities  outside of Whitehorse. Training covered a variety of issues related to mental  wellness, including clinical skills for front-line providers.
THIF  funding was also used for activities aimed at improving access to existing  services. For example, Nunavut hired Community Oral Health coordinators serving  17 communities to provide preventative oral health services, such as fluoride  varnishes.  These coordinators are also able to provide oral health promotion services in  Inuktitut. By providing preventative treatments, the Government of Nunavut expects  to reduce the need over time for oral surgery under general anesthesia for  children living in the territory.
Under  the Pan-Territorial Stream, territories launched several pilot projects using  innovative technologies such as telehealth and e-health platforms to improve  access to mental wellness services. Pilots included app-based interventions  such as “SPARX” and “Breathing Room” aimed at providing Cognitive Behavioural  Therapy (CBT) strategies to cope with mental illness among youth in the North,  and the launch of telehealth services in Yukon and Nunavut. Nunavut and the  Northwest Territories both have helplines providing access to counsellors that  are open 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, and supported through THIF  pan-territorial funding.
5.3 Efficiency and Economy
The design of the new THIF grant is expected to  improve efficiency by removing some reporting requirements, allowing for more  flexibility on the part of funding recipients. Remote service delivery  technologies may help ensure that Northern health care providers have access to  a similar level of diagnostic and screening options as are available elsewhere  in Canada. Though it is not possible to eliminate the need for medical travel,  further investments in innovative service delivery methods and technologies may  enable territories to connect clients more efficiently to necessary care options.
The  THIF contribution agreement introduced several elements of design intended to  improve program efficiency relative to the previous THSSI grant program. The  THIF contribution provided the Government of Canada with a greater ability to  influence project design and outcomes and introduced several methods to limit  administrative costs associated with projects. For example, THIF contained  limits on administrative funding for recipients, including a 10% cap on project  travel and a 10% cap on evaluation costs. The administrative caps were intended  to ensure a significant proportion of the contribution would flow directly to  projects included in the proposals. THIF also  established a minimum budget of $1 million for project proposals. Under the  THSSI grant, there was no budget minimum for proposals, and as a result, a  higher value was attributed to administrative costs among multiple smaller  projects. While these program design elements were expected to improve  efficiency, a review of performance over the three-year period revealed  opportunities for improvement. Many of these have already been incorporated  into the new THIF grant.
Partners  in the territories noted that annual reporting requirements for the  contribution agreement introduced an additional reporting burden that  outweighed any potential gains in transparency or accountability. Feedback from  key informants indicated that territorial health and social service  administrations had to reallocate human resources away from service delivery to  complete annual activity reports. This sentiment was echoed by Health Canada  staff, who noted that reviewing and approving reports also resulted in a  reporting burden. For this reason, THIF partners were supportive of the  transition back to a grant model to deliver THIF funding, and described this  change as a step in the right direction.
Findings  from the 2017 independent performance review of THIF suggest that territorial  partners viewed the funding cap on project travel as “unrealistic” considering  the Northern context. A review of  territorial activity reports indicate that Nunavut in particular faced  challenges staying within the 10% cap on project travel, spending over budget  on project travel for the Mental Wellness stream by nearly $150,000 in 2016-17,  approximately 18% of the annual territorial THIF budget. The new THIF  grant program has removed the administrative caps, including those for program  travel.
Key  informants also indicated that the short-term funding model contributes to  challenges in attracting and retaining human resources. When positions are  linked to short-term funding agreements, the organizations must staff using  temporary contracts with no guarantee of longer-term employment for the  candidate. This reality makes it difficult to attract qualified applicants and  links to ongoing challenges of high turnover and reliance on a transient  workforce. Key informants were generally supportive of the transition to a  grant program, but indicated that longer-term funding would be beneficial for  enabling partners to undertake longer-term planning, including recruitment and  retention of qualified staff.
Finally,  key informants in all three territories indicated that medical travel continues  to be a necessary expense for territorial governments, but noted opportunities  to use medical travel more efficiently in the future. In particular, there were  suggestions related to the use of innovative health technologies, including  remote diagnostic tools and telehealth triaging services. Remote service  delivery technologies may help ensure that Northern health care providers have  access to a similar level of diagnostic and screening options as are available  elsewhere in Canada. These services can help health care providers make  decisions about care options for clients, including potentially avoiding more  costly emergency medical travel (such as medivacs) in favour of earlier  treatment options.
6.0 Conclusions
6.1 Relevance
Similar  to other circumpolar regions, Canada's three territories face higher than  average health care costs, yet residents in the territories fare worse on  indicators of health. Increased costs are driven by the broad geography and  relatively small population in the territories, coupled with a scarcity of  primary care physicians and specialists. There is a need for improved access to  services among the population living in the territories, particularly in the  areas of mental wellness, chronic disease management, and children's oral  health. To respond to this challenge, there is a continued need to implement  innovative strategies that connect clients with medically necessary services.
The  THIF program remains aligned with Government of Canada priorities and  contributes to Health Canada's strategic outcome of achieving a health system  that is responsive to the needs of Canadians. Territorial partners view the  program as responsive to their needs, and note that improved flexibility under  a grant model will allow them to better target funding to where it is needed  most.
6.2 Performance
THIF  funding enabled territorial governments to implement strategic and  systems-level changes to support better service delivery. Furthermore,  territories were able to use THIF funding to improve existing services by  investing in professional development and initiatives related to mental  wellness, chronic disease management, and oral health.
However,  evidence suggests that some proposed THIF activities are slow to progress due  to delays in the release of funding in year one, difficulties in recruitment  and retention for all territories, and changing priorities for territorial  governments and their key partners. While THIF documents indicated a goal of  reducing medical travel over the three-year period, the evaluation found this  was not a realistic goal, as costs for medical travel in the territories will  continue to rise until remote service delivery options become more easily  available.
While  it is too early to measure impacts on patient health outcomes, THIF funding has  contributed to improved services related to key health gaps by facilitating  professional development activities and the hiring of service coordinators, as  well as introducing pilot projects using innovative technologies.
The  recent redesign of THIF to a grant model has addressed several opportunities to  improve efficiency and economy, as the reporting requirements in the  contribution agreement mechanism for THIF introduced an additional  administrative workload for both Health Canada and territorial partners. Key  informants viewed the targeted areas of mental wellness, chronic disease  management, and children's oral health as relevant, however the disease-specific  funding model limited the flexibility of territorial governments to allocate  funding towards areas where it was needed most, and to respond to changing  priorities over time.
In recognition of these lessons learned, the THIF grant no longer  requires proposals to align with key health gap areas by disease, and instead  funds projects that promote innovative approaches to health human resources and  health technology. Furthermore, the Medical Travel Stream for the current  four-year THIF grant program will be stable, in recognition that reduced  reliance on medical travel is a longer-term goal for territorial partners. As  THIF continues to evolve, consideration may be given towards longer-term  funding agreements to address high rates of staff turnover associated with  short-term projects, and to facilitate longer-term strategic planning.
References
Reference 1

Health Canada.  (2018). Performance Information Profile:  The Territorial Health Investment Fund. [Internal Document: RDIMS:  #599567].
Return to reference 1 referrer

Reference 2

 Government of  Canada. (2013). Economic Action Plan 2014.  Retrieved from: https://www.budget.canada.ca/2014/docs/plan/pdf/budget2014-eng.pdf.
Return to reference 2 referrer

Reference 3

Hanson &  Associates. (2016) DRAFT: Territorial  Health Investment Fund (THIF) Performance Story Highlights. [Internal  Document: RDIMS #603259].
Return to reference 3 referrer

Reference 4

Health Canada.  (2018). Performance Information Profile:  The Territorial Health Investment Fund. [Internal Document: RDIMS:  #599567].
Return to reference 4 referrer

Reference 5

Government of  Canada. (2013). Economic Action Plan 2014.  Retrieved from: https://www.budget.canada.ca/2014/docs/plan/pdf/budget2014-eng.pdf.
Return to reference 5 referrer

Reference 6

Health Canada.  (2017). “Details on Transfer Payment Programs of $5 Million or More:  Territorial Health Investment Fund (Voted).” Supplementary Information Tables: Health Canada, 2016-17 Departmental  Results Report . Retrieved from: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/corporate/transparency/corporate-management-reporting/departmental-performance-reports/2016-17-supplementary-information-tables/page-3-2016-17-supplementary-information-tables.html#a4.
Return to reference 6 referrer

Reference 7

Health Canada.  (2017). “Details on Transfer Payment Programs of $5 Million or More:  Territorial Health Investment Fund (Voted).” Supplementary Information Tables: Health Canada, 2016-17 Departmental  Results Report . Retrieved from: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/corporate/transparency/corporate-management-reporting/departmental-performance-reports/2016-17-supplementary-information-tables/page-3-2016-17-supplementary-information-tables.html.
Return to reference 7 referrer

Reference 8

Government of  Canada. (2017). “Chapter 3 – A Strong Canada at Home and in the World”. Building a Strong Middle Class -  #Budget2017. (Ottawa, ON: Library of Parliament) pp. 160. Retrieved From: https://www.budget.canada.ca/2017/docs/plan/budget-2017-en.pdf.
Return to reference 8 referrer

Reference 9

Health Canada.  (2017). Health Canada 2016-17 Report on  Plans and Priorities. Retrieved from: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/corporate/transparency/corporate-management-reporting/report-plans-priorities/2016-2017-report-plans-priorities.html?_ga=2.171861408.1684646265.1517853941-660409742.1516642319. 
Return to reference 9 referrer

Reference 10

Health Canada. (4  December 2016). Evaluation of the  Territorial Health Investment Fund initiative: Scoping Discussion.  [Presentation: RDIMS# 601515].
Return to reference 10 referrer

Reference 11

Young, T. K., and  Chatwood, S. (2011). Healthcare in the North: what Canada can learn from its  circumpolar neighbours. CMAJ 183(2),  pp. 209-214. https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/2ea1/db166371ef81b1118a9b07074bb5dcd1a9b8.pdf.
Return to reference 11 referrer

Reference 12

Hanson and  Associates. (2017). DRAFT: Territorial Health Investment Fund (THIF)  Performance Story Highlights. (Internal Document)  [RDIMS #603259].
Return to reference 12 referrer

Reference 13

Statistics Canada.  (2017). Statistics Canada Catalogue no. 98-402-X2016009. Ottawa. Released  October 25, 2017. Extracted from: http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/census-recensement/2016/dp-pd/hlt-fst/abo-aut/Table.cfm?Lang=Eng&T=101&S=99&O=A.
Return to reference 13 referrer

Reference 14

Young, T. K.,  Chatwood, S., & Marchildon, G. P. (2016). Healthcare in Canada’s North: Are  We Getting Value for Money? Healthcare Policy, 12(1), 59–70.
Return to reference 14 referrer

Reference 15

Young, T. K.,  Chatwood, S., & Marchildon, G. P. (2016). Healthcare in Canada’s North: Are  We Getting Value for Money? Healthcare Policy, 12(1), 59–70.
Return to reference 15 referrer

Reference 16

Young, T. K.,  Chatwood, S., & Marchildon, G. P. (2016). Healthcare in Canada’s North: Are  We Getting Value for Money? Healthcare Policy, 12(1), 59–70.
Return to reference 16 referrer

Reference 17

Young, T. K.,  Chatwood, S., & Marchildon, G. P. (2016). Healthcare in Canada’s North: Are  We Getting Value for Money? Healthcare Policy, 12(1), 59–70.
Return to reference 17 referrer

Reference 18

Conference Board of  Canada. (2018).  How Canada Performs –  Suicides. Retrieved from: http://www.conferenceboard.ca/hcp/provincial/health/suicide.aspx.
Return to reference 18 referrer

Reference 19

Government of  Nunavut. (2014) Cancer in Nunavut: 1999 - 2011. Retrieved from: https://www.gov.nu.ca/sites/default/files/cancer_report_2013_final.pdf.
Return to reference 19 referrer

Reference 20

Government of the  Northwest Territories. (no date). Chronic  Diseases. Retrieved from: http://www.hss.gov.nt.ca/en/services/chronic-diseases.
Return to reference 20 referrer

Reference 21

Government of Yukon.  (2015). Yukon Health Status Report.Retrieved  from: http://www.yukoncmoh.ca/files/health_status_report_2015.pdf.
Return to reference 21 referrer

Reference 22

 Schroth, R.J..,  Quinonez, C., Shwart, L. and Wagar, B. (2016). Treating Early Childhood Caries  Under General Anesthesia: a National Review of Canadian Data. J Can Dent Assoc 82(20): pp. 1-8. http://www.jcda.ca/sites/default/files/g20_0.pdf.
Return to reference 22 referrer

Reference 23

Health Canada,  Nunavut Tunngavik Inc., Nunatsiavut Government, Inuvialuit Regional  Corporation, and Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami. (2011) Inuit Oral Health Survey  Report,  2008-2009. Retrieved from: http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/fniah-spnia/alt_formats/pdf/pubs/promotion/_oral-bucco/oral-inuit-buccal-eng.pdf.
Return to reference 23 referrer

Reference 24

Health Canada.  (2011).  Inuit Oral Health Survey  Report,  2008-2009. Retrieved from: http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/fniah-spnia/alt_formats/pdf/pubs/promotion/_oral-bucco/oral-inuit-buccal-eng.pdf.
Return to reference 24 referrer

Reference 25

Inuit Tapiriit  Kanatami. (2013). Inuit Oral Health Action Plan 2013. Retrieved from: https://itk.ca/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/ITK_OralHealth_English.pdf.
Return to reference 25 referrer

Reference 26

Government of the  Northwest Territories - Department of Health and Social Services. (2015). Road  map to improved oral health. [Internal Document].
Return to reference 26 referrer

Reference 27

Health Canada.  (2016). Health Canada 2016-17 Report on Plans and Priorities. Retrieved from: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/corporate/transparency/corporate-management-reporting/report-plans-priorities/2016-2017-report-plans-priorities.html.
Return to reference 27 referrer

Reference 28

Health Canada.  (2016). Health Canada 2016-17 Report on Plans and Priorities. Retrieved from: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/corporate/transparency/corporate-management-reporting/report-plans-priorities/2016-2017-report-plans-priorities.html.
Return to reference 28 referrer

Reference 29

Hanson and  Associates. (2017). Draft: Territorial Health Investment Fund (THIF)  Performance Story Highlights. (Internal Document)  [RDIMS #603259].
Return to reference 29 referrer

Reference 30

Government of  Canada. (2012). First Nations and Inuit Health Branch: Mandate,  Plans and Priorities. Retrieved from: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/corporate/about-health-canada/branches-agencies/first-nations-inuit-health-branch/mandate-plans-priorities.html.
Return to reference 30 referrer

Reference 31

Department of  Finance. (2011). What is the Canada  Health Transfer. Retrieved from: https://www.fin.gc.ca/fedprov/cht-eng.asp.
Return to reference 31 referrer

Reference 32

Department of  Finance. (2012). Territorial Formula  Financing. Retrieved from: https://www.fin.gc.ca/fedprov/tff-eng.asp.
Return to reference 32 referrer

Reference 33

Government of  Canada. (2018). Non-Insured Health Benefits (NIHB) Program – General Questions  and Answers. Retrieved from: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/first-nations-inuit-health/non-insured-health-benefits/benefits-information/non-insured-health-benefits-nihb-program-general-information-questions-answers-first-nations-inuit-health-canada.html.
Return to reference 33 referrer

Reference 34

Government of Canada. (2016). Canada's Health Care System. Retrieved from: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/canada-health-care-system.html
Return to reference 34 referrer

Reference 35

Government of the Yukon.  (2017). Territorial Stream Annual Activity and Financial Report 2016-17 –  Chronic Disease Management (CDM) Project, July 2017. Internal Document.
Return to reference 35 referrer

Reference 36

Government of the  Northwest Territories. (2017). THIF Annual Report 2016-2017 Health Investment  Fund Financial and Activity Report. Internal Document.
Return to reference 36 referrer

Reference 37

Inuit Tapiriit  Kanatami. (2013). Inuit Oral Health Action Plan 2013. Retrieved from: https://itk.ca/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/ITK_OralHealth_English.pdf.
Return to reference 37 referrer

Reference 38

 Government of  Nunavut. (2016). Medical Travel Expenses Annual Activity Report 2015-16.  [Internal Document: RDIMS # 603075].
Return to reference 38 referrer

Reference 39

Hanson and  Associates. (2017). DRAFT: TERRITORIAL HEALTH INVESTMENT FUND (THIF)  Performance Story Highlights. (Internal Document)  [RDIMS #603259].
Return to reference 39 referrer

Reference 40

Health Canada.  (2016). Presentation to EC: territorial Health Investment Fund – Overview and Options  Moving Forward, September 12, 2016. (Internal Document).
Return to reference 40 referrer

Reference 41

Government of  Nunavut. (2017). Territorial Health Investment Funs Annual Activity Report  -  Nunavut Mental Health Service Capacity  Development Project. Internal Document.
Return to reference 41 referrer

Reference 42

Government of the  Northwest Territories. (2016). THIF NWT Annual Activity & Financial Reports  1516. (Annual Report: 603111).
Return to reference 42 referrer

Reference 43

 Government of the  Yukon. (2017). Territorial Stream Annual Activity and Financial Report 2016-17  – Chronic Disease Management (CDM) Project, July 2017. Internal Document.
Return to reference 43 referrer

Reference 44

 Government of  Nunavut. (2017). Territorial Health Investment Fund Oral Health Project Annual  Activity Report for 2016/17. Internal Document. 
Return to reference 44 referrer

Reference 45

Government of Yukon.  (2016). Territorial Health Investment Fund (THIF) - Pan-territorial stream -  Yukon Government pilot project.
Return to reference 45 referrer

Reference 46

Government of  Nunavut - Department of Health. (2015). Appendix A: Pan-Territorial Stream  Proposal Application - E-Mental Health and Other Innovative Strategies for the  Delivery of Mental Health Services In Remote Northern Communities.
Return to reference 46 referrer

Reference 47

Hanson and  Associates. (2017). Draft: Territorial Health Investment Fund (THIF)  Performance Story Highlights. (Internal Document).
Return to reference 47 referrer

Reference 48

Hanson and  Associates. (2017). Draft: Territorial Health Investment Fund (THIF)  Performance Story Highlights. (Internal Document).
Return to reference 48 referrer

Reference 49

Government of  Nunavut. (2016). THIF Annual Activity Report - Nunavut Mental Health Service  Capacity Development Project - April 1, 2015 to March 30, 2016. Internal  Document.
Return to reference 49 referrer

Reference 50

Government of  Nunavut. (2016). THIF Annual Activity Report - Nunavut Mental Health Service  Capacity Development Project - April 1, 2015 to March 30, 2016. Internal  Document.
Return to reference 50 referrer
Footnotes
Footnote a

A description of the evaluation  questions and lines of evidence used to address them are shown in Appendix 1.
Return to footnote a referrer

Footnote b

In 2014, the proportion of residents reporting  a mood disorder was 7.7% in the Northwest Territories and 8.7% in Yukon,  compared to 7.8% across Canada. Rates for Nunavut were not available. Data  from: https://www.statcan.gc.ca/tables-tableaux/sum-som/l01/cst01/health114b-eng.htm.
Return to footnote b referrer

Footnote c

Inuit Nunangat refers to the traditional Inuit  territory in the circumpolar north. This includes Nunavut, as well as some  northern areas of the Northwest Territories, Quebec and Labrador.
Return to footnote c referrer

Footnote d

This number represents the average from 2009 to 2011, which is the most recent  available data.
Return to footnote d referrer

Footnote e

Dental caries is the medical term to describe  tooth decay, which leads to cavities in teeth. The terms ‘caries’ and  ‘cavities’ are often used interchangeably, however the decay can continue if  cavities are not treated, and may cause further complications for the inner  layers of the tooth.
Return to footnote e referrer

Footnote f

Calculation based on the most recent Canadian Dental Association data available  (2013), and population estimates from Statistics Canada. For more information,  see: https://www.cda-adc.ca/en/services/fact_sheets/dentistincanada.asp.
Return to footnote f referrer
