Evaluation of Health Canada’s First Nations and Inuit Health Branch’s Environmental Public Health Program 2010-11 to 2014-15
Download the alternative format
(PDF format, 456 KB, 59 pages)
Organization:
Health Canada
Date published:
2017-02-24
Prepared by
Office of
  Audit and Evaluation
Health Canada and
  the Public Health Agency of Canada
September
  15, 2016
List of Acronyms
CA
Contribution
    Agreement
CBWM
Community Based Drinking Water
    Quality Monitor
CFIA
Canadian Food Inspection Agency
CMHC
Canadian Mortgage and Housing
    Corporation
DPR
Departmental Performance Report
DWA
Drinking Water Advisory
EC
Environment Canada
EH-ER
Environmental Health and
    Environmental Research
EHIS
Environmental Health Information
    System
EHO
Environmental Health Officer
EPH
Environmental Public Health
EPHD
Environmental Public Health
    Division
EPHP
Environmental Public Health
    Program
FNECP
First Nations Environmental
    Contaminants Program
FNFNES
First Nations Food, Nutrition and
    Environment Study
FNEHIN
First Nations Environmental Health
    Innovation Network
FNHA
First Nations Health Authority
FNIHB
First Nations and Inuit Health
    Branch
FNWWAP
First Nations Water and Wastewater Action
    Plan
Gs&Cs
Grants
    and Contributions
GCDWQ
Guidelines for Canadian Drinking Water
    Quality
HQ
Headquarters
INAC
Indigenous and Northern Affairs
    Canada
O&M
Operations and Maintenance
PAA
Program Alignment Architecture
PHAC
Public Health Agency of Canada
REHM
Regional Environmental
    Health Managers
Table
  of Contents
Executive
    Summary
Management
    Response and Action Plan
1.0        Evaluation Purpose
2.0        Program Description
2.1         Program Context and Narrative
2.2         Program Profile
2.3         Program Alignment and Resources
3.0        Evaluation Description
3.1         Evaluation Scope,
        Approach and Design
3.2         Limitations and Mitigation Strategies
4.0        Findings
4.1         Relevance: Issue #1 – Continued Need for the Program
4.2         Relevance: Issue #2 – Alignment with Government
        Priorities
4.3         Relevance: Issue #3 – Alignment with Federal Roles and
        Responsibilities
4.4         Performance: Issue #4 – Achievement of Expected
        Outcomes (Effectiveness)
4.5         Performance: Issue #5 – Demonstration of Economy and
        Efficiency
5.0        Conclusions
5.1         Relevance Conclusions
5.2         Performance Conclusions
6.0        Recommendations
Appendix 1 –
    Core Areas of Program Activity Focus
Appendix 2 –
    Logic Model
Appendix 3 –
    Summary of Findings
Appendix 4 –
    Evaluation Matrix
List of
  Tables
Table 1:
    Program Expenditures ($)
Table 2:
    Limitations/Challenges and Mitigation Strategies
Table 3: Most
    Frequently Cited EPH Risk Areas by Environmental Public Health Officers
Table 4: Most
    Frequently Cited as "High Priority" Risk Areas
Table 5.  Activity areas where EPH risk is mitigated or
    eliminated in the short term
Table 6: EPHP
    Expenditures by Region and HQ
Executive
  Summary
This
  evaluation provides an update on the relevance and performance of Health
  Canada's Environmental Public Health Program (EPHP), which was first evaluated
  in 2011 under Health Canada's Environmental Health and Environmental Research
  (EH-ER) Cluster Evaluation.
Evaluation Purpose and Scope
The purpose of this evaluation is to
  assess changes in the performance of Health Canada's EPHP during the past five
  fiscal years (2010-11 to 2014-15), and to fulfill the requirements of the
  Financial Administration Act and the Treasury Board of Canada's Policy on
  Evaluation (2009).   The scope of this
  evaluation included most activities performed by the EPHP, as well as progress made on activities covered under the First
  Nations Water and Wastewater Action Plan. 
  Not included within the scope of this evaluation were the activities
  that are now covered under the British Columbia Tripartite Framework Agreement
  on First Nation Health Governance, which came into full effect in 2014-15, and activities
  included under recently evaluated horizontal initiatives, namely the Clean Air
  Agenda and the Action Plan to Protect Human Health from Environmental
  Contaminants. Furthermore, the evaluation did not assess FNIHB activities related to
  Inuit and Inuit communities given that those activities were assessed as part
  of existing external/horizontal evaluation (INAC's Northern Contaminants
  Program and Environment and Climate Change Canada's Clean Air Agenda).
Program Description
The
  primary objective of the EPHP is to "identify, address, and/or prevent
  human health risks to First Nations and Inuit communities associated with
  exposure to hazards within the natural and built environments."  Environmental
  public health surveillance and risk analysis programming includes community-based
  and participatory research on trends and impacts of environmental factors, such
  as chemical contaminants and climate change on the determinants of health
  (e.g., biophysical, social, cultural, and spiritual).
This programming is directed to First Nations communities south of the
  60th parallel, and in the case of the Northern Contaminants Program and the
  Climate Change and Health Adaptation Program, also to Inuit and First Nations
  north of the 60th parallel.
Within Health Canada, the EPHP is coordinated
  regionally by Environmental Public Health Services (EPHS) and supported
  nationally by the Environmental Public Health Division (EPHD). EPH programming
  is delivered in First Nations communities south of 60º by Environmental Health
  Officers (EHOs) employed by Health Canada or First Nation communities and/or
  Tribal Councils in accordance with the National Framework for the Environmental
  Public Health Program in First Nations Communities South of 60º. Key
  programming includes environmental public health assessments; training; and,
  public awareness activities that focus on eight core areas: Drinking Water;
  Wastewater; Solid Waste Disposal; Food Safety; Housing; Facilities inspections;
  Environmental Communicable Disease Control; and, Emergency Preparedness and
  Response.
Between April 1, 2010 and March 31, 2015, the EPHP expended
  approximately $162 million through set contribution funding agreements and
  direct departmental spending to identify, assess and address human health risks
  associated with exposure to hazards within the natural and built environments. One key program difference as of 2014 is that activities are
  now performed in the province of British Columbia by the First Nations Health
  Authority (FNHA) as a result of the British Columbia Tripartite Framework Agreement on First Nation Health
  Governance. Another difference as of 2011 is that the former cluster
  structure of two groups of programming (Environmental Health and Environmental
  Research) have now been integrated into one program, namely the Environmental
  Public Health Program at FNIHB.
Conclusions - Relevance
Continued Need
EPH
  programming is globally recognized as an essential component of public health
  systems, and is a key contributor to improving the health and well-being of
  populations in a holistic manner. The EPHP supports a continued and growing
  need among many First Nations communities to identify and address human health
  risks associated with exposure to hazards within the natural and built environments.
  As identified in the previous evaluation, many First Nations communities
  continue to experience significant EPH risks compared with other Canadian
  communities. Ongoing challenges result from issues such as: sub-standard
  housing and living conditions; poor drinking water quality and poorly operated
  wastewater systems; a lack of certified water plant operators; climate change;
  local geography characteristics; and, numerous socio-economic inequalities. While
  the resolution of EPH issues often falls outside the scope of Health Canada's
  control, there continues to be a strong, demonstrated need for a program like
  EPHP to influence health promotion and disease prevention outcomes in First
  Nations communities. As First Nations communities continue to grow and
  experience more complex environmental
  public health risks, the
  need for EPH assessments, training, public awareness, research and surveillance
  is expected to increase.
Alignment with Government Priorities
The EPHP
  continues to align with federal priorities and strategic outcomes sought to
  improve the health status of First Nations and Inuit communities and
  individuals.
Alignment with Federal Roles and Responsibilities
Since the previous
  evaluation, Bill S-8 was passed and the Safe Drinking Water for First Nations
  Act came into force in 2013. The introduction of this Act moves the federal
  role in EPH risk mitigation beyond advisory to include a possible regulatory
  role. During this evaluation time period, safe drinking water regulations for
  First Nations were under development; however, as of 2016, the Act became
  subject to review by INAC Ministerial direction, and regulatory development was
  put on hold. Health Canada continues, therefore, to play an advisory role which
  varies in each region in order to meet specific community
  needs and priorities.
As different federal departments have a role to play in
  supporting First Nations communities in addressing EPH risks, it is necessary that
  the contribution of all federal departments is coordinated and aligned to
  maximize effectiveness and achieve common strategic outcomes.  Currently,
  the Health Canada role in drinking water remains advisory, and the activities
  delivered under the EPHP align with this advisory role. Health Canada also does
  not currently have the mandate to provide funding to communities to address or
  remediate risks, as this is the purview of INAC.  While there is no duplication, there are
  opportunities for greater coordination and integration at the federal level.
Conclusions - Performance
Achievement of Expected Outcomes (Effectiveness)
Building on
  the achievements identified in the previous evaluation, over the past five
  years the EPHP has demonstrated clear progress in achieving its immediate
  outcomes. For example, findings indicate that data collection is more timely
  and findings are disseminated at various levels either through recommendations
  or other types of reporting; there is an increased use of evidence to guide EPH
  activities with relevant research being conducted in communities to address EPH
  priorities; and an awareness of EPH risks among First Nations communities has
  increased overall, which has further contributed to an increased use of, and
  demand for, EPHP services in communities.
Similar to
  the previous evaluation findings, while progress on immediate outcomes is
  evident, the extent to which intermediate outcomes have been achieved is less
  clear. There are three general steps required to mitigate EPH risks that
  include activities that identify, then assess, and then address issues (if
  required from the assessment).
Findings
  from this evaluation indicate that the EPHP has continued to demonstrate
  capacity to work effectively with First Nations communities to identify and to
  assess EPH risks, and that such activities can result
  in recommendations for First Nations communities and other stakeholders with
  respect to addressing environmental risks. In addition, there has been
  continued progress over the past five years with First Nations communities
  developing their own capacity to identify and assess EPH risks. There has been
  less progress in communities undertaking of activities required to address EPH
  risks, which can be complex, and require considerable resources from other
  funding sources (i.e., outside of the mandate of the EPHP).  While there are some areas where this third
  step is occurring (e.g., short-term remedial actions such as drinking water
  advisories and food safety precautions), overall there remain challenges for
  communities to address the more complex EPH risks (e.g., long-term actions
  involving housing and systems for drinking and wastewater).
The
  contingencies and factors involved in addressing EPH risks are numerous, and
  include the consideration of community prioritization and the availability of
  resources, all of which are external to the EPHP's mandate. This indicates that
  if the EPHP is expected to contribute to communities addressing their more
  complex EPH risks, then the program will need to continue coordinating and
  collaborating with the multitude of other stakeholders involved that assist
  First Nations communities in determining their priorities and obtaining
  resources to address EPH risks.
The
  evaluation was unable to directly assess the longer term outcome of improved health
  and well-being of First Nations. There is consensus among program
  representatives that the EPHP is likely contributing to improving health status
  by taking specific actions towards certain environmental public health risks.
Demonstration of Economy
  and Efficiency
The EPHP
  demonstrates some aspects of economy and efficiency in its delivery. Given
  the manner in which budgets are developed and resources allocated, it is
  challenging to determine the extent to which planning and budgets align with
  actual expenditures in each of the program's regions and activity areas. This
  also contributes to challenges with calculating some measures of efficiency
  using the financial data available for the program such as ratios of cost per
  output.
The program's strong,
  positive connections with First Nations communities and organizations,
  particularly at the community level, assist in ensuring the relevancy of the
  EPHP's services and advice. The EPHP is expending resources on EPH
  activities that are contributing to outcomes important to First Nations
  communities.
A key component of the EPHP successes can be attributed to
  the work of Environmental Health Officers (EHOs). While there were numerous
  areas of efficiency demonstrated for EHOs, the sustainability of their efforts
  may be impacted by an increasing workload in the area, and significantly
  greater demands being placed on the EPHP due to: an increased awareness of EPH
  risks in many communities; an increase in funding for community infrastructure
  projects; and, the ongoing growth and development of First Nations communities. The impact of workload
  pressures among EHOs is somewhat varied by region due to differences in
  capacity and priorities between First Nations communities.
Regarding
  matters pertaining to the program's performance measurement, the EPHP has
  generally improved during the past five years. Areas for improvement identified
  in the previous evaluation show that attempts have been made to advance
  reporting from strictly counting outputs to also including outcomes. In
  addition, there was work on the development of some of the data collection
  systems. Despite these improvements, there remain some challenges with respect
  to the comprehensiveness of data (e.g., different data collection tools and
  coverage parameters among regions) and the utility of data collected (e.g., focus
  on counting inspections but not systematically capturing the content of
  recommendations).
Recommendations
Recommendation 1
Explore options to
  enhance collaboration with stakeholders to support First Nations in addressing
  and mitigating complex environmental health risks (e.g., those that may require
  longer-term and more costly interventions).
While there are many
  coordination and collaboration activities underway already, it is clear that
  for the intermediate (and thus longer term) outcomes to be achieved there needs
  to be continued involvement by EPHP in contributing evidence and assessments to
  support or promote the mitigation of complex environmental public health risks.
  In order to better assess the degree to which outcomes are achieved, the
  impacts of EPH collaboration and coordination on EPH risk mitigation should be
  documented, with the understanding that whether such risks are actually
  mitigated is often outside the EPHP's control.
There are numerous other stakeholders involved in various
  areas of EPH in First Nations communities. These stakeholders include:  First Nations communities, various First
  Nations organizations, other federal government departments and agencies (e.g.,
  INAC, EC, PHAC, CFIA, CMHC), various branches within
  Health Canada, and provincial governments. INAC and Health Canada require
  collaboration specifically in a number of areas associated with EPH given their
  combined contributions to achievement of EPHP objectives. For example, while
  INAC is the lead on the First Nations Water and Wastewater Action Plan, Health
  Canada has important supporting roles. Similarly, investigations by EHOs or
  reviews by public health engineers can result in recommendations for
  infrastructure improvements that are being funded through INAC programming. EPHP
  is only one of the players in this complex matrix; however, the EPHP is
  well-positioned to continue to provide evidence and information required to
  promote the mitigation of complex EPH risks, given their expertise and strong
  working relationships and connections to the community.  EPHP's coordination and collaboration
  activities should continue at various levels including community, sub-region,
  region and national levels.
Recommendation 2
Review the current
  EHO allocation and workload within and across regions to determine
  sustainability of service to communities considering various forecasted
  additional demands and complexities.
Building on the findings from the workload
  analyses currently underway, it will be important for the EPHP to clearly
  understand the challenges involved resulting from the current EHO allocation
  and workloads at both regional and national levels. This review would need to
  take into account the anticipated additional demands and complexities for many
  First Nation communities as a result of various changing contexts (e.g.,
  increased infrastructure funding, climate change, economic development,
  population growth).
Recommendation 3
Produce an assessment
  of the impact of the recommendations made by EHOs to Chiefs and Councils in the
  area of food, water and housing.
Given that the recommendations that EHOs
  develop are an essential output to achieving some of the desirable outcomes for
  the program, they are potentially a rich source of information and data for
  various uses at multiple levels. This would likely enhance the utility of the
  performance and monitoring data being collected by the program.
Management Response and
  Action Plan (or Management Response)
1.0 
  Evaluation Purpose
The
  purpose of this evaluation was to assess the relevance and performance
  (effectiveness, efficiency, and economy) of Health Canada's Environmental
  Public Health Program (EPHP) for the period of 2010–11 to 2014–15. The
  evaluation was conducted in accordance with the Treasury Board Secretariat of
  Canada's 2009 Policy on Evaluation
and the Financial Administration Act. The
  evaluation is part of the Five-Year Evaluation Plan of Health Canada and the
  Public Health Agency of Canada.
An evaluation of the
  EPHP (known previously as the Environmental Health and Environmental Research
  Cluster) was first conducted in 2011, and it focussed on many of the same
  issues covering the fiscal period 2005-06 to 2009-10.
This evaluation presents
  an update on the progress of outcomes and changes made to the EPHP since the
  previous evaluation, and highlights program achievements, lessons learned, and
  delivery challenges.
2.0 
  Program Description
2.1  
  Program Context and Narrative
Conditions in the environment, both natural and
  human-built, can affect a person's ability to achieve and maintain good health.
  A healthy environment includes safe water and food supplies, properly designed,
  constructed and maintained housing and community facilities, as well as
  suitable treatment and disposal of wastewater and solid waste. To maintain a
  healthy environment, it is also necessary to plan for and respond to
  emergencies and work to prevent and control environmental communicable
  diseases.
Improving the health of Indigenous people is a shared
  responsibility among federal, provincial and territorial governments, as well
  as First Nations and Inuit communities and individuals. The EPHP must,
  therefore, continue to work collaboratively with a variety of organizations,
  such as:
First Nations communities and organizations at
    the local, regional and national levels;
Other areas of Health Canada and the First
    Nations and Inuit Health Branch;
Other federal departments, including:  Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada
    (INAC); Environment and Climate Change Canada (EC); Public Health Agency of
    Canada (PHAC); Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA); and, the Canada Mortgage
    and Housing Corporation (CMHC); and,
Provincial and territorial governments.
The long term expected outcome for the EPHP is improved
  health and well-being of First Nations individuals and communities. A logic
  model depicting how the program intends to achieve this outcome was updated in
  2015 (see Appendix 2). This evaluation assessed the degree to which the defined
  outputs and outcomes in the logic model were achieved over the evaluation
  timeframe. The updated EPHP logic model in 2015 is very similar to the one used
  in the 2011 evaluation of the EH-ER Cluster.
2.2  
  Program Profile
The primary
  objective of the EPHP is to "identify, address, and/or prevent human
  health risks to First Nations and Inuit communities associated with exposure to
  hazards within the natural and built environments."  Within Health Canada, the EPHP is coordinated
  regionally by Environmental Public Health Services (EPHS) and supported
  nationally by the Environmental Public Health Division (EPHD). All program activities are provided in
  agreement with and by request of First Nations Authorities. In First Nations
  communities south of 60º (the main focus of this evaluation), EPH programming
  is delivered by Environmental Health Officers (EHOs) employed by Health Canada
  or First Nation communities and/or Tribal Councils in accordance with the
  National Framework for the Environmental Public Health Program in First Nations
  Communities South of 60º. All EHOs must have a Certificate in Public
  Health Inspection (Canada), which is recognized by health organizations in
  Canada as evidence of satisfactory training and competency. They may also
  participate in Continuing Professional Competencies in order to maintain their
  skills, knowledge and expertise.
Key programming under public health assessments continues to
  include activities that focus on eight core areas (Appendix 1): Drinking Water;
  Wastewater; Solid Waste Disposal; Food Safety; Housing; Facilities Inspections;
  Environmental Communicable Disease Control; and, Emergency Preparedness and
  Response. The role of the EPHP is to assist communities by providing training
  and education around EPH risks according to community priorities, developing
  recommendations for addressing EPH risk based on investigations, and reviewing
  infrastructure plans from a public health engineering perspective. Key
  activities include public health inspections and assessments, public education
  and training, and providing advice and guidance.
Environmental
  public health surveillance and risk analysis programming includes
  community-based and participatory research on trends and impacts of
  environmental factors, such as chemical contaminants and climate change on the
  determinants of health (e.g., biophysical, social, cultural, and spiritual).
This
  programming is directed to First Nations communities south of the 60th
  parallel, and in the case of the Northern Contaminants Program and the Climate
  Change and Health Adaptation Program, also to Inuit and First Nations north of
  the 60th parallel.
Between April 1, 2010 and March 31, 2015, the EPHP
  expended approximately $162 million through set contribution funding agreements
  and direct departmental spending to identify, assess and address human health
  risks associated with exposure to hazards within the natural and built
  environments. One key program difference as of
  2014 is that Health Canada's EPHP activities are now performed in British
  Columbia by the First Nations Health Authority, as a result of the British Columbia Tripartite Framework
  Agreement on First Nation Health Governance. Another difference as of
  2011 is that the former structure of two groups of
  programming (Environmental Health and Environmental Research) have now
  been integrated into one program, namely the Environmental Public Health
  Program at FNIHB. In addition, research and surveillance activities have focussed
  primarily on environmental contaminants and laboratory activities (see Appendix
  2, EPHP Program Logic Model).
2.3  
  Program Alignment and Resources
The EPHP is listed as sub sub
  program number 3.1.2.2 under Health Canada's Program Alignment Architecture,
  and it contributes to the following strategic outcome: First Nations and Inuit communities and
  individuals receive health services and benefits that are responsive to their
  needs so as to improve their health status.
The
  Program's financial data for the years 2010-11 through 2014-15 is presented
  below (Table 2). Overall, the Program had expenditures of approximately $162
  million over five years.
3.0 
  Evaluation Description
3.1  
  Evaluation
  Scope, Approach and Design
The scope of the evaluation covered
  the period from April 1, 2010 to March 31, 2015 and included the environmental
  public health activities conducted by the Environmental Public Health Division
  (EPHD) and FNIHB Regions, including progress made on activities covered under
  the First Nations Water and Wastewater Action Plan (evaluation completed in
  November 2013).
Given that other evaluations
have assessed the EPHP's activities specific to Inuit communities, this
  evaluation focussed only on First Nations
  communities. The evaluation excluded activities that are now covered under the
  British Columbia Tripartite Framework Agreement on First Nation Health
  Governance, which came into full effect in 2014-15. Also, the evaluation did
  not include FNIHB activities covered under the following horizontal
  initiatives:
Clean Air Agenda, Adaptation Theme (assessed
    concurrently as part of an Environment Canada horizontal evaluation),
and
Action Plan to Protect Human Health from
    Environmental Contaminants (evaluation completed in February 2014).
The evaluation aligns with the
  Treasury Board of Canada's Policy on Evaluation (2009) and considered the five
  core issues under the two themes of relevance and performance, as shown in
  Appendix 4. Corresponding to each of the core issues, specific questions were
  developed based on program considerations and these guided the evaluation
  process.
An outcome-based evaluation approach
  was used to assess progress made towards achievement of the expected outcomes, to identify any unintended
  consequences, and to document lessons learned. Given the EPHP was
  previously evaluated in 2011,
particular emphasis was placed throughout the present evaluation on determining
  what changes and progress had been made since the previous evaluation.
Data for the evaluation were collected using various
  methods, including:  a review of
  literature, program documents, and administrative data; key informant
  interviews with both internal respondents (n=15), and respondents external to
  Health Canada (n=26);
a
  national survey of EHOs (n=69); and, a comparative analysis with other
  environmental public health services. 
  More specific details on the data collection and analysis methods
  performed are contained in Appendix 4. In addition, data were analyzed by
  triangulating information gathered from the different methods listed above. The
  use of multiple lines of evidence and triangulation was intended to increase
  the reliability and validity of the evaluation findings and conclusions.
3.2  
  Limitations and Mitigation Strategies
All evaluations face constraints that may have
  implications for the validity and reliability of evaluation findings and
  conclusions. The following table outlines the limitations encountered
  during this evaluation. Also noted are the mitigation strategies put in place,
  so that the evaluation findings can be used with confidence to guide program
  planning and decision making.
4.0 
  Findings
4.1  
  Relevance:
  Issue #1 – Continued Need for the Program
There is a continued need to identify and
  address human health risks to First Nations communities associated with
  exposure to hazards within the natural and built environments
.
This evaluation found that many of the current and projected
  environmental health risks facing First Nations communities are very similar to
  those that were outlined during the previous evaluation.
Similar to the previous evaluation, all lines of evidence
  (literature and document reviews, interviews and survey results) indicate that
  there remains a clear and consistent need to identify, assess, and address
  environmental health risks in First Nations communities. As identified in the previous
  evaluation, many First Nations communities experience significant EPH risks
  compared with other Canadian communities. The link between housing quality and
  health has been established and is well documented in the literature/document
  review. Indoor air quality, safety and overcrowding can have a direct impact on
  health. Over the last decades, First Nations communities have been faced with
  health problems as a result of the quality of their housing stock. For example,
  the First Nations Regional Health Survey (RHS), using data collected in
  2008-2010, found that for many First Nations living on reserve, housing and
  living conditions are substandard with approximately one-quarter of First
  Nations adults living in over-crowded housing (23.4%), representing a
  substantial increase since the previous RHS in 2002 (17.2%). In comparison in
  the general Canadian population, 7% of adults live in over-crowded
  housing.  High household membership or
  over-crowding is linked with various negative health outcomes such as mould exposure, and transmission of infectious disease.
A survey conducted in 2013 with First Nations respondents
  found that the majority of First Nations people on reserve feel that
  environmental issues affect their/their family's health "a great deal", and
  that this proportion has grown since 2010 (52 per cent, up from 42 per cent).
Among the eight core areas of EPH
  programming, the highest priority areas of concern have been directed to risks associated with
  housing and water infrastructure issues. As noted in the 2013 survey, the
  environmental issues that pose the greatest health concern to First Nations
  people on-reserve are water pollution, air pollution, and mould, each
  identified by between one in five and one in three. These were also the top
  three issues identified in 2010. More recently, the Standing Senate Committee
  on Aboriginal Peoples released a report on its study of on-reserve housing and
  infrastructure. Among its findings, the Committee heard testimony and visited
  First Nations communities with "boil-water advisories that had been in place
  for more than a decade, over-flowing sewage lagoons, roofs covered by tarps
  because there is no money to repair them, and small overcrowded bungalows where
  between 16 and 18 people sleep at one time"
which raises
  other possible EPH risks like the potential spread of communicable diseases,
  mould, and indoor air quality.
As illustrated in Table 3, findings from the current survey
  of EHOs were relatively similar to those from the previous evaluation's
  findings. The most frequently cited risk areas across both cohorts were
  housing, drinking water, and wastewater related risks, and none of the groups
  interviewed or surveyed identified large-scale changes or differences in areas
  of risk that had occurred over the past five years.
As illustrated in Table 4, among those identifying the above
  risks in 2016, drinking water and housing risks were most frequently rated as
  "high priority".
With respect to drinking water
  and wastewater, responses from the EHO survey identified that challenges
  continued to result from poor or old infrastructure; improper infrastructure
  maintenance; lack of training and availability of certified operators; systems
  working at or beyond capacity; climate change; local geography characteristics;
  and numerous socio-economic issues.
4.2  
  Relevance: Issue #2 – Alignment with Government
  Priorities
Similar to the previous evaluation, the EPHP
  activities continue to align with federal priorities to address environmental
  public health risks in First Nations communities. The
  EPHP is aligned with Health Canada's Strategic Outcome 3:  First Nations and Inuit communities
  and individuals receive health services and benefits that are responsive to
  their needs so as to improve their health status.
The previous
  evaluation found that the EH-ER Cluster activities aligned with the federal and
  Health Canada priorities related to environmental public health. Since April
  2010, various Government of Canada commitments have supported improving the
  identification and mitigation of environmental health risks, particularly in
  the areas of drinking water and wastewater. For example, the 2011 and 2013
  Speeches from the Throne outlined the Government's continued work with
  Indigenous peoples.  Budget 2011 outlined
  funds to support water, housing and First Nations and Inuit health with Budget
  2012 through 2015 mentioning support for various aspects of First Nations and
  Inuit health. More recently, Budget 2016 has included additional commitments
  specifically in the areas of drinking water, wastewater, solid waste management
  and housing in First Nations communities.
4.3  
  Relevance: Issue #3 – Alignment with Federal
  Roles and Responsibilities
The EPHP role is advisory in nature and has
  not changed significantly since the previous evaluation. However, there may be
  potential in the future to move towards a more regulatory role in the area of
  drinking water.
Health Canada
  (FNIHB) provides advice, recommendations and guidance to First Nations
  communities on how to reduce or mitigate potential environmental public health
  risks in the natural and built environments. In 2012, the Federal Government
  introduced Bill S-8, the Safe Drinking Water for First Nations Act, with the
  Act receiving Royal Assent on June 19, 2013 and coming into force on November
  1, 2013. The Act enables the Federal Government to develop enforceable federal
  regulations for access to safe, clean, and reliable drinking water; the
  effective treatment of wastewater; and the protection of sources of drinking
  water on First Nations lands
.
At the time of the finalization of this
  evaluation report, the Act was under review by INAC Ministerial direction, and
  the future of the regulatory development project was unknown.
Currently, in the
  absence of a statutory regime or legislative framework, the activities
  delivered under the EPHP remain advisory. Health Canada also does not currently
  have the mandate to provide funding to communities to address or remediate
  risks, as this is the purview of INAC.
With respect to the
  other core areas of EPH mitigation, the findings from the current evaluation
  are very similar to those from the previous evaluation. Health Canada plays an
  advisory role, and the delivery of this role varies according to region. As a
  result, activities under the EPHP are provided at the request and/or with the
  agreement of First Nations authorities. EPHP personnel operate with the
  understanding that Health Canada does not have any EPH authorities to enforce
  existing public health standards or regulations (federal, provincial,
  otherwise) on-reserve.
As outlined in the previous evaluation, there are numerous other
  stakeholders involved in various areas of EPH in First Nations communities. These
  stakeholders have not changed substantially over time and include:  First Nations communities, various First
  Nations organizations, other federal government departments and agencies (e.g.,
  INAC, EC, PHAC, CFIA, CMHC), various branches within
  Health Canada, and provincial governments. INAC and Health Canada require
  collaboration specifically in a number of areas associated with EPH given their
  combined contributions to achievement of EPHP objectives. For example, while
  INAC is the lead on the First Nations Water and Wastewater Action Plan, Health
  Canada has important supporting roles. 
  Similarly, investigations by EHOs or reviews by public health engineers
  can result in recommendations for infrastructure improvements that are being
  funded through INAC programming.
  For the management of
  drinking water quality, First Nations are responsible for the construction,
  operation and management of the systems; INAC sets the standards for these
  systems and provides funding for the construction, operation and maintenance of
  the systems; and HC provides support to protect public health, including
  drinking water quality monitoring and funding of Community-Based Water
  Monitors. For example, if the HC's Environmental
  Health Officer's(EHO) review and interpretation of drinking water quality
  results indicate that drinking water is not safe, the EHO immediately
  communicates recommendation(s) (such as a "boil water" advisory) to
  the Chief and Council for their action.
The provision and
  management of housing on reserve lands is the responsibility of First Nations,
  with support from the Government of Canada. In
  addition to government funding from INAC, First Nations are encouraged to identify
  funding from other sources for their housing needs, including shelter charges
  and loans. According to documentation, and confirmed through key
  informant interviews and the EHO survey, despite the large number of
  stakeholders involved, roles and responsibilities are clearly outlined through
  various agreements and arrangements depending on the stakeholders involved,
  with limited overlap or duplication.
Echoing the findings
  from the previous evaluation, the one area in need of greater attention and highlighted
  by many of the key informants from First Nations communities and organizations
  is the continued gap between known risks that have been identified and assessed
  by Health Canada, and then those risks actually being addressed by the
  contributions of others. For example, the link between Health Canada's
  identification and assessment work and the contribution of others like INAC's
  programming and funding that would be needed to address the more complex risks
  identified and assessed by the EPHP (e.g., housing and infrastructure changes).
  This challenging gap was also identified in many of the interviews with Health
  Canada representatives, and was outlined in open comments by some respondents
  to the EHO Survey.
4.4  
  Performance: Issue #4 – Achievement of Expected
  Outcomes (Effectiveness)
The immediate outcome of "improved environmental public
  health risk identification" was defined according to four sub-outcomes of:
Timely data collection, analysis, dissemination
    and reporting;
Evidence based decision-making;
First Nations awareness of environmental public
    health risks; and
Immediate risk mitigation activities.
Timely data collection, analysis, dissemination and
  reporting
There are multiple layers of data
  collection, analysis, dissemination and reporting within the EPHP. At the
  community level, and similar to the previous evaluation, this process continues
  to be working well, as EHO expertise and knowledge connects with community
  priorities to guide the collection, analysis, dissemination and reporting
  undertaken within a specific community. Data collected at the community level
  is analyzed and reported through the form of recommendations to Chief and
  Council. Findings are disseminated through various training and community awareness
  activities. At the program level, there has been some improvement in data
  collection systems since the previous evaluation, and continued work in the
  analysis, dissemination and reporting of the program results, particularly with
  respect to drinking water. The current evaluation found gaps and challenges
  that relate to needs for greater data comprehensiveness at a national level,
  and the utility of data in being able to report on outcomes and use in risk
  management.
Data
  collection, analysis, dissemination and reporting occur at various levels under
  the EPHP program. EHOs work directly with communities through investigations
  and various other monitoring activities to collect data on aspects of a
  specific community (e.g., facility, housing, water system) that they then
  analyze and report back to the community through recommendations to Chief and
  Council. Further dissemination of results is continued through work with
  community health representatives, and potentially through related training and
  awareness activities for community representatives.
Another
  level of data collection, analysis, dissemination and reporting occurs at the
  program level, with some aspects of the EHO and CBWM activities getting
  captured within regional and national data systems. Analyses of these data then
  feed into various regional and national performance reports (e.g., FNWWAP
  national reports; EPHP Performance Report).
Data
  systems
The key data systems
  in use by the Program to identify and assess risk are the WaterTrax
  and Environmental Health Information System (EHIS). For various reasons, some
  regions (e.g., Alberta, Quebec) use alternative data systems, but much of the
  data from these systems can be rolled up at a national level. The previous
  evaluation found that there were challenges with the data systems in place at
  that time, but that considerable progress had been made over the five-year
  period. EHIS was implemented in 2005, and drinking water data were being
  compiled in various regional data systems.
For the current
  evaluation, overall, many Health Canada key informants perceived that the
  timeliness and quality of data systems for the EPHP had improved during the
  period under study. Informants indicated that improvements were largely the
  result of increased attention, training and diligence of regions and EHOs in
  populating the data systems. According to the FNWWAP Drinking Water Performance
  Indicators National Report, in 2012-13 all regions had access to a drinking
  water database. Maintenance of regional databases is necessary, so that
  drinking water quality results can be communicated in a timely manner, allowing
  for informed and timely decisions such as recommending the issuance of a
  drinking water advisory (DWA).
When
  Health Canada key informants identified weaknesses with the data / data
  systems, these generally related to the comprehensiveness of the data for
  national reporting purposes, and the utility of the data for decision-making.
Key
  informants' concerns about data comprehensiveness included the fact that EPHP
  does not have access to data from First Nations communities that have entered
  into a Health Funding Agreement, and therefore cannot report on or conduct
  analysis of risks facing all First Nations communities at the regional or
  national levels. Additionally, existing systems are not currently designed to
  allow for the capture of all relevant EPH activities or risks related to any
  given community, facility, system or home. As a result, risk analyses and
  resulting decision-making may at times be based on partial information. Finally,
  there are multiple systems in place and these do not communicate with each
  other. EPH data is currently housed in several different databases depending on
  the program activity and the region, making it difficult to roll-up and analyze
  regional and national data, and identify risks and trends. For example, the
  drinking water monitoring data and drinking water advisory data are housed in
  different databases depending on the Region. Quebec uses Water-Eau, Alberta
  uses ELPHIS, and the four other Regions use WaterTrax.
  For data related to public health inspections, investigations, and other
  activities undertaken, Alberta uses Hedgehog, while the rest of the regions use
  EHIS. There is no communication or interoperability between systems; data is
  not standardized and must therefore be rolled up manually for national
  reporting; and there is little capacity for integrated, complex or
  comprehensive analyses of environmental health risks and trends across
  systems/program areas/activities, which would be useful at all levels of
  decision-making, from First Nations to senior management.
Key informant
  concerns about data utility tended to focus on the perceived limitations of the
  data systems in capturing outcomes, and in providing strategic information
  useful for risk management and decision-making. The data are not yet being used
  optimally to monitor environmental public health risks and outcomes, or to
  support risk management. At the community and regional levels, data pertaining
  to drinking water quality monitoring results is housed separately from data
  pertaining to all other EPH program areas (inspections, investigations,
  assessments, surveillance related to facilities and housing). These databases
  do not speak to each other and do not incorporate geographic information
  systems data in a way that would facilitate cross-referencing or integrated
  analysis of risk trends and results across the different program areas.
  Further, these systems do not integrate data from other systems/departments
  (e.g., those used in other FNIHB Regions, or those used by INAC in relation to
  housing or water and wastewater infrastructure projects and reporting. Some
  additional specific issues mentioned by a few respondents included the
  inability of the inspections data systems to facilitate risk assessment or
  prioritization (e.g., provide risk rankings and follow-up schedules on the
  basis of inspection results).
Staff
Having an adequate number of EHOs is considered to be a
  possible contributing factor to more timely data collection, analysis,
  dissemination and reporting at both the community and program level, which
  should lead to improved environmental public health risk identification. The
  previous evaluation identified a challenge with the demands for EHOs and their
  workload, to the extent that there were issues with having to work reactively
  rather than proactively in some communities. While the current evaluation
  identified continued challenges related to EHO workload, it is unclear whether
  the actual number of EHOs has increased from the previous evaluation.
Inspections, Monitoring and Investigations
Water sampling activity is an
  indicator of data collection, analysis, dissemination and reporting which
  should lead to improved environmental public health risk identification. While
  the document review did not obtain data for all years covered by the evaluation,
  from the information received it appears that the amount of water sampling is
  increasing overall in First Nations communities, with compliance rates for
  recommended frequency of sampling increasing as well. According to the 2015
  evaluation of the CBWM Program, "there has been a 22% total increase in the
  number of bacteriological samples collected for all distribution systems from
  FY2004-05 (76,029 samples) to FY2011-12 (92,785 samples)."
The same evaluation found that while the recommended sampling frequency set out
  in the Guidelines for Canadian Drinking Water Quality (GCDWQ) was generally not
  met at a national level over the period from 2008-09 to 2011-12, compliance
  increased annually from 42% in 2008-09; 45% in 2009-10; 58% in 2010-11; to 60%
  in 2011-12. However, in 2014-15, the compliance rate declined to 42%. This same
  trend was found in the available National FNWWAP Reports with the number of
  water samples analyzed increasing by approximately 6% overall (from 134,659 in 2011-12
  to 142,853 in 2012-13). Although compliance rates increased over the 2008-09 to
  2011-12 period, there was a sharp decline in 2014-15,
  highlighting that further improvement is required to meet
  the recommended monitoring frequencies for bacteriological parameters of the
  Guidelines for Canadian Drinking Water Quality. HC's EHOs work directly with
  First Nations communities to increase monitoring compliance for bacteriological
  parameters in distribution systems with 5 or more connections by identifying targeted
  communities; addressing non-compliance (eg.,identify
  suitable back-up CBWMs) and; in the absence of a CBWM, identifying/training a
  replacement while assisting in monitoring to the extent possible.
The delivery of public health inspections is a core
  component of EPH services in First Nations communities. Overall, there are
  similar proportions of routine inspections and requested inspections; however,
  this proportion differs between communities and across facility types and can
  vary considerably from year to year, and from region to region.
According to the 2014-15 Performance Indicators Report,
  there were on average approximately 7,000 inspections each year for the period
  covered by the evaluation. The variability is demonstrated with a low of 5,960
  inspections in 2012-13 and a high of 9,175 inspections in 2011-12. The number
  of inspections is slightly lower, but comparable to the previous evaluation,
  which identified the number of annual inspections ranged from 8,089 (2009-2010)
  to 8,877 (2007-08).
While the proportion changes slightly from year to year, the
  number of requested inspections is usually slightly higher than routine
  inspections. For example, in 2013-14, the proportion of inspections that were
  requested was 54% compared with the 46% that were categorized as routine
  inspections. The majority of requested inspections are in the areas of housing,
  sewage, and drinking water. In contrast, the routine inspections generally
  occur for food facilities and community care facilities (childcare, schools and
  other care facilities). According to a recent report analysing EHO workloads,
  in 2013-14, the need for some regions to focus on emergency activities (e.g.,
  flooding) resulted in EHOs only being able to meet approximately one-third of
  their targeted inspection regime (i.e., routine inspections as mandated through
  National Framework).
EHOs work with First Nations Authorities and other public
  health agencies to address suspected or confirmed cases or outbreaks of
  foodborne, waterborne and vectorborne diseases. According
  to EPHP Performance Reports, the vast majority of the activities related to
  communicable disease investigations are related to investigating vectorborne illness resulting from rabies risks and animal
  bites from dogs. The number of these investigations appears to have more than
  doubled from 135 in 2010-11 to 301 in 2014-15. Activities around Lyme Disease investigation and awareness increased in the last
  four years while the West Nile Virus work continued, resulting in a large
  increase in the total number of investigations for vectorborne
  diseases.
Zoonotic surveillance activities are primarily located in
  three regions (Atlantic, Ontario and Manitoba) and focus on mosquito, bird and
  tick surveillance.  Surveillance
  activities seem to have decreased more recently from 378 activities in 2013-14
  to only 86 activities in 2014-15
. Overall, the workload of EHOs in these areas has increased.
An initial assessment of the gap in the current number of EHOs reveals a
  shortfall, thus leaving no surge capacity in most communities to address
  unexpected emergencies or events.
Evidence-based decision-making
The previous evaluation found that the EH-ER
  cluster was contributing to the evidence and research used to make decisions on
  EPH-related activities. Similarly, the current evaluation found that the EPHP
  activities undertaken were largely evidence-based. There was evidence of best
  practices being applied in the work with First Nations communities, research
  being conducted and disseminated, and an ongoing effort to update various
  guidance documents.
Overall, key
  informants across all respondent groups were of the view that EPH program
  activities were evidence-based, and that this had largely remained
  stable over time. Health Canada
  representatives most often pointed to the fact that program activities
  were aligned with evidence-based national guidelines (e.g., GCDWQ) and
  provincial EPH standards and practices (e.g., drinking water quality standards,
  themselves largely based on the GCDWQ). As well, some Health Canada respondents
  noted that EHOs and other areas of the program such as the research components
  rely on their internal networks, and also have access to Branch and external
  experts with expertise. A few Health Canada key informants noted that all EHOs
  are certified and part of a professional association that expects they are up
  to-date on current evidence-based practices.
Key informants from First Nations communities and
  organizations indicated no concerns with the evidence base of the Program's
  risk assessment and mitigation (e.g., the EHOs are held in high esteem in
  communities, reports are viewed as careful, rigorous and trustworthy).
  According to one respondent, First Nations communities hiring their own EHO through a
  Health Funding agreement are well-supported by the Health Canada
  regional office with regular communication on standards and case reviews.
According to the EHO survey, the majority of EHOs (55%)
  reported that their use of best practices from other jurisdictions,
  organizations and departments had increased over the past five years. Overall,
  38% indicated that this has increased "somewhat" while an additional 17% of
  EHOs indicated that it had increased "significantly". A large proportion
  reported their use of best practices had remained the same (40%), while
  approximately 5% reported this having decreased.
In addition, the program generates evidence through a number
  of research initiatives. The main research initiatives that produced findings
  that were further disseminated to various communities, researchers, and
  internal HC audiences included:
First Nations Biomonitoring
    Initiative (ongoing),
Northern Contaminants Program (ongoing),
Drinking Water Quality Program (2 years),
First Nations Environmental Health Innovation Network
    (3 years),
First Nations Food, Nutrition and Environment
    Study (FNFNES) (ongoing), and
First Nations Environmental Contaminants Program
    (FNECP) (ongoing).
According to Health Canada key informants, data from these
  studies provide communities with an evidence base to understand risks of
  exposure to environmental contaminants within their community. According to
  Health Canada representatives, the research initiatives are largely
  community-driven (e.g., the FNECP) or will engage communities in methodology
  design and knowledge transfer.
From the interviews with First Nations communities, the
  small number of community representatives who had participated in the FNECP were pleased with the Program and confirmed that the program
  had helped to understand the nature of contaminants in their community and
  mitigation strategies (e.g., levels of mercury in local fish, uranium in ground
  and surface water). Many of the EPHP representatives identified improvements in
  the community-based research program, including guidelines that have been
  implemented in the call for proposals for research projects. Similarly, they
  noted that both national and community-driven research initiatives are
  customizable to the concerns of the community.
Interviews with
  First Nations organizations noted a few areas for improvement, such as ensuring
  that the notification of the AFN of planned research with First Nations
  communities occurs prior to implementation.  
  For all major research work, FNIHB respected the AFN-FNIHB Consultation Protocol (including
  FNFNES, Biomonitoring and FNECP). However, there were
  times in the past where AFN was informed of one-off research projects after the
  fact, yet this was not a common practice.
The document review
  found various examples of policies, guidelines, frameworks and procedures that
  have been developed, updated or adapted by the EPHP during the period covered
  by the evaluation. Examples included:
Drinking Water Program Manual;
Housing Inspection Resource Manual for EHOs;
Field Reference Manual: Non-Microbiological
    Drinking Water Quality Parameters;
Guidance on ensuring the safe delivery of
    drinking water to individual homes and facilities where piped water from a
    central system is not available;
and,
A set of detailed and complete set of
    instructions in straightforward language for the installation, use, maintenance
    and decommissioning of cisterns for holding drinking water from a certified
    safe source.
The target
  audiences for these products vary including FNIHB regions, EHOs, CBWMs, First
  Nations communities and other stakeholders.
First
  Nations awareness of environmental public health risks
Over the past five years there appears to be an increased awareness of
  environmental public health risks among First Nations community members, along
  with increased awareness of EPH services in their community. This greater
  awareness has led to increased access and use of the EPH services in
  communities.  Given the workloads and
  travel restrictions in some regions, this increased access and use may differ
  according to area and region. Awareness of the EPHP was lower among the
  regional First Nations organizations.
The previous
  evaluation demonstrated that considerable effort and emphasis was placed on the
  development of public education and awareness materials under the EH-ER cluster
  activities.  The current evaluation found
  similar levels of effort for the subsequent five-year period.
The evaluation
  found numerous examples of public education and awareness materials that had
  been developed by the EPHP during the past five years. From the document
  review, it was noted that the materials tended to range in topics (drinking
  water, traditional food safety, infection control, mould) and were delivered in
  various formats (fact sheets, videos, websites, newsletters, posters,
  presentations, media releases) to various groups of community members (parents,
  youth, children, council members, facilities employees). According
  to the 2014-15 Performance Indicators Report, there were a total of 257
  public education materials developed nationally in areas of drinking water,
  wastewater, housing food safety, and environmental communicable disease
  control.
A survey
  conducted in 2013 with First Nations respondents found that more than
  half of First Nations people living on reserves (54%) say, unprompted, that
  they recall having seen, heard, or read something about the impacts of the
  environment (outdoors and indoors) on their health in the previous 12 months. When
  asked, unprompted, about the topic of this information, the largest proportions
  of First Nations people mention drinking water safety (20 per cent), mould (18
  per cent), and oil and gas pollution (16 per cent). Alternatively, a decrease
  in the number of First Nations on reserve unable to identify any environmental
  issue was also observed (16% of respondents during the 2013 survey compared to
  31% in 2010).
From the
  interviews, Health Canada regional representatives and First Nations communities representatives named a variety of health
  promotion and public education strategies that were used in the communities to
  raise awareness: radio, door hangers, pamphlets/publications, public health
  meetings, booths at health fairs and community events, door-to-door
  interactions, training (food safety) and annual reports. Some community
  representatives noted that in-person strategies are most effective in terms of
  outreach and awareness-raising, and tapping into community gatherings is
  another common practice that is perceived to be effective and culturally acceptable/well-received.
  A few First Nations community representatives also indicated that awareness of
  EPH risks in some communities is increasing in part due to knowledge of
  external factors, such as impacts of oil and gas activity on drinking water
  quality.
The evaluation captured the perspective of EHOs
  who have the opportunity to observe possible changes in levels of awareness
  among First Nations individual community members. As illustrated in
  Figure 1, approximately two-thirds of respondents to the EHO survey (64%)
  reported that there had been a positive shift in the community members'
  awareness and knowledge of EPH risks in the past five years. Most EHOs (83%)
  reported that the EPHP had made at least some contribution to community
  members' levels of awareness of EPH risks. This rate is similar to that found
  in the previous evaluation where in 2011, 54% of EHOs noted a positive shift,
  and 87% indicated that the Program had made a contribution towards this shift.
Figure 1: 
  Community members' knowledge/awareness of EPH risks and EPHP
  contribution
Figure 1A: Knowledge/Awareness of EPH Risks
Figure 1A - Text Description
Figure 1A illustrates community members' knowledge/awareness of EPH risks and EPHP contribution (n=63). Approximately two third of survey respondents to the EHO survey (64%) reported that there had been a positive shift in the community members' awareness and knowledge of EPH risks., while 33% indicated that their awareness and knowledge of EPH risks stayed the same.
Figure 1B: EPHP Contribution
Figure 1B - Text Description
This figure shows the EPHP contribution to community members' levels of awareness of EPH risks. Among the respondents, 22% stated that the EPHP has significant contribution, 60% stated that EPHP has some contribution, and 17% stated that it has little contribution.
Source:  EHO
  Survey, 2016, (n=63).
Many key informants
  from across the respondent groups tended to agree that awareness of EPH risks
  has increased over the last five years among First Nations community members
  through the active dissemination of information, education and site visits. Most
  Health Canada regional representatives noted awareness has increased in part
  due to the information that is collected by the EHOs (through inspections,
  water sampling, and investigations) and reported back to the community
  leadership, along with risk mitigation strategies. Many Health Canada
  representatives noted that community awareness is also increased by means of
  the EHO working collaboratively with different groups, including Health
  Directors, Housing Director, nursing staff and a variety of community members,
  and not just Chief and Council.
Most First Nations
  community representatives interviewed indicated that their communities had good
  access to the program.This was confirmed with the
  findings from the EHO survey (Figure 2) with the majority of EHOs (57%)
  reporting that availability of EPH services for communities had improved during
  the previous five years. This is similar to the evaluation in 2011 in which 64%
  of EHOs indicated that availability of services had increased.
Most community
  representatives reported being satisfied with access to the EPHP services
  through their EHO, and indicated that the communications and responsiveness
  provided by EHOs are very good. In some cases, the EHO was perceived as taking
  a supporting role in the community (e.g., providing evidence to support
  applications for infrastructure funding to INAC). Their relationship-building
  efforts and site visits were viewed by many community representatives to be
  very important to the visibility and credibility of the program and their
  position with the community. Many community representatives indicated that
  through their role in capacity building and training, EHOs are perceived as valuable
  resources, professionals and trainers. It was noted in the EHO survey that the
  majority of respondents (53%) reported that communities access to skills
  development and training related to EPH had increased over the past five years
  (Figure 2). This is a similar rate to the 47% of EHOs reporting this in 2011.
Consistent with the
  previous evaluation, in general, the EPHP and in particular the EHOs are quite
  visible with many communities as reported by HC regions and confirmed by many
  communities. The interviews with First Nations regional organizations suggest
  that there is less awareness of the EPHP and the role of the EHO among some of
  the regional organizations interviewed. Interviews with some First Nations
  communities and organizations noted the need for greater promotion of the
  program within communities and regions, and a greater sharing of community
  experiences in addressing EPH risks. Venues indicated for this included regular
  meetings of EPHP representatives with Health Directors in specific areas or at
  a regional level.
Figure 2: 
  Community awareness, availability and use of EPH services
Figure 2A: Community awareness of EPH services (n=63)
Figure 2A - Text Description
This figure shows the community awareness of EPH services. There were 63 survey respondents. Among them, 33% stated that the community awareness increased significantly, 35% stated that the community awareness somewhat increased, 27% stated that the community awareness stayed the same, 3% stated that the community awareness somewhat decreased and 2% stated that it decreased significantly.
Figure 2B: Availability EPH services (n=63)
Figure 2B - Text Description
Figure 2B illustrates the availability of EPH services. According to survey respondents who were aware of the availability of EPH services (n=63), 59% believed that EPH services has increased, with 37% stating that the services increased significantly, and 22% stating that the services increased somewhat.
Of note is that 22% stated that the services remained the same. Furthermore, 19% of survey respondents indicated that the availability of EPH services decreased. Whereby 13% stated that services decreased somewhat, 6% indicated that the EPH services decreased significantly.
Figure 2C: Use of EPH services by communities(n=63)
Figure 2C - Text Description
Figure 2C illustrates the use of EPH services by communities (n=63). 65% of survey respondents indicated that EPH service utilization increased, with 40% stating the utilization increased somewhat and 25% indicating uptake increased significantly.
29% of survey respondents stated that their utilization stayed the same, whereas 6% indicated that the usage of EPH services decreased somewhat.
Figure 2D: Access to EPH skills dev't and training (n=55)
Figure 2D - Text Description
Figure 2D illustrates the level of access to EPH skills and development training. 53% of survey respondents indicated that access to EPH skills development and training has increased, with 47% stating that access increased somewhat, and 6% indicating that access increased significantly.
Of note is that 29% of survey respondents stated that the access to EPH skills and development training remained the same. Moreover, 15% indicated that access decreased somewhat, while 4% stated that access decreased significantly.
Source:  EHO
  Survey, 2016
Immediate risk mitigation activities
Similar to the previous evaluation, many EPH risks are being mitigated in
  the immediate or short term as a direct result of EHO's risk assessment
  activities, advice or recommendations. This appears to be happening more
  frequently now during drinking water monitoring activities, food handler
  training sessions, and community education sessions than during the previous
  evaluation time period.
Both in 2011 and
  2016, EHOs reported frequently noticing EPH risks that are being mitigated or
  eliminated immediately due to their ongoing involvement with community members
  (Table 5). This is happening most often as a result of drinking water
  monitoring activities and food handler training sessions, but also occurring as
  a result of public health inspections, communicable disease investigations, and
  community education sessions. The extent to which this was reported by EHOs to
  have occurred was generally more frequently in 2016 during drinking water
  monitoring activities, food handler training sessions and community education
  sessions when compared with 2011 rates.
A survey conducted in 2013 with First Nations
  respondents found that in response to a specific awareness campaign conducted by EPHP, more
  than one-third of First Nations (36%) indicated that they did something based
  on the campaign materials they saw. The largest proportions of First Nations
  took action to protect against harmful chemicals (19%) and to prevent mould in the home (19%), and talked to
  others about environmental health risks (17%).
Achievement
  of Intermediate Outcomes
Similar
  to the previous evaluation, there continues to be progress in increasing First
  Nations communities capacity to identify and assess
  EPH risks and to address certain risks through short-term remedial actions when
  addressing areas such as drinking water advisories and food safety issues.
  Consistent with the previous evaluation, progress is slower with respect to
  addressing more complex recommendations. Considerable effort is being made in
  the area of training and education around EPH risks.
The previous evaluation found that while
  First Nations community capacity to identify and assess EPH risks has
  increased, the community capacity to mitigate or address more complex risks had
  not increased to the same extent. The findings from the current evaluation are
  consistent with this previous finding. As illustrated in Figure 3, EHOs
  indicated that while there had been some change in capacity among communities
  to independently identify and assess EPH risks over the past five years, there
  was more limited evidence of change in communities capacity to either address
  and mitigate EPH risks, or manage and administer EPH programming under the
  guidance of EHOs. This pattern is very consistent with that found with the 2011
  survey of EHOs.
Figure
  3:  Community capacity to identify,
  assess, address and mitigate EPH risks
Figure 3A: Community capacity to independently identify and assess EPH risks (n=57)
Figure 3A - Text Description
Figure 3A illustrates the community (n=57) capacity to independently identify and assess EPH risks. 49% of survey respondents stated that their capacity to independently identify and assess EPH risks increased somewhat, while 39% indicated that their capacity stayed the same.
Overall, it appears that the community capacity to independently identify and assess EPH risks has increased by 51%, with only 9% stating that their capacity decreased somewhat.
Figure 3B: Community capacity to address and mitigate EPH risks (n=61)
Figure 3B - Text Description
This figure shows the community capacity to address and mitigate EPH risks. There were 61 survey respondents. Among them, 34% stated that the capacity somewhat increased, 52% stated that the capacity stayed the same, 10% stated that the capacity somewhat decreased, and 2% stated that it decreased significantly.
Figure 3C: Community capacity to manage and administer EPH programming under the guidance of EHOs (n=57)
Figure 3C - Text Description
This figure shows the community capacity to manage and administer EPH programming under the guidance of EHOs. There were 57 survey respondents. Among them, 2% stated that the capacity increased significantly, 35% stated that the capacity somewhat increased, 54% stated that the capacity stayed the same, 7% stated that the capacity somewhat decreased, and 2% stated that it decreased significantly.
Source:  EHO Survey, 2016
According to some Health Canada regional
  representatives and some representatives from First Nations communities and
  organizations, short-term remedial actions and drinking water advisories lead
  consistently to timely reactions by communities, so that immediate behaviour
  changes can be made by community members. Similarly, issues with food safety
  are quickly taken into account. A few community representatives reported that
  they have had no food-related outbreaks in many years, suggesting that the food
  safety training is effective and changing behaviour.
Similar to what was highlighted in the
  previous evaluation, many of the representatives from First Nations communities
  and organizations and Health Canada regional representatives noted that
  recommendations that are more complex and require costly interventions are more
  difficult for the communities to respond to as these may require additional
  funding from INAC or investments by the community that they cannot afford due
  to other priorities. Some First Nations communities indicated that the human
  resources available to address and manage all EPH risks within their
  communities are inadequate, and that they would benefit from having trained
  resources on site to conduct monitoring and follow-up in various risk areas.
It was noted by some Health Canada
  representatives that an area for improvement with respect to the program is to
  enhance the risk-based approach to programming. Routine inspection and
  monitoring frequencies are important, but in some cases may not be required at
  current levels for certain facilities or systems that are extremely low risk.
  Conversely, high risk facilities and systems might require increased inspection
  or monitoring frequencies and it is important to help communities prioritize
  recommendations pertaining to such systems and facilities. As previously
  discussed, data systems might assist in this respect by facilitating risk
  assessment or prioritization (e.g., provide risk rankings and follow-up
  schedules on the basis of inspection results). An additional area for
  consideration outlined in interviews with EPHP representatives was to begin to
  track both the content and outcome of recommendations (e.g., monitor which
  recommendations were implemented, and which still require attention or follow-up).
Achievement
  of Longer-Term Outcomes
The evaluation was unable to
  directly assess the longer term outcome of improved health and well-being of
  First Nations. There is consensus among program representatives that the EPHP
  is likely contributing to improving health status by taking specific actions
  towards certain environmental public health risks; however, data is limited in
  this regard.
Most key informants across all respondent
  groups indicated that in their opinion the EPHP contributes to the improved
  health and well-being of First Nations' individuals and communities. The
  evidence offered by key informants to support this view often centered on the
  Program's activities, and to the extent that risks are being mitigated, immediate
  outcomes logically linking to the improved health and well-being outcome.
  Examples of activities cited included sampling of drinking water to verify
  quality and, as required, recommendation for drinking water advisories; and
  avoiding outbreaks of food-borne illness through food safety training and
  regular inspection of food facilities.
Following the stated program logic, improved
  health and well-being likely is occurring, particularly where intermediate
  outcomes are being achieved; however, the evaluation was not able to accurately
  ascertain this link due to limited data on First Nations health outcomes during
  this period.
4.5  
  Performance: Issue #5 – Demonstration of Economy and Efficiency
The Treasury
  Board of Canada's Policy on Evaluation (2009) and guidance document, Assessing
  Program Resource Utilization When Evaluating Federal Programs (2013), defines
  the demonstration of economy and efficiency as an assessment of resource
  utilization in relation to the production of outputs and progress toward
  expected outcomes. This assessment is based on the assumption that departments
  have standardized performance measurement systems and that financial systems
  link information about program costs to specific inputs, activities, outputs
  and expected results. The financial information available consists primarily of
  the expenditures by the EPHP as outlined in Table 6.
Departmental Performance Reports (DPRs) provide a source of
  budgetary, expenditure and variance information based on the PAA.  In the case of the EPHP, information is
  available for the two fiscal years (2013-14, 2014-15) for which the program has
  not been included in broader reported activities.  In the 2014-15 DPR, the program spent approximately
  $24.5 million less than originally anticipated ($59.6 million) stating that
  the variance between actual
and planned spending was mainly due to the reallocation of
  funding to sub-sub program Clinical and Client Care for continuity of access of
  nursing services in remote and isolated First Nations communities, which was
  partly offset by additional funding received through Supplementary Estimates to
  support the delivery of the First Nations Water and Wastewater Action
  Plan.  However, it should be noted that,
  while there was a budgetary variance, more human resources (150 FTEs) were
  attributed to the program than originally planned (132 FTEs), mainly due to a
  realignment of resources from plans in order to meet program needs.
Similarly in 2013-14, the program spent just under $6.6 million
  less than anticipated ($82.4 million), noting that the variance that year was
  primarily due to reductions associated with the realignment of resources for
  the implementation of the B.C. Tripartite initiative and a reallocation of
  funding within this strategic outcome to Clinical and Client Care to address
  needs and priorities.  Similar to the 2014-15
  fiscal year, more human resources were dedicated to
  these activities than originally planned.
EPHP
  expenditures are captured by an overall funding source.   For example, an EHO's salary may be funded
  with FNWWAP resources (water and wastewater) whereas her annual activities may actually
  cover other various areas of programming (e.g., communicable disease control,
  solid waste, etc.) depending on community priorities. This approach to
  budgeting and assignment of expenditures limits the extent to which the
  evaluation can quantitatively assess the economy and efficiency of the EPHP
  from a financial data perspective. The evaluation has collected more
  qualitative information on stakeholders' perceptions of economy and efficiency,
  along with some potential areas for improvement which are presented in this
  section.
Economy
The EPHP has continuously worked with First
  Nations communities and organizations to offer the most useful, relevant
  services, policies and knowledge transfer in the various areas of environmental
  public health. The evaluation found that First Nations communities and
  organizations are satisfied with the services from the EPHP, indicating that
  the program is expending resources on areas that are addressing key First
  Nations priorities and that are relevant.  This is a good indicator of
  the economy of the program. An additional area of economy noted by the
  evaluation is the strong network of EHOs that can provide surge capacity, share
  expertise and resources.
Many
  representatives from First Nations communities and organizations and
  representatives from EPHP noted that the relationship between the EHOs and
  community is an important aspect of the economy of the program delivery. The
  EHO investment in community work plans and adjusting the services from the EPHP
  to meet the needs at a community level provides some assurance that the
  services being offered are tailored according to community priorities and
  needs. This planning and flexibility in programming promotes the deployment of
  resources based on the priorities of the community and the EPH concerns of the
  local area.
While the
  flexibility of the program and services offered was highlighted as a positive aspect
  in many interviews, there were a few EPHP representatives that indicated there
  may be a need to determine whether activities do actually align with the
  program's core mandate and eliminate areas of potential duplication. The two
  main areas cited as examples included clarification of funding of drinking
  water sampling at the water plant level in some communities (e.g., role of EHO,
  CBWM, or plant operator), and the extensive involvement in food safety training
  to determine whether it is verging on job skills training more than addressing
  environmental public health risks.
The strong network
  of EHOs in regions was identified as supporting economic program delivery for
  the EPHP. The network allows for quick sharing of expertise and resources
  across EHOs and communities, along with a "surge capacity" to cover emergencies
  and need for quick response from EHOs. This need to quickly respond to
  emergency situations such as flooding in First Nations communities is expected
  to continue to grow with anticipated impacts of climate change.
Efficiency
Already considered a "lean" program, there have been a number of
  efficiencies developed over the past five years. Changes in approaches to
  budgeting and funding at the regional level make it challenging to identify
  national level efficiencies for the EPHP. The workload of some EHOs may be
  unsustainable in the longer term, potentially impacting on the effectiveness of
  the EPHP. There is a strong likelihood that there will be significantly greater
  demands placed on the EPHP given the increased infrastructure changes, ongoing
  growth and development of First Nations communities as they address EPH risks
  in various areas. Given the variability in delivery of the EPHP across regions,
  and differences in capacity and priorities between First Nations communities,
  these challenges in sustainability and its impact on effectiveness may be more
  marked in some areas compared with others.
As illustrated in
  Figure 4, the majority of EHOs surveyed indicated that the efficiency of their
  work methods had increased over the past five years (62%). As well, the
  majority also indicated that the quality and level of service they can provide
  to meet community needs had increased during the same period (56%). These are
  similar levels of increased efficiency noted by EHOs in 2011 (67%), and
  increased quality and level of service (63%).
Figure 4: 
  Efficiency and quality of service improvements in past five years
Figure 4A: Efficiency of EHO's work methods
Figure 4A - Text Description
This figure shows the efficiency of EHO's work method. Among the survey respondents, 21% stated that the efficiency increased significantly, 41% started that the efficiency somewhat increased, 22% stated that the efficiency stayed the same, 13% stated that the efficiency somewhat decreased and 4% of them stated that it decreased significantly.
Figure 4B: Quality & level of service to communities
Figure 4B - Text Description
This figure shows the quality and level of services to communities. Among survey respondents, 16% stated that the quality and level increased significantly, 40% stated that the quality and level were somewhat increased, 32% stated that the quality and level stayed the same, 11% stated that the quality and level somewhat decreased, and 2% stated that the quality and levels decreased significantly.
Source:  EHO
  Survey, 2016 (n=63).
In terms of
  efficiency, many program representatives, particularly in the regions,
  characterized EPHP as a lean program with a few believing that the program is
  actually underfunded. Many regional representatives noted that the workload and
  activities of EHOs are highly monitored for efficiency. Some regional
  representatives reported that they are experiencing significant workload
  pressures. Many regional representatives noted that workload issues are likely
  to get increasingly challenging as a key cost driver for the program is the
  number and profile of communities and their priorities. It was noted among
  regional representatives and other federal government departments interviewed
  that many First Nations communities are growing and there are consistently more
  complicated commercial and community infrastructure being constructed. Budget
  2016 also committed to substantial increased investments for First Nations
  community infrastructure projects. In addition, according to interviews with
  program representatives and First Nations' community representatives, there is
  increasing emphasis on EPH risks within First Nations communities and
  additional funding being allocated to address some of these issues. All of
  these circumstances combined with potential continued work in the development
  of drinking water and wastewater regulations point to future increased demands
  that are likely to be placed on the EPHP.
A draft report from
  the Workload Assessment Working Group found that there are significant
  shortages of EHOs when workloads were assessed against requirements in meeting
  the minimum standards set out in the National Framework for the Environmental
  Public Health Program in First Nations Communities South of 60. The report
  noted that this shortage could be impacted by various factors, such as time
  limited FNWWAP contributions (currently funding approximately 40% of EHOs); possible
  expansion of EHO duties due to environmental changes; the development of a
  regulatory framework for water and wastewater; and, other human resources
  factors that are common across the federal government (e.g., anticipated
  retirements).
Interviews with HQ representatives noted some
  concerns with respect to their oversight role in understanding and reporting on
  EPHP efficiencies at a national level given the changes in budgeting and
  allocation approach (i.e.,
  FNIHB's approach to zero-based budgeting using regional management operational
  plans) combined with the shift of some
  administrative responsibilities to the regions. Some regional representatives
  indicated that the changes in budgeting approach and shift of administrative
  responsibilities could have created inefficiencies for the EPHP at the regional
  level as they are required to perform more administrative aspects of program
  delivery.
Also potentially
  impacting efficiency is the finding from the key informant interviews with EPHP
  representatives regarding a perceived lack of clarity of roles and
  responsibilities between HQ and some regions (as well as provincial health
  authorities). According to some HQ and regional representatives, there is no
  clear definition or direction at this point with respect to leadership and
  responsibilities. Regional representatives varied considerably in their
  characterization of the relationship between HQ and regions as ranging from
  "clear and functional" on the one hand to "strained" on the other. It was noted
  in interviews that regions and HQ have different reporting needs that can lead
  to different perspectives on program priorities (e.g., changes to the data
  systems to meet the national reporting needs of HQ versus the more immediate
  delivery objectives of regions). For example, having all Regions on one
  database/information system would, from HQ's perspective, simplify and improve
  efficiency and accuracy of reporting on national performance and public health
  indicators. However, some Regions prefer different databases because these
  better suit the needs and practices in place in their Regions. Many HQ and
  regional key informants noted that until recently (March 2016), there have been
  no opportunities to meet in-person, leading to an erosion of peer relationships
  given less direct, ongoing contact between regions and HQ.
Performance Measurement
There have been improvements in data collection and quality control over
  the past five years; however there remain challenges with the comprehensiveness
  and utility of data collected through the various administrative and monitoring
  systems.
EPHP has prepared an
  annual performance report on various national-level indicators for four of the
  five years within the evaluation timeframe. In 2012-13, FNIHB finalized the EPH
  Indicator Reporting Strategy with the goal of increasing the evidence base on
  EPH conditions and potential risks in First Nations communities on reserve.
  This strategy was implemented for the 2012-13 and 2013-14 annual reports. From
  a review of documents, the annual reporting for 2014-15 appears to have
  reverted back to be more closely aligned with specific outputs/activities
  according to the logic model developed for the EPHP (similar to 2011-12).
Reports from key
  informants, which were confirmed with the review of performance data, indicate
  that there have been some improvements in data collection and quality control
  over the past five years with respect to EHO activities in communities. There
  remain challenges with comprehensiveness and utility of data collected through
  the various administrative and monitoring systems (outside of drinking water
  monitoring), with reporting from these systems having been variable over the
  period covered by the evaluation.
Many program
  representatives interviewed said that there should be increased efforts in
  improving performance data. The evaluation found that areas cited that could be
  improved included:
addressing data gaps with contributors (e.g.,
    INAC, First Nations communities that have entered into a Health
    Funding agreement);
placing more emphasis on results in addition to
    outputs that would support national reporting on outcomes (particularly related
    to recommendations);
structure data systems so that they allow for
    data mining capabilities and potentially linking to other data sources such as
    GIS – this would make the data more useful in answering questions, planning and
    allocating resources; and
ensuring that there is
    capacity within data systems for a regional/community lens to support a more
    proactive and risk-based service delivery approach.
5.0 
  Conclusions
5.1  
  Relevance Conclusions
5.1.1   Continued
  Need
The EPHP is designed to address a continued and
  growing need among many First Nations communities to identify, address and
  prevent human health risks associated with exposure to hazards within the
  natural and built environments. Environmental public health is an essential
  component of public health systems, and is a key contributor to improving
  health and well-being of populations. As was identified in the previous
  evaluation, many First Nations communities continue to experience significantly
  challenging conditions with respect to environmental health risks compared with
  many other Canadian communities. These ongoing challenges result from issues
  such as sub-standard housing and living conditions, poor quality or maximum
  capacity water and wastewater systems, lack of certified water plant operators,
  climate and geography, and numerous socio-economic inequalities.
5.1.2  
  Alignment with Government Priorities
As was found in the previous evaluation, the
  EPHP is designed to align with federal priorities and strategic outcomes sought
  for First Nations communities. Furthermore, the EPHP is aligned with Health
  Canada's strategic outcome of First Nations and Inuit communities and
  individuals receiving health services and benefits that are responsive to their
  needs so as to improve their health status.
5.1.3   Alignment
  with Federal Roles and Responsibilities
Since the previous evaluation, the Government
  has passed the Safe Drinking Water for First Nations Act (2013). The
  introduction of this Act moves the federal role in EPH risk mitigation beyond
  advisory to include a possible regulatory role. During this evaluation time
  period, safe drinking water regulations for First Nations were under
  development; however, as of 2016, the Act became subject to review by INAC
  Ministerial direction, and regulatory development was put on hold. Health
  Canada continues, therefore, to play an advisory role which varies in each region in order to meet specific community
  needs and priorities.
As different
  federal departments have a role to play in supporting First Nations communities
  in addressing EPH risks, it is necessary that the contribution of all federal
  departments is coordinated and aligned to maximize effectiveness and achieve
  common strategic outcomes.
5.2  
  Performance Conclusions
5.2.1  
  Achievement of Expected Outcomes
  (Effectiveness)
The EPHP has clearly demonstrated progress in
  the achievement of immediate outcomes over the past five years. The findings
  indicate that there have been further improvements in timely data collection,
  the results from which are then disseminated at various levels either through
  recommendations or other types of reporting; an increased use of evidence to
  guide EPH activities with relevant research being conducted in communities to
  address EPH priorities; and an overall increased awareness of EPH risks among
  First Nations communities. This awareness has contributed to an increased use
  of and demand for EPHP services in communities.
Similar to the findings from the previous
  evaluation, although progress on immediate EPHP outcomes is quite clear, the
  extent to which intermediate outcomes have been achieved is less clear. The
  steps required to mitigate an EPH risk are generally to initially identify,
  then assess, and then address (if required from the assessment). The evaluation
  findings indicate that there has been continued progress over the past five
  years with respect to First Nations communities capacity to undertake the first
  two steps (identify and assess) EPH risks, but less progress with undertaking activities
  required to address the EPH risks. While there are some areas where this third
  step is occurring (e.g., drinking water advisories, food safety issues),
  overall there remain challenges for communities to address the more complex EPH
  risks.
The role of the EPHP is to assist communities by
  providing training and education around EPH risks according to community
  priorities, developing recommendations for addressing EPH risk based on
  investigations, and reviewing infrastructure plans from a public health
  engineering perspective. Given this role, EPHP has the capacity to undertake
  the first two steps to identify and to assess EPH risks that often result in
  recommendations for a First Nations community. 
  There is neither funding directly attached to the EPHP nor a mandate to
  actually undertake the third step of addressing an EPH risk, based on the EPHP
  recommendation.
The contingencies and factors involved in
  actually achieving the third step in the outcome of addressing EPH risks are
  numerous including community priorities and resource availability, all of which
  are external to the EPHP. This indicates that if the EPHP is expected to
  contribute to communities addressing their more complex EPH risks, the program
  will continue to have to coordinate and collaborate with the multitude of other
  stakeholders involved that assist First Nations communities in determining
  their priorities and obtaining resources to address EPH risks.
While the program logic would indicate that
  EPHP's progress in the achievement of immediate outcomes combined with the partial
  progress in achievement of intermediate outcomes should be contributing to the
  longer term outcome of improved health and well-being of First Nations, the
  evaluation was unable to actually assess this link accurately. From a
  theoretical perspective, this contribution would be occurring to the extent
  that EPH risks are actually being addressed in First Nations communities.
5.2.2   Demonstration
  of Economy and Efficiency
The EPHP demonstrates some aspects of
  economy and efficiency in its delivery. Given the manner in which
  budgets are developed and resources allocated, it is challenging to determine
  the extent to which planning and budgets align with actual expenditures in each
  of the program's regions and activity areas. This also contributes to challenges
  with calculating some measures of efficiency using the financial data available
  for the program such as ratios of cost per output.
The program's strong, positive connections
  with First Nations communities and organizations, particularly at the community
  level, assist in ensuring the relevancy of the EPHP's services and advice. The
  EPHP is expending resources on EPH activities that are contributing to outcomes
  important to First Nations communities. There were demonstrated efficiencies in
  the past five years for the program, many of which were highlighted in the
  areas of service delivery at the regional levels.
A key component of
  the success of the EPHP is the EHO. While there were numerous areas of
  efficiency outlined for EHOs, there is a concern that the sustainability of
  their effectiveness may be at risk given the increasing workload in many of the
  regions, and the anticipated significantly greater demands being place on the
  EPHP due to increased awareness of EPH risks in many communities, increased funding
  for community infrastructure projects, and the ongoing growth and development of First Nations communities as they address EPH risks in various areas.
  The impact of workload pressures among EHOs is somewhat varied by region due to
  differences in capacity and priorities between First Nations communities.
Highlighted as an area for improvement in the
  previous evaluation, the performance measurement for the EPHP has improved
  during the past five years. Attempts were made at moving the reporting from strictly
  counting of outputs more into the realm of outcomes. In addition, there was
  work on the development of some of the data collection systems. Despite these
  improvements, there remain some challenges with the comprehensiveness and
  utility of data collected.
6.0 
  Recommendations
Recommendation 1
Explore
  options to enhance collaboration with stakeholders to support First Nations in
  addressing and mitigating complex environmental health risks (e.g., those that
  may require longer-term and more costly interventions).
While there are many
  coordination and collaboration activities underway already, it is clear that
  for the intermediate (and thus longer term) outcomes to be achieved there needs
  to be continued involvement by EPHP in contributing evidence and assessments to
  support or promote the mitigation of complex environmental public health risks.
  In order to better assess the degree to which outcomes are achieved, the
  impacts of EPH collaboration and coordination on EPH risk mitigation should be
  documented, with the understanding that whether such risks are actually
  mitigated is often outside the EPHP's control.
There are numerous other stakeholders
  involved in various areas of EPH in First Nations communities. These
  stakeholders include:  First Nations
  communities, various First Nations organizations, other federal government
  departments and agencies (e.g., INAC, EC, PHAC, CFIA, CMHC),
  various branches within Health Canada, and provincial governments. INAC and
  Health Canada require collaboration specifically in a number of areas
  associated with EPH given their combined contributions to achievement of EPHP
  objectives. For example, while INAC is the lead on the First Nations Water and
  Wastewater Action Plan, Health Canada has important supporting roles.
  Similarly, investigations by EHOs or reviews by public health engineers can
  result in recommendations for infrastructure improvements that are being funded
  through INAC programming. EPHP is only one of the players in this complex
  matrix; however, the EPHP is well-positioned to continue to provide evidence
  and information required to promote the mitigation of complex EPH risks, given
  their expertise and strong working relationships and connections to the
  community. EPHP's coordination and collaboration activities should continue at
  various levels including community, sub-region, region and national levels.
Recommendation 2
Review
  the current EHO allocation and workload within and across regions to determine
  sustainability of service to communities considering various forecasted
  additional demands and complexities.
Building on the findings from the
  workload analyses currently underway, it will be important for the EPHP to
  clearly understand the challenges involved resulting from the current EHO
  allocation and workloads at both regional and national levels. This review
  would need to take into account the anticipated additional demands and
  complexities for many First Nation communities as a result of various changing
  contexts (e.g., increased infrastructure funding, climate change, economic
  development, population growth).
Recommendation 3
Produce
  an assessment of the impact of the recommendations made by EHOs to Chiefs and Councils in the area of food, water and housing.
Given
  that the recommendations that EHOs develop are an essential output to achieving
  some of the desirable outcomes for the program, they are potentially a rich
  source of information and data for various uses at multiple levels. This would
  likely enhance the utility of the performance and monitoring data being
  collected by the program.
Appendix 1 – Core
  Areas of Program Activity Focus
Drinking
    Water -
The EPHP provides public education about safe drinking water and
    risk prevention; training and education material to Community-Based Drinking
    Water Quality Monitors (CBWMs)
;
    conducts monitoring and testing of drinking water supplies including
    interpretation of results, recommendations for corrective action and mitigation
    (including issuance and rescindence of drinking water
    advisories); and provides engineering reviews of water infrastructure project
    proposals from a public health perspective.
Wastewater -
The EPHP identifies existing
    and potential hazards associated with wastewater disposal in order to reduce
    and prevent public health risks. Program activities focus on community
    wastewater treatment plants as well as on-site sewage disposal systems.
    Activities include conducting environmental public health assessments,
    providing public education, and providing engineering reviews of wastewater
    infrastructure project proposals from a public health perspective.
Health
    and Housing -
The EPHP works with First Nations communities and other stakeholders
    to address public health issues at the various stages of housing: site and
    design, construction, occupancy and demolition. This is accomplished through
    on-request public health inspections of housing, public education and training
    sessions.
Solid Waste Disposal -
The EPHP works
    with communities and other agencies to help limit public health risks posed by
    solid waste disposal. Activities include conducting environmental public health
    assessments of disposal sites and transfer stations, and providing advice and
    public education about health waste disposal practices, and providing
    engineering reviews of solid waste site project proposals from a public health
    perspective.
Food
    Safety
– The EPHP works with First Nations communities to prevent foodborne
    illness and address public health issues related to both traditional and
    conventional foods. Activities include public education, food handler training
    and routine and on-request public health inspections of permanent, seasonal and
    special event food service facilities.
Facilities
    Inspections
– The EPHP works with First Nations communities, owners,
    operators, employees and users of facilities (health, community care,
    recreational and general facilities) to help prevent the spread of communicable
    disease, minimize public health risks and reduce safety hazards. Activities
    include providing routine and on-request inspections, providing advice,
    guidance and recommendations and delivering public education and awareness
    sessions related to public health and safety within facilities.
Environmental
    Communicable Disease Control
- All EPHP activities aim to prevent illness
    and the spread of communicable diseases (e.g., monitoring drinking water supplies,
    providing food facility inspections and regular inspections of other public
    facilities). Specific activities, such as, inspections, outbreak
    investigations, surveillance and public education are also undertaken to
    prevent and control foodborne, waterborne, and vectorborne
    environmental communicable diseases. All activities are carried out in
    collaboration with local, regional, provincial and/or national communicable
    disease staff. Note that as of 2015-16, this program area within the National
    Office has been transferred to a different unit within Health Canada. However,
    the work of EHOs are environmental public health staff
    at the regional and community level remains the same.
Emergency Preparedness and Response -
The
    EPHP works with communities and stakeholders to support environmental public
    health considerations in emergency planning, response and recovery activities,
    such as: flooding and forest fires. Activities include assessment of
    environmental public health risks during emergency planning, response and
    recovery situations and providing advice, guidance, and recommendations on how
    to minimize these risks. Note that as of 2015-16, this program area within the
    National Office has been transferred from the EPHP to a different unit within
    Health Canada. However, the work of EHOs and environmental public health staff
    at the regional and community levels remains the same.
Appendix 2 - Logic Model
Appendix 2 - Text Description
Key programming under Health Canada's First Nations and Inuit Health Branch's Environmental Public Health Program continues to include activities that focus on two core areas: Public Health Assessments; and Research and Surveillance. Public health assessments include Drinking Water; Wastewater; Solid Waste Disposal; Food Safety; Housing; Facilities Inspections; Environmental Communicable Disease Control; and, Emergency Preparedness and Response. Research and Surveillance includes Environmental Contaminants and Laboratory.
The Health Canada's First Nations and Inuit Health Branch's Environmental Public Health Program supports a continued and growing need among many First Nations communities program to identify, assess and address human health risks associated with exposure to hazards within the natural and built through the funding of the following activities: environmental public health risk assessment; research and surveillance; training, public education, and awareness; collaborative relationship building.
As a result of each activity, Health Canada's First Nations and Inuit Health Branch's Environmental Public Health Program activities generate a number of outputs, namely:
Inspection, engineering reviews
Research dissemination
Training sessions, awareness activities
Joint projects, agreements
Through these outputs, program activities correspond with specific immediate, intermediate and long-term outcomes. In the immediate term, program activities are expected to lead to improved environmental public health risk identification, specifically: Timely data collection, analysis, dissemination and reporting (1); Evidence-based decision-making (2); First Nations and Inuit awareness of environmental public health risks (3); and Immediate risk mitigation activities (4).
The achievement of these immediate outcomes is expected to lead to the following intermediate outcomes: Increased capacity of First Nations and Inuit individuals and communities to address environmental public health risks through Individual risk reduction practices (1); and Community engagement and actions towards environmental public health risk reduction (2). In the longer-term, the Health Canada's First Nations and Inuit Health Branch's Environmental Public Health Program activities expect to lead to an improved health and well-being of First Nations and Inuit individuals and communities.
Appendix 3 - Summary of Findings
Appendix 3 - Text Description
This appendix shows the summary findings done on activities, outputs, immediate outcomes, intermediate outcomes and long-term outcome. The activities, outputs and long-term outcome were not assessed. Regarding the immediate outcome "improved public health risk identification", there was success in evidence based decision making, awareness of enviro public health risk, immediate risk mitigation, but indicates that there were success and some minor but important issues to address in timely data collection, analysis, dissemination and reporting. It also shows that regarding the intermediate outcome "Increased capacity of First nations and Inuit individuals and communities to address environmental public health risk" there were success and some minor but important issues in individual risk reduction practices and community engagement and action toward enviro public health risk reduction.
Appendix 4 – Evaluation Matrix
Page details
Report a problem on this page
Date modified:
2020-09-09