List of tables
Table 1: initiatives or Programs of the 2018–2023 Action Plan
Table 2: new investments under the 2018–2023 Action Plan by pillar and activity – pillar 1 – strengthening our communities
Table 3: breakdown of financial resources by federal institutions, 2018–2023
Table 4: evaluation questions
Table 5: constraints, limits, and mitigation strategies
Table 6: admission rate of French-speaking permanent residents outside Quebec, 2018/19 to 2020/21
Table 7: bilingualism rate of Canadians, 2006 to 2021
List of figures
Figure 1: evolution of federal investments (2003–2023)
Figure 2: short-, medium- and long-term results
Figure 3: short-term results
Figure 4: medium-term results
List of acronyms and abbreviations
ACUFC
Association des collèges et universités de la francophonie canadienne
CADMOL
Committee of Assistant Deputy Ministers on Official Languages
CCA
Canada Council for the Arts
CHSSN
Community Health and Social Services Network
ESD
Evaluation Services Directorate
ESDC
Employment and Social Development Canada
FAMCs
Francophone and Acadian minority communities
FCFA
Fédération des communautés francophones et acadienne du Canada
FOLS
First official language spoken
GBA Plus
Gender-based Analysis Plus
HC
Health Canada
IRCC
Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada
ISED
Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada
JUS
Justice Canada
NRC
National Research Council Canada
OCOL
Office of the Commissioner of Official Languages of Canada
OLA
Official Languages Act
OLB
Official Languages Branch
OLHP
Official Languages Health Program
OLMCs
Official language minority communities
OLSPs
Official Languages Support Programs
PCH
Canadian Heritage
PHAC
Public Health Agency of Canada
PSPC
Public Services and Procurement Canada
RDÉE
Réseau de développement économique et d’employabilité
RIF
Réseau en immigration francophone
SSF
Société santé en français
StatCan
Statistics Canada
Alternate format
Horizontal evaluation of the Action Plan for Official Languages 2018–2023: Investing in Our Future  [PDF version - 1.27 MB]
Executive Summary
This document is the final report of the horizontal evaluation of the Action Plan for Official Languages 2018-2023: Investing in Our Future (hereinafter the Action Plan or the Plan). The Plan is the Government of Canada’s fourth five-year horizontal strategy for official languages. Canadian Heritage (PCH) is implementing the various components of the Plan in collaboration with federal partner departments and agencies.
The evaluation covers the period 2018–2019 to 2021–2022. It focuses on the plan’s relevance, design and implementation, effectiveness, and efficiency, with a particular emphasis on achieving results.
Key Findings
Relevance
The evaluation confirmed the relevance of the Action Plan. The Plan is well aligned with the needs and priorities of official language minority communities (OLMCs) identified during the 2016 Cross-Canada Official Languages Consultations. However, it does not meet all these needs. Several changes observed since 2018, such as the modernization of the Official Languages Act (OLA), issues of reconciliation with Indigenous peoples, support for diversity and inclusion, the growing needs of OLMCs and the shortage of staff, particularly in the education and health sectors, could influence the needs and priorities of the Action Plan.
The Action Plan adheres to the provisions of the OLA and represents the federal government’s commitments to official languages. Lastly, it remains aligned with PCH priorities as well as those of partner departments. However, Justice Canada’s Contraventions Act Fund is not aligned with the objectives of the Action Plan.
Design and implementation
Overall, the design and implementation of the Action Plan are adequate. However, the logic of the expected results needs to be reviewed for greater consistency. The Action Plan is generally considered to be positive, although it is perceived differently by stakeholders: as a communication or marketing tool; an essential support for OLMCs; a concerted effort or at least a contribution to the formal coordination of efforts or as a reporting tool.
In terms of implementation, there is good collaboration between federal institutions through interdepartmental committees, as well as with third parties that deliver certain components of the Action Plan initiatives. Furthermore, there are regular collaborations with community stakeholders and the provincial and territorial governments. That said, the evaluation noted that there is room for improvement with respect to horizontal collaboration and communication between partner departments and agencies.
Effectiveness
Since the evaluation was conducted at the mid-point of the Action Plan, the analysis of its effectiveness was limited. Nevertheless, most of the short-term outcomes are on track for 2023, despite the COVID-19 pandemic that delayed the implementation of several initiatives or slowed progress towards the set targets. The majority of expected medium-term outcomes are also moving in the desired direction.
However, the Action Plan’s initiatives are not sufficient to contribute to some expected long-term outcomes. Notably, the contribution of Francophone immigration is not sufficient to increase the demographic weight of Francophones outside Quebec. Some initiatives in the Action Plan contribute to the vitality of English-speaking OLMCs in Quebec, but the expected results for English-speaking Quebecers are not clearly articulated. The initiatives in place are not sufficient to impact the increase in the long-term bilingualism rate as expressed in the expected results. Lastly, the objective of developing the research capacity beyond Statistics Canada (StatCan) is not being met, as only Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada (IRCC) has implemented an initiative that specifically focuses on developing research capacity.
Efficiency
Several practices promote efficient delivery, particularly the "by and for" model and the management of components of some Action Plan initiatives by third parties. The creation of teams or units within federal institutions that focus on official languages contributes to efficiency as well. Adapting programs and initiatives during the COVID-19 pandemic also helped identify other best practices by providing more administrative flexibility for funded organizations.
However, the assessment of the efficiency of the Action Plan was limited by a lack of adequate financial data. There are also gaps in its accountability. In particular, the data provided by partners as inputs are inconsistent, affecting the analysis of the achievement of expected outcomes.
Recommendations
Based on the findings and conclusions of the evaluation, two recommendations are proposed to address areas requiring particular attention and thus to improve some components of the Action Plan as well as to develop the next five-year strategy. The evaluation recommends that the Assistant Deputy Minister, Official Languages, Heritage and Regions:
Recommendation 1
Review the Plan’s pillars and components to increase the likelihood of achieving expected medium- and long-term results. Particularly those related to the following:

increasing the relative weight of Francophone and Acadian minority communities (FAMCs);
support for the vitality of Quebec’s English-speaking OLMCs; and
the increase in the bilingualism rate of English-speaking Canadians outside Quebec.
Recommendation 2
Identify ways to produce and ensure accountability and the availability of financial data that would help to better assess the effectiveness and efficiency of the Action Plan and any subsequent plans.
1. Introduction
The Action Plan for Official Languages 2018–2023: Investing in our Future (hereinafter the Action Plan or Plan) is the Government of Canada’s fourth five-year horizontal strategy on official languages.
The horizontal evaluation of the Action Plan focuses on its relevance, design and implementation, effectiveness, and efficiency, with a particular focus on achieving results. This report provides the key findings of the horizontal evaluation, as well as the conclusions and recommendations.
2. Action Plan profile
2.1. History
The Action Plan is the Government of Canada’s fourth five-year horizontal official languages strategy. From 2003 to 2018, the federal government supported official languages through various investments. The Action Plan builds on the achievements of previous five-year strategies. It will thus provide communities with the tools needed to benefit from existing programs and from new opportunities conducive to the development and improvement of services. In total, the federal government committed to invest $2.7 billion over five years, beginning in 2018/19. Figure 1 shows the evolution of federal investments from 2003 to 2023.
Figure 1: evolution of federal investments (2003–2023)

Source: Government of Canada, 2018.

Figure 1: evolution of federal investments (2003-2023) – text version

The 2018–2023 Action Plan represents the largest investment in official languages since 2003. It introduces new funding to the previous five-year strategy totalling $410 million over five years, beginning in 2018, and $90.41 million for subsequent years. The Plan builds on the performance of existing initiatives and programs, enhances existing funding, and introduces new targeted measures and investments.
2.2. Horizontal strategy
As with previous five-year strategies, the Action Plan is a horizontal strategy that includes the participation of several federal institutions. The new funding for 2018–2023 includes seven federal partners:
Canadian Heritage (PCH)
Immigration, Refugees, and Citizenship Canada (IRCC)
Health Canada (HC)
Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC)
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC)
Justice Canada (JUS)
Statistics Canada (StatCan)
The Action Plan is part of a logic of continuity. Partnerships developed or consolidated under the 2013–2018 Roadmap continue to receive funding. In addition to the partners mentioned above, the Action Plan includes the following partners: Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada (ISED); the Canada Council for the Arts (CCA); the National Research Council Canada (NRC); and Public Services and Procurement Canada (PSPC). ISED coordinates the efforts of the various regional development agencies. These departments did not receive new funding from the 2018–2023 Action Plan, unlike the other seven federal institutions.
2.3. Consolidation of existing and new programs
Current programs
The Action Plan validates the investments made in the 2013–2018 Roadmap and provides an additional envelope to consolidate some initiatives or create new ones. Table 1 presents the initiatives and programs since the Roadmap, and their breakdown by federal institutions.
Source: Government of Canada, 2018, 2020.
Enhancement of existing programs and new initiatives
In addition to supporting the programs and initiatives of the previous five-year strategy, the Action Plan introduces new investments to fund 26 activities stemming from the Plan’s three main pillars:
Strengthening our communities: This pillar aims to not only restore and maintain the target of the relative weight of Francophones living in minority communities to 4% by 2036, but also to support Anglophones in Quebec in the unique challenges they face, particularly outside of urban centres.
Strengthening access to services: As with the previous pillar, its objective is to restore and maintain the relative weight of Francophones living in minority communities by 2036, and to support Anglophones in Quebec. In addition, it recognizes the importance of the availability of services in the minority official language as an essential factor in the vitality of communities.
Promoting a Bilingual Canada: This third pillar aims to encourage the learning of the second official language and to promote the bilingualism of Canadians. The goal is to increase the national bilingualism rate from 17.9% to 20% by 2036, and to increase the bilingualism rate of Anglophones outside Quebec from 6.8% to 9% by 2036.
In addition to these three pillars, the Action Plan provides new funding to support StatCan’s Language Statistics Section. This funding increases the capacity for data collection to support evidence-based decision-making and results reporting. This funding enables StatCan to establish and maintain ongoing partnerships with key federal, community, and provincial stakeholders in the area of official languages.
Table 2 summarizes the Action Plan’s activities for each of the three pillars, as well as the funding provided for StatCan.
Source: Government of Canada, 2018, 2020.
2.4. Operation, program objectives and expected outcomes
The strategy for implementing the 26 new activities detailed in the Action Plan includes four common long-term outcomes:
The relative weight of Francophones outside Quebec is restored and maintained over the long-term (to 4% by 2036).
The vitality of English-speaking communities in Quebec is supported, particularly outside of urban centres.
The bilingualism rate among Anglophones outside Quebec is increased (from 6.8% to 9% by 2036) to increase the individual bilingualism rate of Canadians (from 17.5% to 20% by 2036).
The public service’s capacity for official languages research is strengthened.
Achievement of the objectives of each of the initiatives is assessed based on their contribution to the four common results rather than the three pillars discussed in section 3.3. Figure 2 presents the short, medium, and long-term results of the Action Plan. It is therefore expected that existing programs, enhancements and new initiatives will:
provide all OLMCs with the support they need to achieve longer-term objectives; and
support the promotion of a bilingual Canada.
Figure 2: short-, medium- and long-term results

Source: Government of Canada, 2020.

Figure 2: short-, medium- and long-term results – text version
Short-term
Outcome 1

Support for immigration
Support for learning and care of young children
Support for access to minority language education

Outcome 2

Support for access to justice
Support for access to health services
Support for communities to be heard
Support for culture and community gathering places

Outcome 3

Online tool
Support for youth
Support for second language training

Outcome 4

Support for Statistics Canada’s language statistics section

Medium-term
Outcome 1
Immigration

Francophone communities outside Quebec are strengthened by immigration

Transmission of language

Francophone communities outside Quebec are better equipped to pass on their language to their children

Outcome 2
Retention

Official language minorities have an increased ability to live in their language in their communities

Outcome 3

English-speaking Canadians outside Quebec have greater access to opportunities to learn French and improve their French skills

Outcome 4

Statistics Canada produces more analytical documents and articles on official languages and those who use them, as well as an official language

Long-term
Outcome 1
Francophones outside Quebec

The relative weight of Francophones outside Quebec is restored and maintained over the long-term

Outcome 2
English speakers in Quebec

The vitality of Quebec English-speaking communities, particularly in their regions, is supported

Outcome 3
Bilingualism

The rate of bilingualism of English speakers outside Quebec has increased

Outcome 4
Research
The official languages research capacity of the public service is strengthened
2.5. Management and governance
In addition to taking responsibility for its activities, PCH is responsible for:
Promoting and encouraging the coordination of the implementation by federal institutions of the commitment to enhance the vitality of Francophone and Anglophone minorities and to promote the full recognition of English and French.
Interdepartmental coordination of official languages. PCH takes on a role of strategic monitoring and the development and coordination of the government’s five-year official languages strategies.
PCH’s Official Languages Branch (OLB) is responsible for the horizontal coordination of all Government of Canada activities related to official languages. The OLB is responsible for the Official Languages Coordination Program, which supports horizontal coordination of the Action Plan and interdepartmental coordination efforts. The OLB’s coordination work is centralized and carried out through various governance committees on official languages, described below.
Several committees support horizontal coordination efforts:
The Committee of Assistant Deputy Ministers on Official Languages (CADMOL) supports interdepartmental coordination efforts. It brings together representatives from several federal institutions and helps promote concerted government action in the area of official languages, particularly regarding three priorities: the language of work in the federal public service, the five-year federal strategies on official languages (the Action Plan), and the management of other issues of interest in relation to the Official Languages Act (OLA).
The Steering Committee on Federal Horizontal Strategies is composed of the Directors General responsible for the Action Plan initiatives. This committee is responsible for monitoring the implementation of the Action Plan. It meets regularly and reports on the implementation of the Action Plan to CADMOL.
Finally, the Council of the Network of Official Languages Champions contributes to interdepartmental coordination efforts.
2.6. Action Plan resources
As noted earlier, the Action Plan represents a total investment of approximately $2.7 billion over five years. Table 3 presents the breakdown of these financial resources by federal institution over five years.
Table 3: breakdown of financial resources by federal institutions, 2018–2023

Source: PCH, 2021c.

Table 3 notes

Table 3 note *


Current investments are the initial expenditures of the 2018–2023 Plan, prior to the announcement of the additional investment of the Plan.
PCH’s Official Languages Support Programs (OLSPs) have also benefited from annual increases (2019, 2020, and 2021 Federal Budget, and emergency funding related to the impact of the pandemic on these programs and their main beneficiaries).

Return to table 3 note * referrer
3. Evaluation approach and methodology
3.1. Scope and timeframe
The evaluation was conducted in accordance with the commitments made in the submission to the Treasury Board and in the PCH departmental evaluation plan for 2020/21 to 2024/25. This evaluation focused on the relevance of the Action Plan, its design and implementation, effectiveness, and efficiency, while focusing on achieving results. The evaluation covers fiscal years 2018/19 to 2020/21 and part of fiscal year 2021/22.
3.2. Evaluation questions
Key evaluation questions are described in Table 4. More information on the indicators, data sources, and data collection methods associated with these questions can be found in the evaluation framework (presented in Appendix A).
3.3. Data collection and analysis methods
The evaluation was based on a mixed methodology involving the use of multiple sources of primary and secondary quantitative and qualitative data.
Document and data review: A review of several government reports, as well as documents of administrative or strategic nature produced by stakeholders of the Action Plan, such as partner departments, third parties, organizations that represent OLMCs, and linguistic duality groups.
Literature review: Targeted research focused on articles dealing with OLMCs and Canadians from all regions of the country who benefit from the Action Plan. An overview of previous reviews identified scientific articles and literature that remain relevant to incorporate in the analysis and findings. To complement these sources of information, several annual reports, reviews, and other government documents were consulted.
Interviews with key stakeholders: 37 interviews were conducted with 53 key informants, consisting of 11 key PCH stakeholders, 22 key partner stakeholders, and 20 other stakeholders. Individual interviews were prioritized, but a few group interviews were also held.
Analysis of existing surveys: The comparative analysis of public opinion surveys conducted by PCH included:
Study on the appreciation and perception of Canada’s official languages (March 2018).
Study on the appreciation and perception of Canada’s official languages among official language minority communities (October 2019).
Case studies: The objective of the case studies on the vitality of OLMCs was to update and improve the case studies conducted in 2012 and 2016. As with previous case studies, they were based on the vitality variables developed by the OLB.
Each case study included telephone or virtual interviews with several key community stakeholders (target group representatives, service providers, and reputable local observers), conducted between November 1 and December 21, 2021. A total of 64 key stakeholders were interviewed, 30 of whom also participated in 2016. Each study included a review of relevant documents and additional statistical data provided by the OLB Research Group covering the eight communities.
Expert panels: Three expert panels on official languages were assembled virtually to obtain their views on the interpretation of certain findings that emerged from this evaluation and to contextualize them as needed. They were structured around three themes based on the long-term expected results of the Action Plan:
Panel 1: The vitality of OLMCs and the relative weight of Francophones outside Quebec (seven experts)
Panel 2: The vitality of English-language OLMCs in Quebec (five experts)
Panel 3: Linguistic duality and the rate of bilingualism in the majority population (four experts)
The composition of each panel included members from the two official language minorities, from different regions of Canada and from different disciplines.
3.4. Constraints, limits, and mitigation strategies
Table 5 presents the key constraints and limitations that have had an impact on the evaluation of the Action Plan, as well as the strategies to mitigate them.
4. Evaluation findings
4.1. Relevance
Evaluation questions
How well does the Action Plan address the needs and aspirations of Canadians?
How well is the Action Plan aligned with the priorities of Canadian Heritage, the Action Plan partner departments, and the federal government?
Key findings:
The Action Plan is well aligned with the needs and priorities of OLMCs identified during the 2016 Cross-Canada Official Languages Consultations.
However, changes since 2018 have influenced the needs and priorities of the Action Plan. Significant changes include: The modernization of the OLA, reconciliation issues with Indigenous peoples, support for diversity and inclusion, the growing needs of OLMCs, the digital shift of organizations, and staff shortages, particularly in the education and health sectors.
The Action Plan is aligned with the OLA and represents the federal government’s commitments to official languages. The Plan remains aligned with PCH’s priorities as well as those of partner departments, except for the Justice Canada Contraventions Act Fund, which is not aligned with the Action Plan.
The Action Plan was developed at a time when worrisome demographic trends were confirmed. Data from StatCan indicated a decrease in the relative weight of Francophones in the country, particularly in Francophone and Acadian minority communities (FAMCs). In addition, there was a slow increase in the rate of bilingualism among English-speaking Canadians outside Quebec and the challenges faced by English-speaking rural communities in Quebec.
The development of the last Action Plan was preceded by the 2016 Cross-Canada Official Languages Consultations. The Action Plan is well aligned with the trends identified by StatCan data and the needs and priorities identified by OLMCs during the consultations. In particular:
the need for increased funding for organizations working in networks for the development of communities, culture or second language learning;
the needs of Anglophone OLMCs;
the increased focus on early childhood;
need for increased support for learning the second official language;
recognition of the education continuum;
the strengthening of the post-secondary sector in the minority official language;
support for community media;
the governance approach of institutions in minority situations “by and for” communities; and
the importance of francophone immigration.
However, the Action Plan does not address all the needs identified during the 2016 consultations, such as:
the digital shift of organizations;
the exodus of OLMC youth;
access to justice services in the preferred official language;
access to quality education equal to that of the majority;
access to health care in English for Anglophones in Quebec; and
access to health care and services for the elderly in OLMCs.
Several writings have raised a deterioration of the Action Plan’s budget envelope for the past several years. Therefore, the increase of $410M in the budget envelope for the 2023 Action Plan was necessary. However, according to several key informants and the experts consulted, this increase was more of a catch-up than a real increase. In fact, the funding for the Action Plan does not live up to its objectives, particularly that of increasing the rate of bilingualism of Canadians.
The main changes noted since 2018 that can influence needs and priorities are:
The debate on the modernization of the OLA and the corresponding bill, which contributes to raising expectations.
The debate on Bill 96 in Quebec, which would consolidate French as the only official language, and other bills that would restrict access to English education.
Reconciliation with Indigenous peoples and the debate on the support and recognition of Indigenous languages, which must be done in parallel with supporting official languages.
The increasing importance of integrating Francophone immigrants into FAMCs.
Discussions about social justice, including the concern for equity, diversity, and inclusion, which relate to the concern for reconciliation and with a concern to counter neocolonialism in the reception and integration of immigrants.
The growing needs of OLMCs and organizations in terms of technology and the digital and virtual/hybrid shift (caused or exacerbated by the pandemic).
The widespread labour shortage, which is worsening in the education and health and social services sectors (exacerbated by the pandemic), which can threaten progress in OLMCs.
The situation that remains precarious in French-language universities in minority settings, including the University of French Ontario, Laurentian University, the Campus Saint-Jean of the University of Alberta, and the Université de Moncton.
The Action Plan is aligned with the provisions of the OLA and represents the Government of Canada’s commitment to official languages, particularly to the development and vitality of OLMCs in Canada. PCH’s annual departmental reports present official languages as one of the department’s five key priorities or responsibilities, which includes the implementation of the Action Plan. In addition, the priorities of the Action Plan and those of the main partner departments (HC, PHAC, ESDC, IRCC, JUS, StatCan) also remain aligned. However, the latest evaluation of the Justice Canada Contraventions Act Fund indicates that it is not well aligned with the objective and purpose of the Action Plan. This was also raised in previous evaluations of the Fund and previous five-year plans.
In addition to the partners mentioned above, the Action Plan includes existing programs managed by ISED and the regional economic development agencies, CCA, NRC, and PSPC. However, key informants indicated that official languages remain a rather peripheral file to the core mission of these departments and agencies.
4.2. Design and implementation
Evaluation questions:
To what extent were the following elements considered in the design and implementation of the Action Plan:
        
Recommendations stemming from the horizontal evaluation of the 2013–2018 Roadmap?
Gender-Based Analysis Plus (GBA Plus) considerations?


Is the specific contribution of the Action Plan as part of all Government of Canada official languages activities clearly identified and understood by all partners and key stakeholders?
Is the logic behind the design of the three-pillar Action Plan and the contribution of the pillars to the overall intended results fully understood and considered appropriate by all federal partners and key stakeholders?
As applicable, what is the added value of consolidating federal partners’ initiatives under the Action Plan?
Key findings:
The four key recommendations of the last evaluation of the 2013–2018 Roadmap, as well as GBA Plus considerations, were incorporated into the design of the Action Plan.
The Action Plan is perceived differently by stakeholders: as a communication or marketing tool; essential support for OLMCs; a concerted effort or at least a contribution to the formal coordination of efforts; or as a reporting tool.
There is good collaboration among several federal institutions, through interdepartmental committees, as well as with third parties that deliver some of the Action Plan initiatives. Furthermore, there are regular collaborations with community stakeholders and the provincial and territorial governments.
That said, horizontal collaboration and communication between partner departments and agencies could be improved as there remains work in silos or opportunities for collaboration that are not being exploited.
The effort to achieve complementarity between the components of the Plan seems clearer with respect to health, Francophone immigration, the education continuum, and early childhood.
Design of the 2018–2023 Action Plan
When the Action Plan was being designed, the four key recommendations of the last evaluation of the 2013–2018 Roadmap and GBA Plus considerations were incorporated. It was recommended to prioritize the organizations that respond to the emerging needs of OLMCs, to better define common horizontal results and indicators, to conduct research on official languages, and to develop follow-up mechanisms to distinguish new investments. In addition, a follow-up mechanism system with federal partners has been put in place to document the ongoing consideration of GBA Plus considerations.
Specific contribution of the Action Plan
In general, there is a good understanding of the purpose and contribution of the Action Plan within all Government of Canada official languages activities.
The Action Plan is perceived in various ways by stakeholders, including:
a communication tool, which signals a commitment by the government and the importance of official languages to it;
a marketing tool or showcase, as information on programs and initiatives is gathered, to highlight them;
an essential support for OLMCs;
a concerted effort on official languages by the federal government;
a contribution to the coordination of the efforts of the various federal departments, and more specifically, beyond what would take place without the Plan, as it includes formal mechanisms; and
a tool that clarifies accountability for departments and agencies through accountability.
However, the Action Plan is criticized by some informants because it does not include all federal activities on official languages. More importantly, the Plan is more targeted at Francophone OLMCs than Anglophone OLMCs and all Canadians.
Added value of the Action Plan
There is little information on the added value of pooling programs and initiatives in a single plan. According to the key informants, partner departments and agencies, as well as communities, are making an effort to increase the complementarity of the Plan’s components. This seems to be clearer with respect to health, Francophone immigration, and the education continuum, including early childhood.
There is good collaboration among several federal institutions through interdepartmental committees, such as the committee established by HC, PHAC, and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research. The available documentation also indicates regular collaboration with community stakeholders and provincial and territorial governments. Key informants indicated that collaboration with third parties delivering some of the Action Plan initiatives is good. These third parties also work together to avoid duplicating their efforts.
While there are several examples of collaboration, key informants feel that horizontal collaboration and communication between partner departments and agencies could be improved, as there are still opportunities for collaboration that are not being exploited: for example, in the sector of:
early childhood, where ESDC has a coordination mechanism in place, and the three health agencies have their own, and there is no collaboration between the two; and
integration of newcomers, specifically economic integration (beyond reception and settlement) where there is no collaboration between stakeholders (e.g., with ESDC and the Réseau de développement économique et d’employabilité — RDÉE Canada, with regional federal economic development agencies).
According to annual reports on activities, partner departments and agencies share lessons learned. In particular, these partners report the importance of maintaining clear and sustained communication with partners, including by organizing regular meetings to resolve problems as they arise. They also stress the need to strengthen interdepartmental collaboration to promote the sharing of best practices, discuss issues or explore avenues of collaboration.
In addition, PCH’s timetables for funding applications or project approval defined by the PCH barely align with those of provinces and territories and partners. The Plan’s midterm report reflects a recurring finding, [translation] “the lack of complementarity or alignment in the timetables and timeframes established by PCH processes and activities, the obligations of provinces and territories and partners”.
Finally, experts noted that the grouping of programs and initiatives and successive five-year plans have contributed to longer-term sustainable effects, although these are difficult to measure. For example, the Réseaux en immigration francophone (RIFs) was established through the five-year plans and IRCC programming. Experts indicate that they are now well established and appear to have positive effects. The RIFs were key players in co-planning and implementing the pilot initiative for Welcoming Francophone Communities that is underway (see new investments in Table 2).
Logic of expected outcomes of the Action Plan
Although the Action Plan is divided into three key pillars, the contribution logic relates more between the initiatives and the four common outcomes as shown in Figure 2. Several key stakeholders indicated that the Action Plan mandate is clear and that there is consistency between the Action Plan and the various levels of expected outcomes. On the other hand, some key stakeholders and experts feel that the logic of the results chain is not sufficiently clear. For example:
The results-chain logic has shortcomings with respect to French language transmission outside Quebec. The suggestion is to add a medium-term outcome for language transmission in early childhood, which could be measured by various indicators, for example, the retention of educators in French-language childcare centres.
Stakeholders argue that the Action Plan lacks information on the achievement of certain expected outcomes, including intermediate outcomes with indicators related to the economic development of OLMCs.
Experts are of the view that very long-term targets (i.e., in 2036) can undermine the accountability of the stakeholders concerned or hinder real progress toward achieving outcomes. Targets should be more realistic and measurable in the short-term. Stakeholders also pointed out that some expected outcomes are not specific enough.
Finally, stakeholders and experts noted that progress toward certain outcomes can only be measured through census data or in the event of an intercensal survey, which limits the assessment of progress during the five-year cycle of the Action Plan.
4.3 Effectiveness
Evaluation questions:
To what extent were the short-term expected results of the Action Plan achieved during the period of 2018/19 to 2021/22?
To what extent has the Action Plan contributed to progress toward expected results over the medium-term?
To what extent has the Action Plan contributed to progress toward expected results over the long-term?
To what extent have PCH activities contributed to the progress toward the intended results in terms of awareness and coordination?
Key findings:
Since the evaluation was conducted at the mid-point of the Action Plan, most short-term results have not yet been finalized. Nevertheless, most of the short-term results are on track for being achieved by 2023, despite the COVID-19 pandemic, which delayed the implementation of several initiatives or slowed progress toward the targets set.
The expected medium-term results are moving in the desired direction through the initiatives. However, these initiatives are insufficient to contribute to certain expected results beyond 2023, particularly those related to the ability to live in the minority language as well as for the bilingualism rate outside Quebec.
In the long-term, the contribution of Francophone immigration is insufficient to increase the demographic weight of Francophones outside Quebec. In addition, several factors can influence the relative weight of Francophones outside Quebec other than Francophone immigration.
Action Plan initiatives contribute to the vitality of Anglophone OLMCs in Quebec. However, the expected results for English-speaking Quebecers are not clearly articulated.
The initiatives in place are insufficient to have an impact on the increase in the long-term bilingualism rate. The Mauril application, the increase in places in immersion programs and bursary programs contribute to the expected results, but these initiatives remain limited compared to the expected results.
Of the Action Plan partner departments other than Statistics Canada, only IRCC has implemented an initiative that specifically addresses the development of research capacity. Therefore, the objective of developing research capacity beyond StatCan is not being achieved.
In general, Canadians support the contribution of the Action Plan to strengthening OLMCs and linguistic duality. Horizontal management enables effective coordination among federal partners.
Short-term results
Since the evaluation was conducted at the mid-point of the Action Plan, most short-term results have not been achieved yet (Figure 3). Nevertheless, most of them are on track to be achieved by 2023.
Figure 3: short-term results

Source: Government of Canada, 2020.

Figure 3: Short-term results – text version
Short-term
Outcome 1

Support for immigration
Support for learning and care of young children
Support for access to minority language education

Outcome 2

Support for access to justice
Support for access to health services
Support for communities to be heard
Support for culture and community gathering places

Outcome 3

Online tool
Support for youth
Support for second language training

Outcome 4

Support for Statistics Canada’s language statistics section
Key stakeholders noted that increased core funding for several organizations enabled the building of their capacity. In addition, the “by and for” approach to communities has contributed to notable successes. However, some issues have slowed or limited progress toward short-term results:
following Treasury Board approval of the Action Plan, several initiatives were only launched late in the 2018/19 fiscal year;
the pandemic had a significant impact on several activities, and some recipient organizations were better placed to adapt than others; and
progress toward provincial and territorial outcomes (e.g., education, health) is less clear, more nuanced, and disparate across regions.
Support for Francophone immigration
Under IRCC’s responsibility, two initiatives, one new and one enhanced, directly contribute to supporting Francophone immigration in minority communities. These initiatives are the Francophone integration pathway (Table B-14 and B-15, Appendix B) and Collaboration and Accountability (Table B-15, Appendix B). Targets for both initiatives were either met or exceeded for each year of the Action Plan.
Key stakeholders believe that the investments under the Action Plan enabled IRCC to publish its strategy on Francophone immigration in French-language minority communities in 2019. In addition, one of the components of the Francophone integration pathway—that is, the initiative of the 14 Welcoming Francophone Communities—was identified as an interesting initiative that is already achieving positive results. In particular, the initiative demonstrates the importance of the “by and for” Francophones approach, as it enables community organizations that do not focus primarily on immigration to be involved in welcoming Francophone newcomers, while also enabling the optimization of partnerships.
Stakeholders working in this sector argue that funding for immigration has filled gaps in the continuum of services (e.g., at in terms of reception services). Moreover, the data shows that since the implementation of the Francophone integration pathway, more French-speaking immigrants have availed themselves of services in French offered by a Francophone organization. In fact, the share of French-speaking immigrants served by Francophone service providers compared to all users of French-language services has been steadily increasing, from 44% in 2018/19; to 51% in 2019/20; and 57% for 2020/21. When assessing the OLMC immigration initiative in 2017, this percentage was 32%. In addition, the department has hired program officers to support the operationalization of the Francophone integration pathway.
In recent years, IRCC has also strengthened official languages governance within its department, including by creating a Francophone Immigration and Official Languages (Part VII) Directorate. The department also strengthened the mechanisms for dialogue with communities and organizations working in this area. In short, the department contributes to Francophone immigration in minority communities by implementing collaboration and accountability initiatives.
Despite all that has been put in place, most stakeholders who have spoken on this matter said that there has been some progress, but not significant enough concerning Francophone immigration in minority communities. Some challenges were highlighted:
The pandemic was a major obstacle because of the border closures in 2020 and 2021.
There is a lack of initiatives for recruitment and promotion abroad and a lack of knowledge of pre-departure services.
Red tape in evaluating funding requests from stakeholders.
Excessive delays for the recognition of foreign degrees, especially in education and early childhood.
Francophone immigrants are assimilated into Anglo-dominant environments (for example, due to a lack of services in French).
Support for early childhood
Through two new initiatives (Tables B-16 and B-17, Appendix B), ESDC contributes to access to early childhood services in minority communities by creating jobs and spaces in childcare centres in collaboration with the Réseau de développement économique et d’employabilité (RDÉE), as well as by creating partnerships to provide training to educators in FAMCs. The recent evaluation of the Enabling Fund for Official Language Minority Communities indicates that RDÉE has entered into 12 sub-agreements with service providers in support of community projects. However, since these initiatives are recent, it is too early to assess their impacts.
According to key informants, there is still little French-language training at the higher levels and few continuing education programs in both official languages. That said, the Action Plan has led to progress, and the stakeholders involved express satisfaction, noting that the programs have been well received and enable communities to act according to their needs and particularities. In addition to the new spaces in childcare centres, stakeholders highlighted the following progress:
the offer of training for parents;
an overview of the training of educators in Francophone OLMCs;
a first virtual national symposium on early childhood in minority communities in 2021 (500 participants from OLMCs); and
the provision of funding to implement projects to develop training tailored to the needs of Francophone OLMCs and to promote the recruitment and retention of educators in these OLMCs.
Some stakeholders point out that the National Early Childhood Management Committee has facilitated adaptation in times of pandemic by enabling the rapid identification of issues exacerbated by the health crisis, such as the decline in the number of trained educators in communities and the low motivation to complete training. It also identified possible solutions: focus on technological support, provide support for students in training programs, offer a more flexible educational path depending on availability, and raise awareness among employers of the importance of training.
Several stakeholders highlighted challenges beyond the pandemic. It remains difficult to recruit and retain qualified staff in this area. Lack of financial support for infrastructure projects—for example, new early childhood centres—remains a challenge, although provincial and territorial input is also required. Finally, the Action Plan provides insufficient resources to meet early childhood needs for the English-speaking community in Quebec. Case studies show that the English-speaking communities of Beaconsfield and New Carlisle complain about the absence of English-speaking early childhood centres and the lack of spaces in English-language childcare centres.
Support for instruction in the minority language
PCH enhanced its contribution to minority language education through two new initiatives: partnerships for citizen community schools (Table B-1, Appendix B) and the contribution to the Teacher Recruitment and Retention Strategy in Minority French-Language Schools (Table B-2, Appendix B). There were 371 civic community schools in 2019/20 and 743 in 2020/21, while the targets were 125 and 518, respectively.
The target of 13 initiatives (one in each province and territory) by 2022/23 has almost been reached in terms of the recruitment and retention of teachers. Data is not available to quantify the decrease in the percentage of job vacancies.
While the targets are largely exceeded or in the process of being exceeded (see Tables B-1 and B-2, Appendix B for more details), key stakeholders believe that there are several challenges hindering progress toward better access to minority language education and a real continuum in this area. While demand exceeds supply at several levels of education in some provinces and territories, the retention of students of parents’ rights holders to secondary education, and especially post-secondary education, is a problem in other provinces and territories.
In addition, case studies indicated that access to pre-school education in the minority language presents challenges in Surrey, Summerside, Pontiac, Beaconsfield, and New Carlisle. In elementary school, there is an increase in enrollment in Surrey and London, but there is a decrease in enrollment at the English school in Beaconsfield. Stakeholders and experts also highlighted the limited provision and precariousness of French-language post-secondary education outside Quebec, which continues to impede access to a continuum of minority-language education. In Quebec, stakeholders who participated in the case studies indicate that access to English education is generally declining due to the legislative context that restricts it.
With respect specifically to teacher recruitment and retention activities, key stakeholders and case studies show that activities focus more on the recruitment of teachers. For example, there are difficulties in recruiting minority-language education workers in Timmins, London, Pontiac, and Summerside, so efforts have focused on this.
Support for community voices
PCH contributes to support for community voices through media capacity building (Table B-4, Appendix B), increased internship opportunities to ensure succession (Table B-5, Appendix B), the provision of strategic projects, the enhancement of the Funding for Quebec English-speaking communities (Table B-6, Appendix B) and with other departments (ESDC, JUS, and HC), and the increase of core funding for OLMC community organizations (Table B-24, Appendix B).
The targets, almost all set over five years, are on track to be achieved by 2022/23, except for the number of strategic projects, which remain low, at 6 for 2018/19 and 2020/21, and 2 for 2019/20, well below the target of 13 projects per year (Table B-24).
For the core funding of community organizations, ESDC, HC, and JUS have planned a distribution of funds to enable them to meet their targets for 2022/23 (Table B-24, Appendix B). Finally, PCH is on track to meet its targets for increasing funding for certain organizations and supporting new ones financially.
Most stakeholders who commented confirmed that there has been good progress in the “supporting community voices” outcome. In their view, the increase in core funding enables community organizations to develop their internal capacity to better express political, social, and community demands to different levels of government.
In addition, funding for community media and radio has helped communities share, express themselves, and communicate. Again, the importance of the “by and for” approach in achieving this outcome was emphasized by several key stakeholders. However, some of them feel that per capita funding was lower for Anglophone than Francophone minority organizations, that the increase in core funding for organizations could have been administered differently to favour smaller organizations, and that this funding should take inflation into account.
Support for culture and gathering spaces
PCH contributes to community cultural activities through community educational infrastructure projects (Table B-7, Appendix B), cultural, heritage, and artistic activities in OLMCs, and cultural activities in (Table B-8, Appendix B). The department has met targets for infrastructure projects and is on track to meet targets for cultural activities in schools by 2022/23. The stakeholders noted that over 70,000 students participated in an initiative of the civic community school in the first two years of the program, despite the pandemic and the fact that only a fraction of the selected projects could be completed before the pandemic.
Overall, stakeholders were satisfied with cultural and gathering spaces, although funding remains relatively low compared to the needs related to the vitality of OLMCs. In addition, despite the availability of micro-grants to fund artistic, cultural, and heritage activities for English-language schools in minority communities, some stakeholders noted that the Action Plan does not make the same resources available to the English-language community in Quebec.
Access to justice
The enhancement of the Access to Justice in Both Official Languages Support Fund has three expected outcomes:
an increase in the legal information available to OLMCs in both official languages;
increased training for justice system professionals; and
funding available to translate legal texts and judgments.
JUS thus contributes to a better access to justice in both official languages. Annual targets for translation and training were achieved. In terms of legal information, these activities appear to be on the right track to achieve the target (Table B-21, Appendix B).
Stakeholders noted that they were very pleased with projects for the Anglophone community in Quebec, which included a project with the Quebec Community Groups Network, as well as funding for Educaloi and the Côte-Nord Community Justice Centre.
Outside Quebec, the department targeted underserved communities, with no French-speaking lawyer association (e.g., in Prince Edward Island, Newfoundland and Labrador, and in the three territories) and few community organizations working in the field of justice. These regions have been invited to the Departmental Advisory Committee, and some of the organizations representing them have even received core funding. Nationally, the Fédération des associations des juristes d’expression française also received increased core funding, enabling it to better represent the entire pan-Canadian Francophonie and serving as leverage with other funders.
Finally, stakeholders suggested that funding over a longer period would help organizations recruit and retain lawyers in minority language situations, which in turn would improve access.
Access to health services
The data shows that enhanced initiatives and a new HC/PHAC initiative contribute to access to health services for OLMCs through the creation of community health organizations, French-language health training in minority communities, and early childhood health promotion projects. The department and agency exceeded their business targets (Table B-22, Appendix B). The targets of the three activities of the Official Languages Health Program (OLHP) conducted by HC have been achieved (Tables B-18 to B-20, Appendix B). Regarding early childhood health promotion, an initiative led by PHAC, the targets of 45 projects and 3,170 individuals in 2020/21 were largely exceeded. There was no specific target until 2020/21. PHAC funding to the Société santé en français (SSF) and the Community Health and Social Services Network (CHSSN) enabled them to select and fund 51 projects to improve access for vulnerable families and OLMCs to programs to promote and protect the health of families and children, reaching over 10,564 people (Table B-22, Appendix B).
Most of the stakeholders consulted gave a positive assessment of the Plan’s design and implementation in the health sector. Funding was provided to HC and PHAC, who rely on third parties to implement the initiatives. This approach enables intermediaries to mobilize their existing structures within their communities and has strengthened the capacity of communities to express their needs to the various levels of government. As in the education sector, several stakeholders noted that the willingness of each provincial or territorial government to support such initiatives has an impact on their success and leads to disparate results across the country.
Key stakeholders indicated that needs remain with respect to access to health services, home care for seniors, and long-term care. While community organizations help to address gaps and needs, case studies show that some continue, such as access to a family doctor or mental health services. In addition, stakeholders indicate that funding for early childhood health services is insufficient to meet demand and that access to health in the minority language is even more limited in remote areas. Other issues exist, such as the recognition of foreign degrees to overcome the shortage of qualified professionals.
Support for second-language learning
PCH contributes to second language learning in Canada through two new initiatives: bursaries for post-secondary education in French as a second language (Table B-12, Appendix B) and the Teacher Recruitment and Retention Strategy in French Immersion and French Second-Language Programs (Table B-13, Appendix B). Bursary targets for 2019/20 and 2020/21 were achieved, and recruitment and retention strategy targets were exceeded in 2019/20 (Appendix B), but data was not standardized in 2020/21.
According to key stakeholders, the two initiatives combined with the bursaries in French as a second language education and in linguistic reinforcement for health professionals and students contributed to second language learning. Several stakeholders expressed satisfaction with these investments. However, several pointed out that the demand for second-language learning opportunities exceeds the funding available, especially for young people. In addition, the recruitment of teachers remains an issue in some regions, and provincial and territorial governments are reluctant to increase funding for French second-language programs.
Promoting a bilingual Canada through opportunities for youth
PCH helps providing second-language learning opportunities outside of schools through the enhancement of the Explore and Odyssey programs, while the new Mini-Explore initiative promotes French as a second language among youth aged 13 to 15 years old. However, these programs have been greatly affected by the pandemic. For instance, Explore was cancelled in 2020/21. Mini-Explore was implemented in 2019/20 and cancelled in 2020/21 (Tables B-10 and B-11, Appendix B).
Stakeholders believe that several other initiatives (Destination Clic, Young Canada Works, or bilingual internships) enabled progress toward this result and provide opportunities for youth to have life experiences in their second official language. Some stakeholders also stressed the need to further promote these programs, as there is too little awareness of the multitude of opportunities available.
Maintaining English and French as a second language
In addition to the above-mentioned bursaries, PCH contributes to maintaining English and French as a second language through the new $16.5 million funding for the creation of the Mauril application. Several key stakeholders noted that the results were positive, as the application was installed more than 33,000 times just a few months after its launch in April 2021. However, several stakeholders note that the application is not sufficiently well known and that PCH would benefit by adding content to better target youth.
Support for Statistics Canada’s Language Statistics Section
This enhanced initiative was primarily aimed at sustaining the StatCan Language Statistics Section so that it could continue to provide quality statistical information. This result has been achieved, and the trajectory is expected to continue until 2023. A total of 22 initiatives per year were to be undertaken, comprising 15 activities and 7 analytical products. These targets were exceeded for the years 2018/19 to 2020/21, and between 82% and 100% of clients expressed satisfaction with the statistical information produced each year (Table B-23, Appendix B). StatCan also created two committees on official languages statistics to support the Language Statistics Section:
the Advisory Committee on Language Statistics, with external experts who provide advice on the data, concepts, and instruments used; and
the internal language statistics committee, designed to raise awareness and to inform and discuss official languages surveys with managers.
Medium-term results
The available data is insufficient to assess the contribution to medium-term results since the Action Plan is at the mid-point of its implementation (Figure 4).
Figure 4: medium-term results

Source: Government of Canada, 2020.

Figure 4: medium-term results – text version
Medium-term
Outcome 1
Immigration

Francophone communities outside Quebec are strengthened by immigration.

Transmission of language

Francophone communities outside Quebec are better equipped to pass on their language to their children.

Outcome 2
Retention

Official language minorities have an increased ability to live in their language in their communities.

Outcome 3
English-speaking Canadians outside Quebec have greater access to opportunities to learn French and improve their French skills.
Outcome 4
Statistics Canada produces more analytical documents and articles on official languages and those who use them, as well as an official language.
Nevertheless, there is progress in the desired direction:
various initiatives in support of immigration and the transmission of the minority official language have been successful, potentially contributing to the intended results, namely, to increase the relative weight of FAMCs and to promote language continuity;
various initiatives to improve access to justice, health, education, culture, and media in the minority official language potentially contribute to the retention and enhanced capacity of OLMC members to live in their language in their communities;
by providing opportunities for youth and second-language learning opportunities, initiatives are contributing to greater access to opportunities to learn and improve French among English-speaking Canadians outside Quebec and to increase the bilingualism rate.
As indicated in the previous subsection, the initiatives in place are insufficient to achieve certain expected results beyond 2023. According to several stakeholders, the targets themselves are insufficient to reverse the trends detected in 2016. That said, a better analysis of the contribution to expected results will be possible when more relevant 2021 Census data are available. The information will be relevant to assess trends, including the FOLS, second official language proficiency, the linguistic continuity index, and the number of new arrivals to FAMCs. The analysis of data from the recently published 2021 Census as well as future data should also examine the impact of certain socio-demographic trends (immigration and interprovincial migration rates, population aging, and rural exodus).
According to IRCC data, the admission rate of French-speaking permanent residents to FAMCs is increasing, from 1.83% to 3.61% from 2018/19 to 2020/21 (Table 6), bringing it closer to the target of achieving a 4.4% rate by 2023. However, in 2021/22, this percentage decreased to 2%. This decline in the admission of French-speaking permanent residents from abroad is largely attributed to the COVID-19 pandemic and the closing of borders.
Sources: PCH, 2021c; PCH et al., 2018b.
The many activities and products of the StatCan Language Statistics Section indicate that it is on track to achieve the desired medium-term result of producing “more analytical documents and articles on official languages and those who use them, as well as on official language minorities in Canada”. Stakeholders noted that StatCan strengthened dialogue with communities and other departments and launched two new data collections (an additional block in the 2021 Census and a new survey in 2022), and that there have been improvements in the accessibility of data relevant to official languages online, through mailing lists and workshops.
Long-term results
The Action Plan contributes in a positive way to long-term results, even though they are being influenced by various external factors. Experts and several key informants feel that the results chain as expressed in the Action Plan’s performance measurement framework is not sufficiently clear and consistent. In addition, it is too early to determine the progress of long-term expected results, as the targets are set for 2036 and results can be influenced by several factors other than the Action Plan. In addition, some experts believe that very long-term targets are detrimental to the accountability of stakeholders and thus to progress toward achieving results.
Result 1: The relative weight of Francophones outside Quebec is restored and maintained over the long-term (at 4% by 2036).
In 2017, StatCan projected a decline in the proportion of Canadians living outside Quebec whose first official language spoken is French between 2011 and 2036, from 3.8% to 2.7%. For its part, recent data from the 2021 Census shows a decline from 3.8% in 2016 to 3.5%, which could confirm the expected trends.
Additionally, the contribution of immigration to medium- and long-term results is not sufficient to restore or maintain the relative weight of FAMCs at 4% by 2036. Stakeholders and experts expressed similar perceptions. Moreover, according to the experts, measures to increase Francophone immigration are aimed more at reception and initial integration than to long-term retention. Finally, it is too early to learn from the pilot initiative of the 14 Welcoming Francophone Communities, which aims, among other things, to foster a sense of belonging among newcomers in their communities.
Several other factors may influence the relative weight of Francophones outside Quebec other than Francophone immigration. Particularly, stakeholders emphasize access to certain services that support language transmission in minority communities and the rate of exogamous marriages that affect language transmission and retention.
Result 2: The vitality of English-speaking communities in Quebec, particularly in the regions, is sustained.
Initiatives under the Action Plan contribute to the vitality of English-language OLMCs in Quebec. However, experts believe that the expected results for English-speaking Quebecers are not concrete in relation to education, inclusion, and integration into the labour market. The more general socio-demographic trend of population aging and the exodus of young Anglophones to other Canadian provinces have an impact on the vitality of English-language OLMCs in Quebec.
In addition, retention and vitality in English-speaking communities in Quebec depend not only on federal government initiatives, but also heavily on the Government of Quebec. Current and recent federal and provincial policy and legislative frameworks have influenced progress toward this long-term result.
Finally, the sequencing of short-, medium-, and long-term results is inconsistent. In addition, there are no targets for measuring the vitality of English-speaking communities, such as the demographic weight to be achieved, as for FAMCs. The focus is put in “the regions,” since the vitality of English-language OLMCs is much more undermined in areas outside of urban centres like Montréal. However, this intended result seems to systematically exclude the vitality of the English-speaking community in the area of Montréal or other cities.
Result 3: The bilingualism rate among Anglophones outside Quebec is increasing (to 9% by 2036) to increase the individual bilingualism rate of Canadians (to 20% by 2036).
Based on trends from previous censuses, StatCan projected in 2017 that the bilingualism rate for Anglophones outside Quebec would reach 7.6% in 2036. Despite a decline between the 2006 and 2011 censuses (7.0% to 6.6%), the rate increased between the 2011 and 2016 censuses (from 6.6% to 6.8%). However, the latest census shows that the bilingualism rate of Anglophones outside Quebec has declined again, from 6.8% in 2016 to 6.5% in 2021.
Key stakeholders and experts consulted felt that the target and initiatives were insufficient to achieve the result as expressed. According to them, the activities of the Action Plan—including the Mauril application, the increase in places in immersion programs and bursary programs—target only a few thousand people per year. As a result, these measures have a limited impact on the bilingualism of Canadians. For example, key stakeholders noted the lack of opportunities to practice a second language after compulsory schooling.
The proportion of bilingual Canadians remains virtually unchanged from 2016, rising from 17.9% to 18%. In addition, this slight increase is due to Quebec. Between 2016 and 2021, the bilingualism rate in Quebec increased from 44.7% to 46.4%, while the bilingualism rate for Canadians outside Quebec decreased from 9.9% to 9.5% (Table 7).
Source: National Censuses.
Result 4: The public service’s capacity for official languages research is strengthened.
The short- and medium-term results are not intended to develop research capacity beyond StatCan, which is what is intended in the long-term. The only exception is support for the Action Plan to develop research capacity within IRCC through the creation of the Francophone Immigration Policy Hub. However, it is too early to determine the impact of this initiative.
Awareness and coordination
According to the public opinion survey conducted in 2019, most respondents indicated that linguistic duality is a source of cultural enrichment, and that the federal government is effective in protecting both official languages. However, more than half of English-speaking Quebecers did not believe that the federal government was determined to represent and defend the interests of their communities. The increase in Canadians’ awareness of the federal government’s intervention in official languages could not be examined since PCH did not conduct a survey in 2021 (see Section 3.4, Constraints and limits).
Several experts believe that the Action Plan promotes increased awareness and cooperation among departments. Based on documentation and interviews, coordination ensures that partners in the Plan, as planned, report annually and separately on their results and contributions to the overall results of the Action Plan.
In several cases, the Action Plan supports the provinces and territories in the provision of services to OLMCs, particularly in education and health. Key stakeholders and experts noted that the level of collaboration varies depending on the provincial and territorial governments in place and their willingness to support official languages. The literature and case studies confirm that most provinces and territories have legislation and policies in place that help ensure access to provincial services to OLMCs in their language, but there is still room for improvement, and case studies report several services that are not available. In order to standardize the situation and ensure the provision of services to OLMCs, some key stakeholders suggested that clauses be included in federal-provincial-territorial transfers requiring services to the official language minority.
Coordination mechanisms between partner departments and recipients help increase effectiveness. Recipients also have their own committees and issue tables. Finally, core funding provided to community organizations enables them to strengthen and expand their networks and increase partnerships.
4.4. Efficiency
Evaluation questions
Are the most efficient means being used to achieve the desired results?
Are there other ways of achieving the same results more efficiently?
Key findings:
Several practices promote efficient delivery of the Action Plan. The key best practices identified are: the “by and for” model and component management and third-party funding for some of the Action Plan initiatives. The creation of teams or units within federal institutions that focus on official languages also contributes to efficiency.
Adapting programs and initiatives during the COVID-19 pandemic helped identify other best practices by providing more administrative flexibility to funded organizations.
Not all financial data required to assess the efficiency of the Action Plan was available. In addition, data provided by partners (inputs) is inconsistent and focuses more on activities and outputs than on expected results.
Best Practices in the Action Plan
Several best practices are in place, such as the “by and for” community’s model. This approach ensures that OLMC interests are represented in the activities implemented. It also contributed to better third-party management of some components of some of the Action Plan initiatives and the funds associated with them. The Office of the Commissioner of Official Languages of Canada (OCOL) commends “federal institutions and community organizations on their efforts in developing the programs together,” while recognizing that the “by and for” approach represents a long-term effort. Some partners noted that the collaborative measures of this Plan and the concept of “by and for” communities are excellent practices within official languages programs.
According to the OCOL and key stakeholders, third-party management helps minimize red tape, foster cooperation between communities, and take into account the specific needs of communities. In addition, programs and initiatives are delivered under the terms of existing programs, thus simplifying their administration. Several key stakeholders also noted that the funds are well managed by third parties.
Another good practice was highlighted: the creation of teams or units within federal institutions that focus on official languages, such as the ESDC Official Languages Secretariat, the PHAC Centre of Excellence on OLMC, and the StatCan Advisory Committee on Linguistic Statistics.
The COVID-19 pandemic also identified best practices, such as greater flexibility in program administration. This situation enabled changing the launch dates for activities and while providing flexibility over the use of funding. The literature reviewed confirms that organizational flexibility was also expressed in various ways. In particular, by:
changes to the timelines of certain initiatives;
the review of the structure of certain initiatives, in particular in order to adapt them to carry them out online; and
more flexibility for staff implementing initiatives.
Several partner departments and agencies report that they have increased their internal communications, between different jurisdictions, and with the recipients of the various programs and initiatives in order to improve and strengthen working relationships. According to the partners, this practice has helped to target better, and more quickly, various issues or to identify the elements most affected by the impact of the pandemic. However, according to the informants interviewed, this flexibility and these practices have not been consistently adopted across PCH and its partners.
Suggestions for improvement
There is very little information about other measures or models to achieve the same results more effectively. However, several key stakeholders provided suggestions for improvements:
create more spaces for public deliberation in the design of the Action Plan;
review accountability mechanisms to reduce red tape for recipients;
as indicated in section 4.3, include clauses in federal-provincial transfers requiring services (education, health) to the official language minority; and
develop a way to provide direct support to school boards that teach French as a second language.
As noted above, the variability in the response of the various partner departments to the effects of the pandemic has been criticized. Guidelines could have helped to standardize the emergency measures and funds put in place by the partner departments and agencies of the Action Plan.
In addition, according to the literature review and the analysis of administrative data, two issues affected the evaluation of the Action Plan’s efficiency. First, the financial data required to assess the Action Plan’s efficiency was not available. Second, the data provided by the partners (inputs) are not uniform. In particular, the information provided focuses more on activities and outputs than on expected outcomes and issues that arise. In addition, several partners have not set targets for several objectives. Since both types of data are incomplete or unavailable, this limits the ability to assess the Action Plan’s efficiency.
5. Conclusion
The Action Plan remains relevant to the federal government’s support for official languages. It is well aligned with the trends, needs and priorities identified during its design. The Action Plan also remains well aligned with the provisions of the OLA and the federal government’s commitments in relation to official languages, its priorities, and those of PCH and partner departments. However, the Contraventions Act Fund does not align with the Action Plan’s objectives.
The consultation processes to identify the needs and priorities of the five-year plan are important to ensure its relevance. However, the context and some needs have changed since 2018. These needs should be considered for the last year of the five-year plan or should be part of the context when developing the next plan, if applicable.
Overall, the design and implementation of the Action Plan are adequate. Key stakeholders see the Action Plan as an indispensable tool and believe that there is clear complementarity between its pillars and components. However, the logic of the expected results needs to be reviewed for greater consistency.
Analysis of the effectiveness of the Plan has been limited. Since the evaluation was conducted at the mid-point of the Action Plan, most short-term results have not yet been finalized. Nevertheless, most of them are on track to be achieved by 2023. In addition, medium-term results are moving in the desired direction.
However, the nature and scope of the Plan’s programs and initiatives do not reflect the magnitude of the expected medium- and long-term results. They are insufficient to achieve some of these results, particularly those related to the ability to live in the minority language as well as those related to the bilingualism rate outside Quebec. Finally, the Action Plan initiatives are also insufficient to establish a path toward long-term expected results.
In general, the Action Plan uses efficient means to achieve the intended results and generates leverage for its partners, including through enhanced funding. Finally, several best practices contributing to efficiency were identified. The creation of teams or units within federal institutions that focus on official languages also contributes to efficiency.
Some issues remain in terms of accountability. Mainly, the analysis of the Action Plan’s efficiency was limited by a lack of adequate financial data. In addition, inputs provided to PCH by the Action Plan partners are not consistent, limiting the analysis of effectiveness and evidence-based decision-making. Finally, stakeholders suggested adapting accountability mechanisms to reduce the red tape for recipients and to collect more data on expected outcomes.
6. Recommendations
In light of the findings and conclusions of the evaluation, two recommendations are proposed to address areas requiring special attention and thus improve some components of the Action Plan. These recommendations are particularly important for the development of the next five-year strategy for official languages.
Recommendation 1
The evaluation recommends that the Assistant Deputy Minister, Official Languages, Heritage and Regions review the Plan’s pillars and components to increase the likelihood of achieving expected medium- and long-term results. Particularly those related to the following:

increasing the relative weight of Francophone and Acadian minority communities (FAMCs);
support for the vitality of the Quebec’s English-speaking communities; and
the increase in the bilingualism rate of English-speaking Canadians outside Quebec.

Management response
The program accepts the recommendation.
The mandate letter of the Minister of Official Languages, the Honourable Ginette Petitpas Taylor, confers on her the responsibility of developing a new official languages plan. This new plan is based, among other things, on a consultation process that took place from May 24 to late August 2022. This cross-Canada consultation enabled the general public, official language minority communities, spokesperson organizations, representatives of the provinces and territories, and federal institutions and organizations to express their views on emerging needs in certain areas. The consultation also prioritized and promoted programs and initiatives to better meet the emerging needs of OLMCs and government priorities, as well as the expected results of the next multi-year plan for official languages.
In fact, this broad consultation identified courses of action, including increasing the relative weight of Francophones minority communities and the vitality of English-speaking communities in Quebec and the bilingualism of English-speaking Canadians outside Quebec. Among the themes mentioned that could be considered in the development of the 2023–2028 Action Plan are Francophone immigration, official languages as a tool for economic development, the importance of official languages for Canadian identity and bilingualism, and the leadership of the Government of Canada.
This information will enable the OLB to develop axes that will align not only with the priorities identified by the stakeholders, but also with the recommendations of this evaluation exercise to align our future initiatives with the expected results in the medium and long-term.
Recommendation 2
The evaluation recommends that the Assistant Deputy Minister, Official Languages, Heritage and Regions identify ways to produce and ensure accountability and the availability of financial data that would help to better assess the effectiveness and efficiency of the Action Plan and any subsequent plans.
Management response
The program accepts the recommendation.
The development of good public policies and programs requires detailed and disaggregated data to which the OLB and its partners have limited access. That said, the federal government is developing a new framework for its data strategy. It is expected to be implemented in the coming years, and Canadian Heritage and all federal institutions will have to align their own data strategies with the federal framework.
The OLB has a long tradition of gathering, sharing and analyzing data related to the vitality of official language communities. The publication of the 2021 Census language data will also provide an opportunity to update a range of profiles and statistical tools that will provide better context for government action. As emphasized in the reform document “English and French: Towards a substantive equality of official languages in Canada,” published in 2021, the government is committed to fostering collaboration between federal institutions and Statistics Canada to collect and extract information on OLMCs, as well as updating statistical and non-statistical data on various indicators of the vitality of official languages. In addition, we will soon have access to data from the post-censal survey of the vitality of official language communities (OLMCs) published by Statistics Canada. This new data will help us better understand the evolving issues facing OLMCs. They will also enable us to track the impact of our initiatives.
In terms of accountability, the new action plan for official languages will align with the new provisions in Bill C-13, which is currently before Parliament. Bill C-13 clarifies the horizontal coordination role of PCH in the legislation. The bill also identifies, as an activity, the development and maintenance of a cross-Canada strategy that sets out the major priorities for official languages, as well as its publication. This could help improve our efficiency and effectiveness because expectations are now clearer for us. If Bill C-13 is passed, the role of the Minister responsible for Official Languages, who would be included in the Act, would be strengthened and would act as the government’s spokesperson for any matter relating to official languages. This government leadership is clearly and strongly expressed and is embodied in ambitious horizontal strategies. Thus, it is expected that the Official Languages Branch will have a better overview of the official languages file and will be able to interact effectively with the various stakeholders. This must be achieved through greater interdepartmental collaboration on official languages, particularly by focusing on greater involvement of the Treasury Board, regional offices, and the Official Languages Centre of Expertise. The OLB will contribute directly to the development of tools and analyses for federal institutions, the strengthening of coordination mechanisms, governance, increased leadership, strengthened internal collaborations (TBS, Justice and other federal institutions), external consultations and dialogues, and the development of regulatory projects. Our objective is to make our accountability even more effective and efficient by using the rich range of data and strategies discussed above, while avoiding weighing down and complicating processes for organizations and institutions.
A management and accountability framework will be developed to support the next Action Plan. This framework will define the most relevant results chain, commitments, and data to be made public to demonstrate program results. Next, data collection will be aligned with the content of the management and accountability framework. This will make our accountability more effective and efficient.
Appendix A: Evaluation framework
The following evaluation framework presents the questions, indicators, and primary data collection and secondary data analysis methods to be used in carrying out the evaluation.
Appendix B: achievement of specific short-term targets by program and initiative
PCH initiatives
Sources: Canadian Heritage, 2019, 2021; PCH et al., 2018d.
Sources: Canadian Heritage, 2019, 2021; PCH et al., 2018d.
Sources: PCH et al., 2018d; PCH, 2019b, 2021c.
Sources: PCH et al., 2018d; PCH, 2019b, 2021c.
Sources: PCH et al., 2018d; PCH, 2019b, 2021c.
Sources: PCH et al., 2018d; PCH, 2019b, 2021c.
Sources: PCH et al., 2018d; PCH, 2019b, 2021c.
Sources: PCH et al., 2018d; PCH, 2019b, 2021c.
Sources: PCH et al., 2018d; PCH, 2019b, 2021c.
Sources: PCH et al., 2018d; PCH, 2019b, 2021c.
Sources: PCH et al., 2018d; PCH, 2019b, 2021c.
Sources: PCH et al., 2018d; PCH, 2019b, 2021c.
Sources: PCH et al., 2018d; PCH, 2019b, 2021c.
IRCC initiatives
Sources: IRCC, 2019b, 2020c, 2021b.
Sources: IRCC, 2019 a, 2020b, 2021a.
ESDC initiatives
Sources: ESDC, 2019b, 2020e; PCH et al., 2018d.
Sources: ESDC, 2019 a, 2020d, 2021a, 2021c; PCH et al., 2018d.
HC initiatives
Sources: PCH et al., 2018d; HC, 2019c, 2020c.
Sources: PCH et al., 2018c; HC, 2019b, 2020b.
Sources: HC, 2019 a, 2020c.
JUS initiatives
Sources: JUS, 2019, 2020c, 2021a; PCH et al., 2018d.
PHAC initiatives
Sources: PHAC, 2019, 2020c, 2021; PCH et al., 2018d.
Statistics Canada initiatives
Sources: PCH et al., 2018d; StatCan, 2019 a, 2020b, 2021a.
Joint initiatives (PCH, ESDC, HC, and JUS)
Sources: ESDC, 2019c, 2020g; Justice Canada, 2019, 2020a; PCH et al., 2018d; HC, 2019c, 2020c.
Appendix C: bibliography
ESDC. (2019a). Inputs for 2018–2019 —Support for early childhood development—Vocational training and capacity building.
ESDC. (2019b). Inputs for 2018–2019—Enabling Fund for OLMCs (skills and employment).
ESDC. (2020a). Inputs for 2019–2020— Support for early childhood development—Professional training and capacity building.
ESDC. (2020b). Inputs for 2019–2020—Enabling Fund for OLMCs (skills and employment).
ESDC. (2021). Mid-term review exercise of the Action Plan for Official Languages 2018–2023: Questionnaire for Federal Partners - Employment and Social Development Canada.
ESDC. (2022). Evaluation of the Enabling Fund for Official Language Minority Communities.
Government of Canada. (2018). Action Plan for Official Languages 2018–2023: Investing in Our Future
Government of Canada. (2020). Action Plan for Official Languages 2018–2023 – Accountability Framework.
HC. (2019a). Inputs for 2018–2019—Enhancement of the Official Languages Health Contribution Program—Training and retention of human resources in health.
HC. (2019b). Inputs for 2018–2019—Official Languages Health Program (OLHP) (networks, training for health professionals and projects to improve access to health services), Increase in core funding for community organizations.
HC. (2020a). Inputs for 2019–2020—Enhancement of the Official Languages Health Contribution Program —Innovative projects
HC. (2020b). Inputs for 2019–2020—Official Languages Health Program (OLHP) (networks, training for health professionals and projects to improve access to health services), Increase in core funding for community organizations.
HC. (2021). 2018-2023 Action Plan for Official Languages Mid-Term Exercie: Questionnaire for Federal Partners — Health Canada
Houle, R. and Corbeil, J.-P. (2017). Language projections for Canada, 2011 to 2036. Statistics Canada, Government of Canada (PDF format)
IRCC. (2017). Evaluation of the Immigration to OLMC Initiative.
IRCC. (2019a). Inputs for 2018–2019—Francophone immigration—Cooperation and Accountability.
IRCC. (2019b). Inputs for 2018–2019—Francophone immigration—Francophone integration pathway.
IRCC. (2020a). Inputs for 2019–2020—Francophone immigration—Collaboration and Accountability.
IRCC. (2020b). Inputs for 2019–2020—Francophone immigration—Francophone integration pathway.
IRCC. (2021a). Inputs for 2020–2021— Francophone immigration— Francophone integration pathway.
IRCC. (2021b). 2018-2023 Action Plan For Official Languages Mid-Term Exercise: Questionnaire for Federal Partners
IRCC. (2021c). IRCC’s Departmental Results Report 2019–2020.
JUS. (2019). Inputs for 2018–2019—Contraventions Act Fund, Enhancement of the Access to Justice in Both Official Languages Support Fund, Core Funding for Community Organizations.
JUS. (2020a). Inputs for 2019–2020— Core funding for community organizations.
JUS. (2020b). Inputs pour 2019–2020— Contraventions Act Fund, Enhancement of the Access to Justice in Both Official Languages Support Fund, Core Funding for Community Organizations.
JUS. (2021a). Inputs for 2020–2021—Enhancement of the Access to Justice in Both Official Languages Support Fund.
JUS. (2021b). 2018-2023 Action Plan For Official Languages Mid-Term Exercise: Questionnaire for Federal Partners – Department of Justice.
JUS. (2021c). Evaluation of the Contraventions Act Program
PCH. (2018). Performance Information Profile.
PCH. (2019a). Inputs for 2018–2019—Development of Official-Language Communities Program, Enhancement of Official Languages Program.
PCH. (2019b). Inputs for 2018–2019—Development of Official-Language Communities Program, Enhancement of Official Languages Program.
PCH. (2019c). Statistics on official languages in Canada.
PCH. (2021a). Bilan de mi-parcours : Plan d’action pour les langues officielles 2018–2023.
PCH. (2021b). Annual Report on Official Languages 2019–2020.
PCH. (2022). Appendix 1: 2020–2021 Summary of government investments in official languages
PCH, ESDC, Justice Canada, Health Canada, PHAC, StatCan, & IRCC. (2018a). Treasury Board Submission: Funding for the Action Plan for Official Languages – 2018–2023
PCH, ESDC, Justice Canada, Health Canada, PHAC, StatCan, & IRCC. (2018b). Treasury Board Submission—Appendix B: Delivery and Expected Results: Deputy Head Commitment.
PCH, ESDC, Justice Canada, Health Canada, PHAC, StatCan, & IRCC. (2018c). Treasury Board Submission—Appendix F: Request by activity.
PHAC. (2021). 2018-2023 Action Plan For Official Languages Mid-Term Exercise: Questionnaire for Federal Partners — Public Health Agency of Canada.
OCOL. (2018). 2017–2018 Annual Report (PDF format).
StatCan. (2019). Inputs for 2018–2019—Additional, continued support to the language statistics section.
StatCan. (2020). Inputs for 2019–2020—Additional, continued support to the language statistics section.
StatCan. (2021). Inputs for 2020–2021—Additional, continued support to the language statistics section.
StatCan. (2022a). Mother tongue by first official language spoken and knowledge of official languages: Canada, provinces and territories, census divisions and census subdivisions, Statistics Canada Catalogue no. 98-10-0170-01. Ottawa. Released on August 17, 2022.
StatCan. (2022b). Census Profile, 2021 Census of Population, Statistics Canada Catalogue no. 98-316-X2021001. Ottawa. Released on August 17, 2022.
© His Majesty the King in Right of Canada, represented by the Minister of Canadian Heritage, 2023
    Catalogue No.: CH7-68/1-2023E-PDF
    ISBN: 978-0-660-47779-4
