At a Glance: Departmental Evaluation Plan for the Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada, 2019-20 to 2023-24
Download the alternative format
(PDF format, 80 KB, 7 pages)
Date published:
2016-01
This document presents the Office of Audit and Evaluation's (OAE) Departmental Evaluation Plan (DEP) for 2019-20 to 2023-24 for the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) and Health Canada (HC).
The DEP is updated annually to support the allocation of resources to a suite of evaluation projects over a five-year period, and is focused on Departmental and PHAC information needs. The development of this plan complies with requirements of the Treasury Board (TB)
Policy on Results (July 1, 2016)
. The projects contained within this plan were selected to ensure compliance with legislation and policy, support information needs, and consider risks in order to ensure the optimal use of resources.
The Departmental Results Frameworks (DRF), program inventories, and performance information profiles developed by each organization have formed the basis for this plan.
Planning for Evaluation
Over the next five years, the OAE plans to conduct 51 evaluations, 19 of which will cover PHAC activities and 23 of which will cover HC activities. In addition, OAE will participate in nine horizontal evaluations led by other government departments or agencies. A yearly breakdown is provided in
Table 1
, while
Table 2
provides an overview of the number of horizontal evaluations led by other government departments (OGDs) by year.
Appendices A and B
outline the direct program spending (DPS) by branch for all scheduled evaluation for the next five years for PHAC and for HC respectively.
Footnotes
Footnote 1
The evaluation of Canada's Tobacco Strategy is currently counted as two evaluations one covering Health Canada's activities and the other covering PHAC's activities. At the time of scoping the evaluation, these evaluations may be merged into one.
Return to footnote
1
referrer
Page details
Report a problem on this page
Date modified:
2019-07-31