Summary of the Evaluation of the Climate Change Adaptation (CCAP) Program
About the Climate Change Adaptation Program
NRCan has been involved in climate change initiatives for over 20 years. CCAP is delivered by two divisions within the Lands and Minerals Sector (LMS): Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation Division’s Adaptation Program (CCIAD-AP) under the Hazards, Adaptation and Operation Branch (HAOB), and the Climate Change Geoscience Program (CCGP) of the Geological Survey of Canada (GSC).
The main source of funding for CCIAD-AP was through temporary funding (C-base), and the total actual expenditures between 2016-17 to 2020-21 were approximately $29.8 million. The actual expenditures of CCGP were $21.6 million, which included A-base, C-base and OGD allocations, as well as additional cash and in-kind support secured from partners and collaborators.
Natural Resources Canada’s Climate Change Adaptation Program (CCAP) consists of:
Climate Change Impact and Adaptation
Division’s Adaptation Platform (CCIAD-AP)
Climate Change Geoscience Program
(CCGP)
CCIAD-AP aims to advance climate resilience across Canada by facilitating collaborative actions among the public and private sectors, non-governmental organizations, academia, and Indigenous organizations. The program advances climate change adaptation in Canada via three key delivery mechanisms:
Canada’s Climate Change Adaptation Platform
brings together key stakeholders to support and enhance collaboration, knowledge creation, and knowledge dissemination. The Platform includes the Plenary, subject matter Working Groups, State of Play reports, Grants and Contribution program, and Regional Adaptation Collaboratives hub.
The
National Knowledge Assessment (NKA)
process supports the assessment and sharing of science-based knowledge and tools, including Indigenous knowledge, and funds regional risk assessments with each province.
The
Building Regional Adaptation Capacity and Expertise
(BRACE) program works in direct partnership with provinces to build the capacity of organizations, professionals, and communities to apply climate change considerations and actions.
CCGP delivers scientific research and analysis on geoscience issues to support climate change adaptation, organized around: 1) current and future conditions in permafrost regions; 2) coastal dynamics; 3) extreme events; and 4) melting glaciers.
In Canada’s North,
CCGP’s expertise and systems are used almost exclusively to support climate change adaptation in permafrost and coastal regions, as well as glacier mass balance monitoring.
In Canada’s coastal areas,
CCGP supports climate change adaptation by conducting research as well as making tools available in relation to sea level change and coastal sensitivity mapping.
What the Evaluation Found
Relevance and Program Context
Climate change impacts are already felt across Canada, particularly in Canada’s northern and coastal regions. The increasing frequency and severity of natural disasters driven by climate change illustrate the need to ensure that infrastructure and communities can adapt to climate change impacts. Climate change adaptation is a growing concern and priority for the Government of Canada, as demonstrated by the ratification of the Paris Agreement in 2015 and the development of the Pan-Canadian Framework on Climate Change and Clean Growth (PCF) in 2016. The PCF aims to meet Canada’s GHG reduction targets, grow the Canadian economy, and build Canada’s resilience to a changing climate. In 2022, the GC released the National Adaptation Strategy. Several federal departments are involved in climate change adaptation in Canada, and CCAP is NRCan’s long-standing climate change adaptation program.
Effectiveness in achieving the intended outcomes
CCAP is effective in achieving its intended outputs and immediate outcomes. The program is progressing towards the intermediate and long-term outcomes.
Through CCIAD-AP, target stakeholders have:
Increased awareness of climate change impacts;
Increased access to information, expertise, and tools they need to support climate adaptation actions;
Increased capacity to use and apply climate adaptation tools and information in their work through BRACE; and
Been enabled to participate in and contribute to the identification of priorities for climate adaptation activities in Canada.
As a result, CCIAD-AP’s target stakeholders have identified a range of climate change adaptation measures to address risks and opportunities arising from climate change. Target stakeholders have started including climate adaptation in their plans and strategies and implementing climate adaptation measures. However, more work is required because not all target stakeholders have taken climate adaptation action.
Through CCGP, target stakeholders have:
Increased awareness of NRCan geoscience data, knowledge and tools related to climate change;
Increased use of NRCan resources related to climate change; and
Increased access to knowledge products to support the identification of priorities for preparedness and adaptation activities in Canada.
CCGP products are published on NRCan information systems (i.e.,
GEOSCAN
,
Permafrost Information Network
, and
CanCoast
) and on external databases to communicate its scientific discovery to national and international end-users.
Through CCGP, target decision-makers from all levels of government have made science-based decisions related to climate change adaptation. CCGP has also influenced the implementation of climate adaptation measures in several key areas, including improved flood forecasting (Hudson Bay Lowlands), long-term glacier monitoring (Canadian Arctic and the Western Cordillera), permafrost-climate-infrastructure interactions (Iqaluit Airport), and understanding of ground-ice conditions and coastal changes (Hamlet of Tuktoyaktuk).
Finally, CCAP is progressing towards its ultimate outcome.
The overall trends of progress suggest that CCIAD-AP and CCGP have enabled improved resilience to climate change impacts in Canadian regions, communities, and economic sectors through the implementation of climate change adaptation measures. CCIAD-AP and CCGP have cultivated stakeholders’ capacity to act and adapt in the events of climate-related hazards and disaster risks. However,
the evaluation found some limitations in CCAP’s performance measurement strategy
. While CCIAD-AP and CCGP have put in place several measures for performance measurement, neither has been consistent with collecting performance information on all their key components. Performance information for the longer-term outcomes remains a challenge for CCAP to make a definitive conclusion on the impact of the program on the ultimate outcome.
Efficiency and Economy of the Program Model
CCAP has generally evolved in the design and delivery to meet the new and changing needs of target stakeholders.
CCIAD-AP is effective in keeping abreast of the trends in the field of climate change adaptation. CCIAD-AP have added Indigenous partners to the Platform Plenary, enhanced inclusivity and transparency of the NKA process, and worked with the provinces to build regional adaptation capacity via BRACE. CCGP has updated its strategic priorities and activities over time by shifting its focus on Canada’s Arctic region, and thus maximizing program impacts on infrastructure and communities for northern resource development.
The CCAP model generally supports the program objectives as part of the PCF
. CCIAD-AP and CCGP each provide unique and important functions while collaborating on issues and activities of common interests. Both the CCIAD-AP and CCGP models are effective in facilitating partnerships, collaborations and communications, as well as the production of relevant knowledge and tools. CCGP’s matrix organization facilitates the contribution to the project management and decision-making process of CCGP scientists and other personnel from across the country. The evaluation also found that CCGP and CCIAD-AP are efficient in leveraging their resources. CCGP is effective in establishing partnerships to increase the reach and impact of its projects led by a relatively small number of personnel, as well as procuring funds from various external sources. CCIAD-AP facilitates the advancement of desirable outcomes in climate adaptation in communities by leveraging pre-existing relationships and networks that are embedded in a particular community.
Key informants underscored that there are still critical gaps and challenges in the practical implementation of climate change adaptation measures. Although the implementation of climate adaptation measures is not part of the program’s current mandate, CCAP could play a potential role in catalysing the implementation of climate adaptation measures by using its pre-existing networks and knowledge built.
CCAP has considered EDI factors in all its key components.
CCIAD-AP and CCGP have facilitated a variety of initiatives that have strengthened some Indigenous groups’ adaptive capacity to respond to climate change impacts. CCAP could consider further opportunities to include more under-represented communities, in addition to Indigenous peoples, to identify climate change adaptation solutions and strengthen Canada’s resilience.
About the Evaluation
NRCan’s Audit and Evaluation Branch conducted an evaluation of the CCAP between April 2020 and December 2021, in accordance with the Treasury Board (TB)
Policy on Results
(2016). The evaluation covered the five-year period from 2016-17 to 2020-21. The evaluation responds to a TB commitment with respect to CCAP’s funding in 2016-17 and 2017-18, as part of the Horizontal Climate Change Adaptation Initiative led by Environment and Climate Change Canada. The evaluation focused on program performance and the following three objectives:
Assess the program model’s capacity to adapt to the evolving context;
Assess whether the program has put in place measures to achieve EDI objectives with an emphasis on Indigenous peoples; and
Assess the program’s contribution to achieving its intended outcomes with emphasis on the long-term outcomes.
The evaluation also examined CCAP’s implementation of recommendations from the previous evaluation, as well as lessons learned and best practices related to the design and delivery of the program. A document review, a literature review, key informant interviews, and case studies were used to answer the evaluation questions.