Summary of the Joint Audit and Evaluation of the Spruce Budworm Early Intervention Strategy – Phase II
About the Spruce Budworm Early Intervention
Strategy – Phase II (SBW EIS-II)
Native to North America, the Spruce Budworm (SBW) is a destructive insect that feeds on the needles of fir and spruce trees, resulting in defoliation. SBW outbreaks can have widespread, devastating, and long-term impacts on the forestry industry. The Canadian Forest Service (CFS) was allocated up to $74 million over four years (2018-19 to 2021-22) toward preventing SBW outbreaks in Atlantic Canada and improving knowledge and tools to address current and future SBW outbreak development and spread through the SBW EIS-II. Costs were to be shared 60 percent by the federal government and 40 percent by program partners comprised of provincial governments and the forestry industry.
What the Engagement Found
Relevance
The SBW EIS-II is well aligned with governmental and NRCan priorities and there is a necessary role for the federal government in the area of pest management given the interjurisdictional nature of SBW outbreaks. There is a continued need for the program in order to protect forests in Atlantic Canada from SBW outbreaks, reduce the rate of defoliation, protect the wood supply, and positively contribute to Canada achieving its targets regarding carbon emissions and sustainable forest management.
Effectiveness
The SBW EIS-II partially achieved its immediate outcomes and made progress toward achieving its intermediate and long-term outcomes, which are focused on effective treatment (and in the longer-term, protection) of Atlantic Canada’s forests at-risk of an SBW outbreak, access to scientific knowledge and SBW surveillance/response solutions, and integration of scientific knowledge into program decisions.
Longer time horizons are required to determine the program’s overall success and the achievement of its final outcome of
forests protected from SBW outbreaks provide a sustainable wood supply for Atlantic Canada’s forestry industry
.
Performance Measures
A flaw in the design of some performance indicators limited the program’s ability to report achievement of some of its outcomes. The two indicators for scientific publications and presentations are categorized into surveillance solutions and response solutions. However, being limited to these categories leaves out numerous important published scientific papers and presentations and does not capture the full breadth of what the program was able to achieve.
There is an opportunity for the SBW EIS-II to improve information management processes to ensure they are updated on a regular basis with data and information related to the program’s intermediate and final outcomes. This will allow the program to monitor trends and progress more effectively as well as support decision-making.
Additionally, there is an opportunity for the program to develop performance measures regarding engagement with potentially impacted Indigenous communities.
Governance and Oversight
The SBW EIS-II’s governance bodies provide effective oversight and challenge functions and support program delivery and effectiveness. The program utilized a governance structure that brought together experts, multiple levels of government, and industry to tackle a common issue through the Healthy Forest Partnership (HFP). There is adequate and diverse representation of key stakeholders on each committee, which supports sound decision-making for the program. However, there is an opportunity to formalize a conflict-of-interest process for all current and future program committee members and more clearly document the program’s information management processes to increase program efficiency and support knowledge transfer.
Engagement Strategy
There is a robust engagement strategy in place for the SBW EIS-II, which has greatly contributed to the program’s success. The program engaged early and regularly with Indigenous communities, local communities, and landowners to increase awareness and understanding of research and insecticide application activities. Additionally, there is a high degree of collaboration and engagement internally among program partners. The HFP is comprised of researchers, academics, provincial and federal government officials, and industry members who all collaborate, share findings, and participate in the decision-making process.
Citizen science was a factor positively influencing the achievement of expected results, increasing the program’s effectiveness and fostering a greater degree of trust and understanding among community members.
Resource Allocation
Program representatives indicated that the allocated resources (both FTEs and budget) used to deliver and achieve the SBW EIS-II’s outcomes are adequate. Although the program has generally remained within budget, it has been challenging for the program to accurately predict the precise amount of funding required for each fiscal year over the duration of the program. A large part of the program’s budget is dedicated to insecticide application, which largely depends on SBW populations. In the midst of the program, an unexpected natural decline in SBW reduced the need for treatment which led to larger than expected lapses in funding. There is a known challenge with better aligning multi-year financial and reporting practices with science-based programs where expenditure needs and outcomes are driven by nature.
The 60:40 cost-sharing arrangement introduced an additional layer of complexity in terms of increased administrative burden and confusion regarding how to quantify in-kind contributions. The program’s Terms and Conditions have since been modified to simplify the calcuation of this requirement.
About the Engagement
The objective of this joint audit and evaluation is to assess the relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, and economy of the SBW EIS-II. The joint engagement covers the period from April 1, 2018, to March 31, 2021.
NRCan’s Audit and Evaluation Branch (AEB) conducted this engagement in accordance with the Treasury Board (TB)
Policy on Results
(2016) and the Institute of Internal Auditors’
International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing
and the Government of Canada’s
Policy on Internal Audit
. Details on specific engagement questions, methods and limitations are found in the full report.