Executive Summary
This document presents the Evaluation Synthesis of the Clean Energy Science and Technology (S&T) Sub-Program. The Evaluation Synthesis was conducted between August 2013 and June 2014, and focused on the six S&T funding mechanisms and six research, development, and demonstration (RD&D) areas forming the Sub-program. The goal of the Synthesis report is to incorporate the findings from previous evaluations and other data sources to develop a broad understanding of the impacts of NRCan’s clean energy science and technology programming over the past ten years. The majority of these programs have been evaluated previously and the specific program-level recommendations have been implemented. The focus of the report is on issues that span across all program areas rather than any individual program.
Scope and methodology
An evaluation synthesis is a systematic procedure for organizing and analyzing findings from different evaluation studies. By integrating diverse evaluation findings, it aims to establish an easily accessible base of knowledge and identify knowledge gaps or needs with respect to a specific topic upon which future evaluations can build.  There were, however, limitations to the following Synthesis approach. The programs under review covered ten years of management approaches, program designs and objectives, limiting the extent to which the Synthesis could link program outcomes systematically and clearly across all programs.
The Synthesis contains evidence from seven Clean Energy S&T evaluations covering the Office of Energy Research and Development (OERD) activities between 2003-04 and 2013-14, as well as supplemental evidence from an international literature review, bibliometric analysis, a Delphi panel, interviews with key stakeholders and case studies in order to summarize the relevance, effectiveness and efficiency of Clean Energy science and technology (S&T) activities over the ten-year period.
Findings
Program need
Documentary evidence and interviewees indicate that there is a continued need for the activities conducted by the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program, including contributing to Canada’s commitments to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and supporting the economic competitiveness and sustainability of Canada’s energy sector. The Evaluation Synthesis found that there is a clear rationale to develop technologies to a pre-commercialization state by funding RD&D activities intended to increase the efficiency of energy production and use, and to facilitate the use of alternative and renewable energy sources. As such, all lines of evidence and previous evaluations concurred on the need to reduce technology development risks inherent in the early stages of the innovation cycle, to encourage private sector investment, and to inform Canadian codes, standards and policies.
Interviewees were clear that Government of Canada participation in clean energy S&T is essential to help ensure Canada’s continued participation in the international innovation system. In particular, the evaluation of CEF showed that there is an ongoing need to fund innovation through clean energy R&D, and small and large-scale demonstration projects. Further, investments in clean energy S&T, including the current ecoEII activities, respond to a continuing need for industry growth, stimulated short- and long-term employment, and increased economic output, while reducing the impact on the environment.
Alignment with government priorities
Documentary evidence and interviews with key stakeholders indicate that the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program is aligned with federal government priorities, including commitments to address climate change and other environmental concerns, and to ensure Canada’s economic competitiveness and sustainability. Previous evaluations found that funding for the Sub-program has been announced through various budgets during the evaluation period, including the announcements for the Clean Energy Fund in 2009, and the ecoENERGY Innovation Initiative in 2011. The 2013 Speech from the Throne highlighted the federal government’s commitment to responsible resource development, including reducing GHG emissions. Finally, the activities under the Sub-program are in line with the Government’s recently announced commitment to reduce GHG emissions by 30% below 2005 levels by 2030.
Alignment with federal roles and responsibilities
The findings from all lines of evidence indicate an appropriate role for the federal government and NRCan in clean energy S&T. Federal involvement in clean energy RD&D is enabled by the Natural Resources Act and the Energy Efficiency Act. Additionally, the federal government may play an important role in responding to market failures (e.g., weak RD&D investment from the private sector) and providing leadership in the area of clean energy S&T. While provinces play a critical role in natural resources and energy (with the exception of nuclear energy), federal government activities in this area were generally viewed by stakeholders as part of the federal mandate for science and technology leadership,  national coordination, supporting provincial regulatory decisions, as well as harmonizing regulations, codes and standards.
The evaluation of the Clean Transportation Systems (CTS) Portfolio noted that Program of Energy Research and Development (PERD) projects fund R&D that supports policy and regulatory decision-making as well as pre-competitive R&D in targeted technology areas where federal laboratories have unique capacity and facilities, and that NRCan is well integrated into the clean transportation research framework in Canada.
It was also noted that Canada’s approach to reducing energy-related GHG emissions is consistent with the activities undertaken in other major countries and jurisdictions (e.g., the European Union, China, Australia, and the United States).
Achievement of expected outcomes
The Evaluation Synthesis found evidence of the impact of NRCan’s Clean Energy S&T activities over the last 10 years, including those related to collaboration, the development of the early-stage scientific and technological knowledge base, impacts on codes, regulations and standards, economic and environmental impacts.
A wide variety of metrics were used to assess program performance across previous evaluations. Generally, the evidence pointed to the following:
Effective approaches to collaboration and dissemination with over 1,000 external partners as demonstrated by qualitative research and interviews with stakeholders;
Effective production of scientific knowledge as evidenced by strong results from bibliometric analysis;
Effective leveraging of investments from partners as evidenced by analyses of financial data (approximately $3.5 billion leveraged from $900 million in federal investment);
Success in advancing the development of technologies as demonstrated by movement in Technology Readiness Levels (TRLs), for example moving pre-commercial technologies to demonstrated at commercial scale and ready for market entry;
Success in the development of 50 codes and standards as noted in document and literature reviews; and
Recent improvements to the OERD performance measurement system, particularly as it relates to the ability to collect data on environmental and economic impacts at the project level.
Collaboration and partnerships play a critical role in all research areas of the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program, helping technologies move from basic research and knowledge creation to demonstration and deployment. Leveraged funds, both financial and in-kind, and the number of project partners (over 1,000), are key indications of collaboration for the Clean Energy S&T Program. There is clear evidence of stakeholders’ participation in RD&D, without which this program would be limited in its achievement of its expected outcomes. In addition, partnerships helped to set international standards and policies, provide Canada’s perspective to other countries, increase Canada’s credibility in research areas, and facilitate international trade and marketing.
Through the analysis of NRCan publications, the Synthesis found that the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program is an important contributor to clean energy and efficiency technology awareness in Canada. Between 2008 and 2013, the total number of publications in Canada related to the six RD&D areas was 15,024. Of these, 9% were based on internal research conducted by NRCan or external research funded by the department. Within each RD&D area, NRCan internal and external research contributed to between 7% and 23% of the Canadian publications. NRCan’s publications rank between the 1 and the 12 rank in Canada. Previous evaluations indicated that several research areas were engaged in dissemination activities to increase awareness and understanding of clean energy and energy-efficient technologies. However, they also indicated the need to continue these dissemination activities in addition to published research.
Representatives of OERD also noted that NRCan adopted the Technology Readiness Level (TRL) ratings based on a model developed at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) to estimate the extent to which RD&D projects have moved along the innovation chain. The TRL ratings provide OERD with a systematic method to assess and rate the extent to which projects have progressed from early conceptualization to demonstration. The case studies found that RD&D projects under review developed from a TRL of 2 (concept formulated) to a TRL of 8 (system developed and tested/demonstrated in operational environment) or 9 (system proven), suggesting that these projects were effective in producing the expected scientific and technical knowledge.
The Synthesis documented other areas in which progress was made in the development of early-stage clean energy scientific knowledge. The evaluation of the Clean Energy Fund (CEF) noted that the 56 CEF projects demonstrated a strong contribution to the Clean Energy S&T knowledge stream. For example:
Carbon Capture and Storage: NRCan’s Bells Corners Complex has the only integrated testing facility in Canada to complete bench- and pilot-scale testing of high-pressure energy conversion systems (a part of the Carbon Capture and Storage research effort).
Atlantic Energy Gateway: AEG interviewees commented that CEF funding allowed the organization to search outside provincial boundaries for technologies that supported GHG emission reduction targets, and created an environment for clean energy technologies to be developed and advanced.
Oil Sands: An oil sands project led to the development of a new method that can distinguish between natural background and oil sands production-related sources of naphthenic acid. Improved understanding of the impact of oil sands operations on the environment will inform future codes, standards and regulations.
Fuel Cells: A hydrogen and fuel cell project developed and demonstrated a new melt extrusion process described as a “significant breakthrough in lowering the manufacturing cost and accelerating the commercialization of fuel cell technologies.”
Stakeholder awareness: 32 R&D projects contributed to 64 peer-reviewed publications, 25 client reports and 120 presentations. Based on the review of project final reports, results from 63% of the projects were being used by external stakeholders to conduct RD&D.
The evaluation of Oil and Gas Activities documented a project related to radar processing for ice hazard detection that developed algorithms to improve the accurate detection and tracking of small ice objects. The Built Environment evaluation documented a project related to deep lake cooling that resulted in the development of a lake-source cooling system to provide air conditioning for office towers.
The development of codes, standards and regulations informed by RD&D projects conducted through the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program was also highlighted in the Synthesis. Over the past 10 years, programs contributed to 50 new or amended codes and standards. Built Environment RD&D, for example, contributed to the National Energy Code for Buildings and informed the development of three standards for the Canadian Standards Association (CSA). The development of Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (for particulate matter emissions produced from flaring) informed the United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) emission measurement standards and Global Gas Flaring Reduction Partnership policies.
The potential impact of Clean Energy RD&D on enhanced market opportunities for Canadian companies through the commercialization of technologies, and sustainable resource development was also assessed. The case studies conducted as part of this evaluation provided examples of the impact of Clean Energy RD&D in areas such as the Replacement of Fossil Fuels Used in Greenhouses with Energy from Biomass Residues projects, which created a potential for new industries using wood residues, biomass resources (e.g., switchgrass), and agricultural waste feed stocks (e.g., grain chaff). Small-scale demonstration projects under the CEF program reported discussion with 1,111 potential adopters. At the time of the evaluation, the estimated dollar value of potential deals totaled $8 billion.
Estimates of economic benefits remain challenging as it is difficult to attribute economic impact to a particular research area as direct linkages to the foundational R&D become diluted as the technology is further developed. Further, economic competitiveness depends significantly on external market factors (such as energy prices). However, OERD provided documentation that demonstrates a revised project management approach, particularly since the launch of the ecoEII program, to address this reporting limitation. Proponents are now required to provide measures of economic impacts, such as estimates of technology economic potential and job creation for five years after the completion of the project.
The Synthesis also assessed the available evidence related to environmental outcomes. The evidence was wide-ranging, covering several evaluations and supplementary methods and pointed to clear examples of positive environmental impacts. At present, OERD estimates that past energy technology programs will directly reduce GHG emissions by up to 5.05 Mt/year by 2019, with the potential for further reductions with commercialization and market adoption of technologies developed through this programming.
Evidence from previous evaluations noted program-specific estimates of environmental impacts.
Evidence from the Technology Early Action Measures (TEAM) program estimated that collectively, 49 demonstration projects could contribute to reducing GHG emissions by 525,210 tCO2e/year.
The two large-scale CEF projects (i.e., Shell Quest, Enhance Alberta Carbon Trunk Line) may be able to sequester approximately 2.2 megatonnes of CO2 per year.
Small-scale CEF demonstration projects resulted in estimated environmental impacts through energy generated by renewables totaling 3.7 million kWh/year, peak demand reduction of 2,330 kW, energy saved totaling 18.2 million kWh/year, displaced volume of diesel of 13,800 L and decreased NO2.
The evidence was, however, based primarily on project-level data, making it challenging to report at a program level or provide a comparable benchmark for environmental benefits. As noted above, OERD is now requiring post-project reporting to capture potential environmental benefits such as GHG reductions in order to facilitate program-level reporting.
Efficiency and Economy
The Synthesis identified a broad range of factors that both supported and challenged the achievement of intended outcomes. On the positive side, factors such as NRCan’s long-term commitment to RD&D, effective leveraging, NRCan’s RD&D expertise, NRCan research facilities and equipment, and NRCan participation in international committees were all cited as key elements to program success. The Evaluation Synthesis also highlighted barriers documented in previous evaluations. These included both ongoing program management challenges, such as uneven funding during the ten-year period, or contextual issues, such as  a lack of a nation-wide clean energy regulatory framework, the weak state of the macro-economy in 2008, intellectual property rights, challenges in staffing  and  barriers imposed by existing regulations. OERD has taken steps to improve the efficiency of the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program through reducing the number of related RD&D portfolios and by using standardized proposal review and selection processes since 2007-08 and by taking steps to systematically improve the collection and reporting on outcomes after the project’s funding has ended.
Evaluations such as those for CTS and CEF highlighted the impact of partnerships on the efficient and economic delivery of RD&D, particularly related to leveraging funding. The CTS evaluation noted, for example, that international interest in magnesium R&D in the automotive sector resulted in leveraged funds with investments made in the US and China. A general estimate, based on the information contained in the previous evaluations, suggests that every dollar of NRCan funding provided to the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program leveraged an average of $1.41 in cash and in-kind contributions from other federal departments, provincial governments, and industry.
Case studies conducted during the synthesis also illustrated the importance of collaborations to the achievement of RD&D on clean energy technologies, for example:
Key collaborators in the Deep Lake Water Cooling project included NRCan, the City of Toronto, Enwave, and the Toronto Environmental Alliance.
Environment Canada and China established an agreement to collaborate on applying the Wind Energy Simulation Toolkit (WEST) system to prepare a wind atlas for China. Additionally, Mexico expressed interest in establishing a similar agreement.
Research into, and development of, ice detection radar was made possible through a 10-year partnership between NRCan, Transport Canada, the Canada Coast Guard, and Rutter Technologies.
One key challenge highlighted in previous evaluations is performance reporting and the tracking of financial data. Nearly every evaluation covered under the Synthesis made a recommendation related to improving performance and related monitoring systems.
There are clear challenges to reporting RD&D outcome data systematically. This type of data collection is resource-intensive and requires an ability to monitor past the initial funding period. Further, wide variations in project-level outcomes may lead to difficulty in estimating program-level outcomes. Since the implementation of the ecoEII program, OERD has been undertaking steps to improve reporting in these areas. Improvements include a more robust performance measurement and reporting system to link projects with long-term program outcomes. Greater emphasis is also being put on annual project reporting to match funding levels reported in project financial databases and actual expenditures.
Recommendations
The objective of the Synthesis is to establish an easily accessible base of knowledge and to identify any outstanding gaps in program design and implementation. This knowledge base can inform program management on general trends noted in previous evaluations and identify key topics for future evaluations. Given the scope of the Synthesis and the previous recommendations embedded in existing evaluations, the recommendations are intended to address only those programming issues that have not been previously covered by program evaluations. The following recommendations are therefore meant to emphasize areas that should be considered in future programming.
1.0 Introduction
The purpose of this document is to present the Evaluation Synthesis of NRCan’s Clean Energy Science and Technology (S&T) Sub-Program. The evaluation was conducted between August 2013 and June 2014. The evaluation’s focus is the S&T funding mechanisms and research, development, and demonstration (RD&D) areas forming the Sub-program. This evaluation synthesis is more than a summary of Clean Energy S&T previous evaluations. Beyond providing an analysis of the findings of six Clean Energy S&T evaluations since 2003, additional lines of evidence were generated to assess the overall impact of recommendations and the implementation of action plans. A triangulation of lines of evidence provided reliable findings to show the Clean Energy S&T Sub-Program’s progress on outcomes by telling a long-term performance story and help a better scoping of the future evaluations.
The rest of this document is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the background information in the form of a profile of the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program. Section 3 presents the purpose and scope of the evaluation, and explains the methodological approach used to address the evaluation issues and questions. Section 4 presents the evidence as it relates to the evaluation findings by issue (relevance; economy and efficiency; and effectiveness). Section 5 presents conclusions and lessons learned.
2.0 Profile
The objective of the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program is “for academia, industry, and the public sector to lay the foundation for the next generation of clean energy products and practices that will have fewer negative impacts on Canada’s air, land and water, by funding, creating and advancing new energy knowledge and technologies.” The Sub-program supports the following six RD&D areas across the innovation chain, from early conception to pre-commercialization demonstration: Oil and Gas, Clean Electrical Power Generation (CEPG), Sustainable Bioenergy, Clean Energy Systems for Industry (CESI), Built Environment, and Clean Transportation Systems (CTS).
As shown in Table 1, source funding for the six RD&D areas consists of one major ongoing funding mechanism and five different short-term funding mechanisms.
Table 2 provides the duration of each funding program.
**T&I R&D Initiative – Technology and Innovation Research and Development Initiative
The RD&D funded through these programs is conducted by Government of Canada (GoC) scientists at federal laboratories or externally by academia and/or industry (via contribution agreements). Between 2003–04 and 2012–13, a total of 1682 RD&D projects were conducted through the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program.
Table 3 provides, for each funding program, the total number of RD&D projects funded.
Source: information provided by OERD
Table 4 provides, for each funding program, the total cost of RD&D projects (by source, excluding PERD).
Source: information provided by OERD
Information provided by OERD indicated that the total cost of RD&D projects funded under PERD between 2003-04 and 2012-13 was $541M. Information on the contribution of PERD partners was not available at the time of analysis. PERD’s data was therefore not included in Table 4; however OERD is developing a database to report this information in the future.
3.0 Purpose, Scope and Methodology
3.1 Purpose and Scope
Covering the period of 2003–04 to 2012–13 , the evaluation synthesis assessed the relevance and performance (effectiveness, efficiency, and economy) of NRCan’s Clean Energy S&T Sub-program. It examined the overall effectiveness of the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program and specific program impacts, successes and challenges, and their contributions towards the intermediate and long-term outcomes (see Appendix A), including the extent to which the results have informed policy and decision makers.
3.2 Evaluation Questions
The questions that were addressed in the evaluation are presented below.
Relevance
	
Is there an ongoing need for the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program?
Is the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program consistent with government priorities and NRCan strategic outcomes?
Is there a legitimate, appropriate, and necessary role for the federal government in clean energy S&T? Is NRCan’s role appropriate in the context of the role of others?


Performance
	
Efficiency and economy
		
What are the internal and external factors that have facilitated or hindered the achievement of the intended outcomes of the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program?
Are the activities within each clean energy S&T funding mechanism the most economic and efficient means of making progress towards the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program’s intended outcomes?


Effectiveness
		
To what extent has the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program achieved its intended outcomes?
Have there been any unintended outcomes (positive or negative) from the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program?
3.3 Methodology
The methodological approach is described below.
Document Review. The documents for review included the previous evaluations of the six area of research of the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program. Each area of research has been evaluated at least once, with Built Environment and Clean Transportation Systems evaluated twice. Figure 3 indicates the period and expenditures covered by the evaluations, The Evaluation of the Clean Energy Fund included approximately $250M of expenditures in Clean Electrical Power Generation. Key components in the clean electrical area include both the large-scale CCS demonstrations and smaller-scale demonstrations of renewable technologies. Table 5 shows the Synthesis Evaluation Coverage and Estimated Expenditures
The ecoEII program, though in early program implementation during the data collection phase, was also integrated within the scope of the Synthesis. Although implementation was relatively recent, ecoEII was building on a platform of previous programs such as CEF and the on-going PERD program, allowing the evaluation team to broadly infer expected outcomes (e.g., economic and environmental impacts) based on previous program models. Further, the Synthesis incorporated how ecoEII program design and delivery was influenced by actions taken to address previous evaluation recommendations. A more detailed assessment of the program’s direct program outcomes will be addressed in the subsequent program evaluation.
File Review. A review of the following PERD files was undertaken: Project Annual Status Reports (PASRs) for projects funded between 2007–08 and 2012–13, and a sample of Program at the Objective Level (POL) Annual Reports for projects funded prior to 2007–08.
Literature Review. The literature review examined legitimacy, appropriateness, and necessity of the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program by discussing the economic theory that provides justification for government intervention in clean energy R&D.
Interviews. Interviews with key stakeholders were conducted to obtain informed opinions and observations on the evaluation questions. Nineteen interviews were completed with representatives the following groups: NRCan senior management (current and former), representatives of OERD, representatives of other NRCan divisions, and representatives of other federal departments.
Bibliometrics. Based on a search of the Web of Science (WOS) database, the bibliometric analysis assessed the relative scientific impact of publications supported by the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program for the six RD&D area funded, compared with: 1) all papers published over the same period of time within the same areas of research; and 2) research supported by comparator programs in other jurisdictions.
Case Studies. Twelve case studies of funded projects (refer to Appendix A for additional information) were conducted to assess the extent to which they have contributed toward the achievement of the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program’s longer-term outcomes. Projects for case study were selected from the pool of more than 130 case studies conducted by the previous evaluations. Each case study was based on the following lines of evidence: 1) a review of documents, including project files and the case study reports prepared as part of the previous evaluations; and 2) interviews with project representatives.
Delphi panels of scientific experts. Two Delphi panels, one related to the International Energy Agency Greenhouse Gas (IEA GHG) Weyburn-Midale Project and one related to the Lightweight Thermal Management Systems for Turbocharger Technologies, were undertaken to further explore the impact of the clean energy S&T projects conducted and funded through NRCan. Three to four industry/government/ academic experts were identified to participate in each panel. Each group of experts received the results of the bibliometric analysis and case study pertaining to their RD&D area. They were then asked to respond to a series of questions related to NRCan’s contribution to clean energy RD&D.
3.3.1 Limitations and mitigation
4.0 Findings
This section provides the findings of the evaluation, organized by the following issues: relevance; effectiveness; and economy and efficiency.
Evaluation question: Is there an ongoing need for the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program?
4.1 Relevance – Ongoing Need
Documentary evidence and interviewees indicate that there is a need for the type of activities conducted by the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program, including their contributing to Canada’s commitments to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and supporting the economic sustainability of Canada’s energy sector.
The Clean Energy S&T Sub-program responds to the need to reduce GHG and other air emissions by funding RD&D activities intended to increase the efficiency of energy production and use and to facilitate the use of alternative, renewable energy sources.
	
In Canada, energy use is the principal source of GHG and criteria air contaminants (CAC) emissions. Forecasted increases in global energy demand have increased pressure to find ways to reduce GHG and CAC emissions, develop new renewable sources of energy, and find more efficient ways of using fossil fuel energy; thus, investments in clean energy S&T is a pathway to contribute to the achievement of these goals.
Under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) process, the federal government is committed to reducing GHG emissions. Canada reaffirmed this commitment by agreeing, as part of the Copenhagen Agreement, to reduce carbon emissions by 17% from 2005 levels over the next 10 years.


The previous evaluations reported that investments in clean energy S&T support continued industry growth and thus stimulate short- and long-term employment, increase economic output, and generate government revenue, especially through leveraging. Further, the previous evaluations and other documentary evidence indicated that although the energy sector is a significant contributor to the Canadian economy, its potential for growth and/or innovation could be affected by a range of different factors and/or challenges.
	
Increasing production costs in Canada, emerging economies such as China, and the rapid pace of development in Europe, may be the opportunity for Canada to support a home-grown industry developing solutions that work in situations that reflect the Canadian context.
By 2020, Canada’s crude oil production levels are expected to reach five million barrels per day, making Canada the world’s third or fourth largest oil producer. However, many generally accepted technologies and methods within the global industry cannot be used in northern and offshore environments; consequently, the industry faces several challenges relating to infrastructure, transportation, construction, and drilling.
Challenges confronting development of the potential bioeconomy include lack of financial capital for developing and producing bioproducts; the economies of scale factors for Canada’s predominantly small companies to operate competitively; and the need for research, development and demonstration to reach a commercial development stage.
In the transportation sector, vehicle manufacturers are reluctant to produce vehicles operating on new fuels when there is no fuel delivery infrastructure, consumers are reluctant to purchase these vehicles for the same reason, and energy firms are unwilling to develop new fuel infrastructure due to insufficient demand.
While Canada can chose among a wide range of tools to stimulate business R&D, there is still a need to reconsider the balance between direct support (through grants, co-investments or procurement) and indirect support (through tax credits). Research by the OECD has shown that Canada is unusual among the major industrialized countries in its heavy reliance on indirect as opposed to direct support. The federal Science, Technology and Innovation Council estimates that 90% of Canada’s government support of business R&D is in the form of indirect measures; at the other end of the scale, 80 per cent of government support in the United States is direct.
Evaluation question: Is the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program consistent with government priorities and NRCan strategic outcomes?
4.2 Relevance – Linkages to Government and NRCan’s Priorities
Documentary evidence and interviewees indicate that the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program is aligned with federal government priorities, including recent commitments to address climate change and other environmental concerns, and to ensure Canada’s economic sustainability.
Senior managers indicated that responsible resource development and technological innovation, through the use of clean and sustainable energy, remains a strong focus for the federal government. Moreover, they reported that, by helping academia, industry, and the public sector pursue development of clean energy technologies that have fewer negative environmental impacts, the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program is well-aligned with NRCan’s strategic outcome that natural resource sectors and consumers are environmentally responsible.
The 2013 Speech From the Throne (SFT) highlighted the federal government’s commitment to responsible resource development and indicated that the Government of Canada will “build on its record as the first government to achieve an absolute reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by working with provinces to reduce emissions from the oil and gas sectors while ensuring Canadian companies remain competitive.”
The 2014 Federal Budget did not specifically earmark funding for clean energy RD&D; however, it noted that Canada is “a major player in the world energy economy,” outlined various strategies for responsible resource development, and spoke to expanding tax incentives for clean energy generation.
In 2015, the federal government announced a commitment to reduce GHG emissions by 30% below 2005 levels by 2030.
Previous evaluations found that funding for the Sub-program has been announced through various budgets during the evaluation period, including the announcements for the Clean Energy Fund in 2009, and the ecoENERGY Innovation Initiative in 2011. For example, the findings from the evaluation of the CEF program indicated linkages between the Government of Canada and NRCan priorities as its objectives were to guide funded projects towards GHG reductions and economic growth in the areas of smart grid, renewable and clean energy (former Integration of Renewable Energy Systems priority), bioenergy and carbon capture and storage.
Evaluation question: Is there a legitimate and appropriate role for the federal government in clean energy S&T? Is NRCan’s role appropriate in the context of the role of others?
4.3 Relevance – Roles and Responsibilities
There is an appropriate role for the federal government and NRCan in clean energy S&T. Federal involvement in clean energy RD&D is authorized by several Acts and aligns with NRCan’s mission and mandate. Additionally, there is an acknowledged role for the federal government to respond to market failures, and provide leadership, in the area of clean energy S&T. Finally, Canada’s involvement in clean energy S&T is consistent with approaches used in other countries.
Interviewees indicated that NRCan serves as the lead federal department for clean energy S&T. The Natural Resources Act gives the Minister various responsibilities related to the sustainable development of natural resources, including development and promotion of scientific technologies, and the Energy Efficiency Act provides NRCan with authority to conduct research that promotes efficient use of energy and the use of alternative energy sources. 
The economic concept of “market failure,” namely externalities and public goods, provides evidence of a legitimate and appropriate role for the federal government in Clean Energy S&T.
	
Examples of positive externalities include: 1) early adopters of technologies who pave the way for others and often lower costs for later adopters; and 2) network externalities, which occur when the benefits of consuming a product increases with the number of other users consuming or producing the product. An example of a negative externality is pollution (i.e., GHG emissions).
The public good nature of clean energy research and commercialization implies that without government intervention, the private market will provide less research and commercialization than what is socially optimal. The US Council of Economic Advisors estimates that private returns to RD&D are 20-30%, while the social returns at 50% or higher. The gap between private and social returns for RD&D is particularly high in earlier stages of the innovation chain, as fundamental research has significantly greater external benefits than later-stage commercialization research.


Several factors point to the need for federal leadership in the area of clean energy S&T. The previous evaluations and interviewees noted the following:
	
If Canada does not take a leadership role, it may simply become a supplier of energy inputs to other countries and will not accrue benefits across the value chain.
Provinces play a predominant role in natural resources and energy (with the exception of nuclear energy), which needs effective national coordination of activities. The federal government plays an important role in supporting provincial regulatory decisions and harmonizing regulations, codes, and standards.
Federal funding may be required to encourage industry to develop technologies and engage in high-risk, early stage R&D.
Often, the facilities needed for energy research and testing are not cost effective for industry to construct and operate, however they may be cost effective as government facilities.
The economic savings resulting from energy efficiency measures may not exceed the cost of implementing the technology.


Canada’s approach to reducing energy-related GHG emissions is consistent with the activities undertaken in other major countries and jurisdictions (e.g., the European Union, China, Australia, and the United States).
	
The EU Strategic Energy Technology Plan (SET-Plan) provides a roadmap to reduce GHGs by 80% to 95% by 2050. The SET-Plan focuses on research, technological development, and innovation and diffusion of new technologies to promote clean energy.
China’s S&T National Plan, which directs R&D and innovation efforts to 2020, places high priority on developing technologies related to energy, water resources, and environmental protection (Tan, 2010). Two main programs provide the most direct funding for clean technologies: the 863 Program focuses on hydrogen and fuel cells, energy efficiency, clean coals, and renewable energy; and the 973 Program focuses on energy, natural resource conservation, and environmental protection projects.
The Australian government invested in R&D and demonstration for renewable energy, including “Low Emissions Technology Fund, Solar City trials, Renewable Energy Development Initiative, Advanced Electricity Storage Technologies, and Wind Forecasting Capability.” It also created the Renewable Energy Commercialization Program (RECP) to “promote renewable technologies” and the Renewable Energy Equity Fund, which provides venture capital for small innovative companies.
The US is a major player in RD&D. Spending levels in 2009, in part reflecting investment to offset the 2008 global economic crisis, reached as high as $10B. The US announced in 2013, as part of the President’s Climate Change Plan, a commitment to lead the world in clean energy RD&D. The US has also tabled a policy through the  American Clean Energy and Security Act to provide funding to support RD&D in clean energy and energy efficient technologies and under the 2011 America Invests Act to strengthen IP protection system and to speed the patent application processing times.
4.4 Performance – Effectiveness
Evaluation question: To what extent has the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program achieved its intended outcomes?
4.4.1 Continued Collaboration and Partnership for Clean Energy and Energy Efficiency R&D and Demonstration
Collaboration and partnership play a critical role in all research areas of the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program, helping technologies move from basic research and knowledge creation to demonstration and deployment. The level of leveraging of funds and partner contributions both financial and in-kind are key indicators of collaboration for the Clean Energy S&T Program. As reported in section 4.3, there is clear evidence of the stakeholders’ participation in RD&Ds, without which, this sub-program would be limited in its achievement of its expected outcomes. In addition, partnerships helped to set international standards and policies, provide Canada’s perspective to other countries, increase Canada’s credibility in research areas, and facilitate international trade and marketing
The previous evaluations note the following specific benefits resulting from collaboration with over 1000 external partners: improved dissemination of research, sharing of expertise, less duplication of effort, identification of R&D priorities, increased funding and in-kind resources, reduced financial risk, access to new networks and contacts, increased human resource capacity, increased credibility with funding decisions, opportunities for future collaboration, and increased relevance of research to the end user. Furthermore, international partnerships can help set international standards and policies, provide Canada’s perspective to other countries, increase Canada’s credibility in research areas, and facilitate international trade and marketing.
Almost all of the previous evaluations describe the research areas forming the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program as contributing to strengthened networking and collaboration among stakeholders such as federal departments, provinces and territories, universities, research organizations, producer groups, and private industry.
	
All of the research areas forming the Sub-program have resulted in presentations at national and international conferences, and many projects have attracted significant interest from national and international groups.
Collaboration was highlighted as a key factor that facilitated progress in federal RD&D in the CEF evaluation. For example, the majority of the 32 small-scale projects reviewed included the participation of two or more departments (20 of 32 projects). Inter-departmental cooperation gave project teams broader access to the facilities and equipment housed in federal laboratories. Further, external stakeholders often contributed financially and in-kind to the projects, and their involvement helped project teams vet early project findings, identify which technical solutions would be most readily adapted by the industry, and provided a pathway to share results
Partnerships and collaborations with other relevant federal departments and agencies in the bioenergy sector are included in the planning and decision-making process of the Priority through governance committees and the Canadian Biomass Information Network (CBIN). Furthermore, the Priority has facilitated international partnerships by maintaining positions in international editorial boards and hosting guest scientists.
For CESI, partnerships are frequently made with the same organizations as previous years, thus resulting in slow partnership growth. Further, industry perceived collaboration with government as “being associated with more paperwork to complete, federal jargon to decipher, and/or a longer or more rigorous approval process to purchase equipment, modify research scope, etc.” (NRCan, Evaluation of the Clean Energy Systems for Industry (CESI) Sub-Activity, 2012).
In the Built Environment area, the Buildings and Communities Energy Technology (BCET) Program and TEAM projects focused on co-funded initiatives involving multiple partners, including multiple government, industry, and academic contributors.
AFTER Program Plans describe how plans were modified to reflect stakeholder needs. AFTER also engaged international stakeholders, as the program has close working relationships with the US Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) and Department of Energy (US DOE), along with members from many countries participating in the International Energy Agency (IEA) Advanced Motor Fuels (AMF) Implementing Agreement.


As shown in the appendices of this report, the case studies conducted as part of this evaluation validate the importance of collaboration across a range of S&T projects and illustrate the importance of collaborations to RD&D on clean energy technologies. In these cases, the evidence points to reduced redundancy and confusion between partners, better results and examples of public private partnerships that held benefits for both parties. The examples below briefly illustrate several case study findings:
	
Research into, and the development of, ice detection radar was made possible through a 10-year partnership between NRCan, Transport Canada, the Canada Coast Guard (CCG), and Rutter Technologies resulting in improved radar technology that could be applied quickly and safely to address emerging ice issues in the Arctic.
The Technologies Beyond Anaerobic Digestion (AD), Gasification and Pyrolysis for Bio-based High-Value Production from Secondary Biomass Feedstock (modules 1, 4, and 5) project contributed to “strengthen[ing] networking and/or collaboration among federal departments and agencies, the provinces, industries, universities, and/or international activities.” and may have application within the commercial sector.
The Combined Water and Energy Optimization project improved the efficiency with which extensive testing was conducted at partnering pulp mills such as Tembec, Paprican, and Domtar by validating the testing technology in a real-world setting with industry partners.
Key collaborators in the Deep Lake Water Cooling project included NRCan, the City of Toronto, Enwave, and the Toronto Environmental Alliance. The success of the project, which draws cold water from Lake Ontario to provide cooling to a high-density system in Toronto’s downtown core, relied on early federal RD&D investment in environmentally efficient cooling technology and was demonstrated and applied by industry and other external partners.
The High Pressure Compressed Hydrogen Fuelling System project was led by IMW Industries Ltd., with funding support and expertise from NRCan’s TEAM program. IMW Industries Ltd. collaborated with Stuart Energy, a supplier that provides compressor motors, as part of a development arrangement.
Environment Canada and China established an agreement to collaborate on applying the Wind Energy Simulation Toolkit (WEST) system to prepare a wind atlas for China. Additionally, Mexico expressed interest in establishing a similar agreement.
Various provinces and territories have used AnemoScope and the Canadian Wind Energy Atlas (CWEA) to develop a consistent approach to higher-resolution wind maps that can cover multiple jurisdictions.
4.4.2 Increased Stakeholder’s Awareness and Understanding of Clean Energy and Energy Efficient Technologies
Through the analysis of NRCan publications, the evaluation synthesis found that the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program is an important contributor to clean energy and efficiency technology awareness in Canada. Also, the previous evaluations indicated that several of the research areas were engaged in dissemination activities to increase awareness and understanding of clean energy and energy-efficient technologies.
Bibliometric analysis found that, between 2003 and 2013, the total number of publications in Canada related to the six RD&D areas was 22,360. Of these, 6% were related to internal research conducted at NRCan. Based on publications related to internal research and compared to all research organizations in Canada, NRCan produced between the largest and 12 largest volume of publications for each RD&D area.
Between 2008 and 2013, the total number of publications in Canada related to the six RD&D areas was 15,024. Of these, 9% were based on internal research conducted by NRCan or external research funded by the department. Within each RD&D area, NRCan internal and external research contributed to between 7% and 23% of the Canadian publications.
Text version
Graph
            Within each Research, development, and demonstration area, Natural Resources Canada internal and external research contributed to between 7% and 23% of the Canadian publications. 
            
This graph describes the Natural Resources Canada proportion of Canadian publications by Research, development, and demonstration area between 2008 and 2013. On a scale of 0 to 23%, Sustainable bioenergy and Clean Energy Systems for Industry publications are at 7% each; Clean Electrical Power Generation is at 8%, followed by Clean Transportation Systems at 10%. Along the same lines, Oil and Gas publications represent 18% and Built Environment are at 23%.
Four of the previous evaluations (CEPG, CESI, Build Environment, and CTS) included substantive discussion of dissemination activities using the following tools: stakeholder networks, guides, analyses, advice, best practices manuals, and analytical techniques. For example, the CTS evaluation noted that citations of publications based on the results of the Advanced Fuels and Technologies for Emissions Reduction (AFTER) Program were 26% higher than the world average for papers in the field. In contrast, the CTS evaluation found that, due to intellectual property issues, dissemination of the Advanced Structural Materials for Natural Gas Vehicles (ASM-NGV) results was limited, in some cases, to direct use by project participants.
The 32 R&D projects under the CEF program contributed to 64 peer reviewed publications, 25 client reports and 120 presentations. Based on the review of project final reports, results from 63% of the projects are being used by external stakeholders to conduct RD&D
In response to recommendations made in the CEF evaluation, the OERD indicated that it has been taking steps to improve and develop mechanisms to foster better collaboration between researchers, exchange of information on best practices, and dissemination of project results. Specifically, the OERD developed an internet tool to promote collaboration between funding applicants under the ecoENERGY Innovation Initiative (ecoEII) program. In addition, ecoEII requires proponents to prepare and implement a dissemination plan for each project and requires that they report on these activities annually.
4.4.3 Clean energy and energy efficient knowledge, technology, systems and approaches are tested and proved
The evaluation found evidence from both previous evaluations and supplemental data collection indicating that RD&D has contributed to the development of information tools for industry and other stakeholders, and provided a platform to advance the technology readiness levels (TRL) of clean energy technologies.
Scientific Knowledge
As shown in Table 8, examples of the Clean Energy S&T’s contribution to scientific knowledge was documented in all seven evaluations.
New Information Tools
As shown in Table 9, case studies revealed that the funded RD&D projects resulted in the development of new information tools.
Movement along the Innovation Chain
Representatives of OERD said NRCan is starting to use Technology Readiness Level (TRL) ratings, which are based on TRLs adapted from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), to estimate the extent to which RD&D projects have facilitated movement along the innovation chain.
The case studies conducted as part of the evaluation assessed the extent to which Clean Energy S&T funding helped move technologies along the following innovation chain:
The case studies found that three RD&D projects contributed to the movement of the technologies being developed from a TRL of 2 (concept formulated) to a TRL of 8 (system developed and tested/demonstrated in operational environment) or 9 (system proven). See Appendix B for more detail.

	
In the area of oil and gas, a project related to radar processing for ice hazard detection developed several algorithms to improve the accurate detection and tracking of small ice objects.
For the built environment, a project related to renewable cooling resulted in the development of a deep lake-source cooling system to provide air conditioning for office towers.
Another project in the area of built environment demonstrated the use of refrigeration system heat recovery to heat building space and water in supermarkets. It also demonstrated the use of integrated CO2 secondary loop refrigeration systems instead of refrigerants to cool refrigerators and freezers.


Other projects contributed to movement of technology along earlier points of the innovation chain.
	
In the area of sustainable bioenergy, a project related to bio-based high-value production from secondary biomass feedstock examined the use of metabolic engineering to produce biobutanol from methanol or methane and the use of polymeric membranes for gas purification and separation. For each project, the RD&D moved the TRL from 2 (concept formulated) to 3 (proof of concept).
For CESI, a project related to advanced blasting from comminution process optimization involved RD&D on rock hardness sensors for use in electronic blasting operations. This project moved the TRL from 1 (basic principles observed/reported) to 3 (proof of concept).
4.4.4 Increased Canadian Capacity for the Development and Implementation of Regulation, Codes and Standards for Clean Energy and Energy Efficient Technologies
The findings of the previous evaluations and the case studies conducted as part of this evaluation synthesis demonstrate that RD&D conducted through the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program has informed the development and/or revisions of codes, standards, and regulations.
Energy RD&D funded by IETS programs has made significant contributions to the development and implementation of 50 codes and standards, including for national building codes, microgrid interconnection, EnerGuide ratings systems, soil quality standards, and marine energy standards.
Representatives of OERD noted that the absence of codes and standards can be a significant barrier to the adoption of technology. In some cases, implementation of regulations, codes, and standards for new clean energy technologies is essential for moving technology along the innovation chain to demonstrations and commercialization. This is illustrated by the CTS Hydrogen and Fuel Cells (H2FC) project, whose Airports Demonstration had limited success in meeting project targets, partially because “the codes, standards and safety measures needed to support new technology deployment (especially in a sensitive, risk-averse commercial environment) were not in place” (NRCan, Evaluation of Clean Transportation Systems (CTS) Portfolio, 2013). Additionally, standards remove the barrier of one firm bearing the costs of adopting new technologies; it becomes something everyone has to do, and everyone bears the cost.
Almost all of the previous evaluations reported that the RD&D and governance activities contributed to the development of codes, standards, and regulations.
        
The Canadian Council for Ministers of the Environment (CCME) adapted the Bitumen Oil and Gas (BOG) Portfolio work to develop Canada-wide standards. Furthermore, western provinces and territories use BOG Portfolio outputs to advise their regular reviews and updates to standards and regulations. Finally, the BOG Portfolio also helped identify opportunities and threats in the oil sands and heavy oil market, and this information may be used by policymakers to develop provincial environment and emissions standards (NRCan, Evaluation of the Oil and Gas Sub-sub Activity, 2011).
            
The CEPG “has supported the development of a number of new codes and standards and influenced a variety of provincial and municipal regulations” (NRCan, Evaluation of NRCan’s Clean Electrical Power Generation (CEPG) S&T Sub-sub Activity , 2011). Furthermore, interviewees and case studies indicate that CEPG has helped shape provincial and Environment Canada environmental policies.
Project researchers provided consultations for federal bioenergy policy development and members of the Canadian Biomass Information Network (CBIN) worked with industry to develop standards for pyrolysis oil. Additionally, funded research influenced standards for residential wood heating appliances and informed the development of provincial policies that recognize energy crops as agricultural crops.
Built Environment RD&D contributed to the National Energy Code for Buildings and informed the development of three standards for the Canadian Standards Association (CSA). The Buildings and Communities Energy Technology (BCET) Program has reportedly influenced the creation or revision of 12 standards and 16 test procedures.
The Hydrogen and Fuel Cells (H2FC) projects contributed to the Canadian Hydrogen Installation Code, which, in turn, “was instrumental in developing the basis for a standardized regime for regulatory approval of hydrogen installations and equipment across Canada” (NRCan, Evaluation of Clean Transportation Systems (CTS) Portfolio (draft), 2013).




The case studies conducted as part of this evaluation also yielded several examples of how RD&D results have been used in the development of codes, standards, and regulations (refer to Appendix B for additional information).
    	
Development of Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (for particulate matter emissions produced from flaring), which informed the United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) emission measurement standards and Global Gas Flaring Reduction Partnership policies
Development of the Canadian Standard Association Code Z741-12 on Geological Storage of Carbon Dioxide
Provision of emissions data as input to emissions regulations development in Ontario (Ontario Ministry of Environment [MOE] Guidelines A-7 and A-9 and MOE Interim Wood Combustor Guidelines)
Provision of information to the BC Greenhouse Growers Association about the potential impact of the Greater Vancouver Regional District Agricultural Boilers Emission Regulation Bylaw No. 1098, 2008
Revision of a CSA code to allow the use of CO2 for refrigeration in supermarkets
4.4.5 Increased Adoption of Clean Energy and Energy Efficiency for the Competitiveness of Canadian Energy Producers and Users
Previous evaluations reported that companies supported by RD&D projects had entered technology markets with the potential for positive environmental outcomes. Long-term economic benefits are less clearly linked to these projects as linkages to the foundational RD&D become diluted as the technology is further developed. The OERD currently tracks projects once the funding period has ended in order to better measure long-term economic impacts.
Several evaluations cite examples of contributions to economic competitiveness through cost savings and economic benefits:
	
The oil and gas industry realized capital savings of between $50 million and $250 million as a result of the knowledge produced by the Strategic Priority (NRCan, advanced Separation Technologies (AST) Evaluation (OERD POL 1.1.3), 2006). Since the evaluation, OERD’s own case studies showed that paraffinic froth separation technology developed by Syncrude and Canmet energy was commercialised. This technology was one of the factors that contributed to the economic viability of the Jackpine Mine.
Industry partners indicated that their involvement in the Built Environment Strategic Priority increased their capacity and visibility, which helped promote and market their work. Along similar lines, some industry partners indicated their participation increased demand for their work (NRCan, Advanced Separation Technologies (AST) Evaluation (OERD POL 1.1.3), 2013). For example, evidence from the documentation review indicated that the developers of an eco-friendly ice rink refrigeration technology have since installed and commissioned systems for clients associated with the National Hockey League and the 2010 Vancouver Winter Olympic Games.
The Canadian Lightweight Materials Research Initiative (CLiMRI), the Canadian Transportation Fuel Cell Alliance (CTFCA), and Technology and Innovation (T&I)-TEAM projects generated a total of $9.9 million in actual sales from 2005 to 2008 (NRCan, Evaluation of NRCan’s Transportation S&T Sub-sub Activity, 2010).
Advanced Separation Technologies (AST) R&D is currently being used by some oil sands firms commercially. These improvements in the oil sands industry’s knowledge base have helped it realize savings in capital costs from $50 to $250 million (NRCan, Advanced Separation Technologies (AST) Evaluation (OERD POL 1.1.3), 2006).
For bioenergy, the previous evaluation indicated that many interviewees believe commercialization of biomass is occurring in Canada, as first generation technologies are well-established and many pulp and paper facilities already act as biorefineries (NRCan, Evaluation of the Sustainable Bioenergy Strategic Priority, 2012).
Stakeholders used the knowledge generated in the area of Built Environment to implement more energy-efficient building design and construction practices, promote and market their companies, and determine future research directions. According to the previous evaluation, from the period of 2008–09 to 2011–12, the following four products/systems were commercialized: Diagnostic Agent for Building Operation software (DABO); a zoned comfort system; a core sunlighting /solar canopy system; and advanced phase change material.
Some evidence of industry adoption for the Advanced Fuels and Technologies for Emissions Reduction (AFTER) Program exists such as three pre-commercial sensor prototypes that monitor engine performance to control emissions that are being tested by car manufacturers. Examples included a particulate matter (PM) sensor for monitoring PM from diesel engines; an Exhaust Cyclic Variability (ECV) combustion stability sensor; and an active particulate filter regeneration system.
The CEF evaluation noted that the federal R&D component resulted in two patents (the technologies were not identified). Additionally, for the small-scale demonstration component, nine projects involved discussions with potential adopters of the technology.


The case studies conducted as part of this evaluation provided further examples of how the RD&D funded through the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program has contributed to increased industry competitiveness:
	
The Sigma S6 radar processor, which is a key component of the FedNav/Enfotec IceNav Virtual Marine Radar System, is being used in two Canada Coast Guard (CCG) icebreakers. Additionally, many international vessels have adopted Rutter’s Ice Navigation system, indicating international sales in the period following federal funding for pre-commercial research.
Following the release of the Canadian Wind Energy Atlas (CWEA) in 2004 and AnemoScope in 2005, Canada’s installed wind power capacity increased by 50% in 2005 and 100% in 2006  Further, between 2003 and 2009, Canadian wind energy electricity generation capacity increased almost 10-fold, from 322 MW to 3,150 MW, thereby generating enough power for almost 1 million homes. Nonetheless, the growth of the industry cannot be directly attributed to the development of the CWEA and forecasting tools.
The Replacement of Fossil Fuels Used in Greenhouses with Energy from Biomass Residues project created a potential for new industries, products, and/or value-added opportunities with respect to wood residues, purpose-grown biomass resources (e.g., miscanthus, switchgrass), and agricultural waste feedstocks (e.g., grain chaff).
With the Combined Water and Energy Optimization (CWEO) project, the developed software tool was commercialized under the name CADSIM. The tool was successfully transferred to the Tembec Skookumchuck mill. Additionally, FPInnovation has conducted some preliminary tests of the software in its mills. The CWEO software tool could potentially provide enhanced market opportunities to industries other than pulp and paper, such as petroleum refining.
The previous evaluations found the extent of adoption varies to some extent across the research areas, with the Built Environment, and Oil and Gas research areas claiming some market success for technologies and the other research areas reporting little market penetration of technologies.
4.4.6 Lowered GHG emissions
There are a wide range of examples of the Clean Energy S&T Sub-Program’s contributions to GHG emissions reductions. Evidence from previous evaluations, case studies and other methodologies highlighted specific, measurable impacts on GHG reduction. At this point, the evidence is largely based on specific projects rather than program-level data as capturing data on GHG reductions depends on the deployment and uptake of specific technologies. Further, there was limited capacity to measure this outcome over the ten-year period under review. However, the OERD is taking steps under new reporting requirements to collect and report environmental benefits on a systematic basis.
Previous evaluations frequently noted it was too early in the development cycle to accurately measure the environmental impacts of funded projects.  Nonetheless, previous evaluations, in particular the TEAM program and CEF program, highlighted specific, measurable impacts on GHG reduction:
	
As part of the evaluation of TEAM, the System for Measurement and Reporting of Technology (SMART), was “developed to provide a rigorous, consistent, transparent and cost effective means of planning, evaluating & measuring technical performance and GHG emission reductions for demonstration projects”. At a cost of $1.3 million, SMART assessments were developed for 65 of the 135 demonstration projects funded through TEAM. Analysis of 49 SMART Project Master Plans (PMPs) estimated that these projects would contribute to reducing GHG emission by 525,210 tCO2e/year (OERD, TEAM Program Wrap Up Presentation #3 SMART & GHG Assessment Framework, 2011).
The 2009 Built Environment evaluation concluded that the 11 completed TEAM projects will reduce GHGs by more than 12,000 tonnes per year (NRCan, Built Environment Evaluation, 2009).
Estimates from the CEF evaluation suggested that the two large-scale CEF projects, Enhance Energy’s Alberta Carbon Trunk Line (ACTL) and Shell’s Quest project, should be able to sequester approximately 2.2 megatons of CO2 per year. The small scale demonstration projects have also resulted in environmental impacts through energy generated by renewables totaling 3.7 million kWh/year, peak demand reduction of 2,330 kW, energy saved totaling 18.2 million kWh/year, displaced volume of diesel of 13,800 L and decreased NO2


Estimates suggested substantial GHG reductions from the Canadian Lightweight Materials Research Initiative (CLiMRI), Transportation Technology and Innovation (T&I), the Canadian Transportation Fuel Cell Alliance (CTFCA), and TEAM projects. These estimates represent a combination of forecasting and actual emission reduction, resulting in a final estimate of 20,660 metric tonnes of CO2 emission reduction over a five-year period (NRCan, 2010). The subsequent CTS evaluation further estimated Hydrogen and Fuel Cells (H2FC) emissions reductions at approximately 530 tons/year (NRCan, Evaluation of Clean Transportation Systems (CTS) Portfolio, 2013). As shown in the appendices, the case studies conducted as part of this evaluation also provided some insight into the potential of RD&D to contribute to lowering GHG emissions, with the following examples:
	
The primary motivation for the research for Radar Processing for Ice Hazard Detection was to increase the safety of marine transportation, the radar technologies being developed are intended to improve the navigational capabilities of marine vessels. By improving the navigational capabilities of marine vessels, which may improve fuel efficiency, ice detection radar may indirectly contribute to reduction of GHG emissions.
For the Particulate Matter (PM) Emissions from Flares project, providing industry and government regulators with a reliable and accurate measurement tools for the quantification of black carbon emissions will support the development and implementation of informed GHG reduction policies and targets, the enforcement of regulations, and the management of PM emissions.
The Technologies Beyond Anaerobic Digestion (AD), Gasification and Pyrolysis for Bio-based High-Value Production from Secondary Biomass Feedstock project has the potential to benefit the environment, as it promotes use of biofuels as a substitute for non-renewable fossil fuels and potentially reduces GHG/CAC emissions by diverting biomass waste toward energy production. To illustrate this potential, project representatives from the previous case study stated that if the Canadian pulp and paper sector treated only 30% of the organic component of total solid waste, the municipal sector could reduce its GHG emissions by 10 million tons of CO2.
For the Advanced Blasting from Comminution Process Optimization project, the 2011 case study noted that “preliminary results showed that electronic blasts increased rock fragmentation by 15% to 20%, which in turn reduced energy consumption associated with excavation, transport, and crushing by 5% to 10%. The electronic detonator technology was subsequently adopted by Rocky Lake Quarry in April 2006. Experimental work at Quebec Cartier Mines (QCM) then began in October of that year, with modeling studies indicating a 5% GHG reduction potential for QCM.”
Presently, the impact of the Deep Lake Water Cooling project on GHGs is estimated to be the elimination of 145 tonnes of nitrogen oxide and 318 tonnes of sulfur oxide annually.
The High Pressure Compressed Hydrogen Fuelling System project had the potential to impact GHG emissions, based on products developed from its findings. This impact would have been the result of the use of lower cost, high-pressure hydrogen fuelling systems that would facilitate the deployment of high pressure on-board storage tanks as a means to improve the range of fuel cell vehicles. However, since the project did not proceed beyond the prototype stage, no impact on GHG emissions has occurred.


Document review has provided information from OERD’s internal assessment of project GHG emission reductions (or projected reductions). The project related reductions are as follows:
	
Waste to Energy Systems: Transition from natural gas to syngas reduced greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 12,000 tonnes per year; the equivalent of taking more than 8,600 midsize cars off the road
Heat Recovery for Ice Rinks:: By 2014, the ECO Chill installations had realized more than 350,000 tonnes of CO2 emission reductions which are equivalent to removing, for one year, 80,000 cars from the road, each driving 20,000 km in that year
Drake Landing Solar Community: Reduction of 5 tonnes GHG emissions per home per year (260 tonnes/yr.)
Deep Lake Water Cooling: It reduced CO2 emissions by 79,000 tonnes per year - the equivalent of 20,000 fewer mid-size cars on the streets of Toronto.
Shell Quest Carbon Capture and Storage Project: Will reduce direct emissions from the Scotford upgrader by 35% or 1MT CO2/yr. (256,000 cars off the road)
Shell Enhance Oil Sands Froth Treatment: Improves energy efficiency of bitumen production by 10%, reducing GHGs by 40,000 tonnes/yr. (10,000 cars off the road)
Richmond Energy Garden and Composting Centre: Expected to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by about 9000 tonnes of CO2 equivalent each year (2,300 cars off the road)
Wasdell Falls Hydro Power Project: 8.5 million kilowatt hours a year of emission-free electricity, which is enough to power 1,200 homes.
Saskatchewan Boundary Dam: reduce GHG emissions by approximately 1MT/yr. (256,000 cars off the road)


Generally, stakeholders (including representatives of OERD) noted that measuring the Clean Energy S&T Sub-Program’s actual contributions to GHG emissions reductions, especially for R&D projects, has not always been productive or even possible. The amount of GHG emissions reductions resulting from projects depends on the eventual deployment and uptake of the technology being developed. Recently, however, estimates of GHG reduction potential attributable to the RD&D have been required in reporting, for example in the ecoEII program. The OERD now requires each project proponent provide estimates of GHG reductions in order to establish estimates of GHG reductions resulting from OERD-funded projects.  Although the information was preliminary and was not available for validation during the data collection phase, the OERD provided current examples of estimated direct and indirect emissions reductions in tonnes per year. At present, for example, the OERD estimates that past energy technology programs will directly reduce GHG emissions by up to 5.05 Mt/year by 2019, with the potential for further reductions with commercialization and market adoption of technologies developed through the program.   These tables are available in Annex H.
4.4.7 Other outcomes and unintended outcomes
Three of the previous evaluations identified unintended outcomes resulting from program activities. Additionally, the case studies noted that some of the RD&D projects are expected to contribute to other outcomes aside from GHG emissions reductions, many of which are environmental in nature (see Table 10).
4.5 Performance – Economy and Efficiency
Evaluation question: What are the internal and external factors that have facilitated or hindered the achievement of the intended outcomes of the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program?
4.5.1 Internal and External Factors
Interviewees and the previous evaluations identified a wide range of positive factors as supporting the achievement of intended outcomes.
Long-term commitment to RD&D. The 2010 transportation evaluation indicated there is a need for long-term private and public commitment given long lead times necessary for technological change and skill development. It concluded that the Hydrogen Energy Economy (HEE) Program provided the long-term stability “required for its partners to plan their shorter-term projects” (NRCan, Evaluation of NRCan’s Transportation S&T Sub-sub Activity, 2010).
Leveraging of program funding. All seven program evaluations documented leveraging from partners (over 1000 partners in total). Sustainable Bioenergy ($2.91 for every $1) and CEF ($2.10 for every $1) were the two most successful programs in this area. Further, more recent, analysis of financial data was conducted during the Synthesis review. The financial data included additional partner contributions under the CEF program that were not captured in the original evaluation, as well as recent ecoEII data. These recent figures (documented in Table 11 below) showed increased program success in leveraging funds ($3.90 for every $1).
NRCan expertise. The CEPG and AST evaluations found that NRCan’s technical expertise, program management skills, professionalism, and reputation had a positive influence on performance. Additionally, the 2013 transportation evaluation noted that NRCan CanmetENERGY provided modelling expertise and that Canmet-MTL provided access to computational methods, models, and expertise to help designers test the performance of new automotive materials under varying conditions.
NRCan research facilities and equipment. The CEPG evaluation stated that NRCan’s specialized facilities and equipment are important for developing partnerships with stakeholders and transferring knowledge to beneficiaries. Likewise, the 2013 transportation evaluation identified Canmet-MTL as providing access to pilot scale testing facilities.
NRCan participation in international committees. NRCan, through its participation in international committees, can leverage existing relationships to support other RD&D work. The 2013 transportation evaluation noted that NRCan was able to take advantage of its existing relationships with the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and Department of the Environment (DOE), developed through the Advanced Fuels and Transportation Emissions Program (AFTER) and Electric Mobility (EM) Program planning activities. In particular, the EM Program was easily able to extend existing discussions to include plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs). The EM Program was also able to become involved in the International Energy Agency (IEA) transportation-related initiatives due to Canada’s existing long-term involvement with it.
Interviewees and the previous evaluations identified the negative factors as impeding the achievement of intended outcomes
Uneven and declining funding. Interviewees and several of the previous evaluations indicated that demand for funding exceeded the resources available and that 5-year funding cycles are disruptive to the monitoring of long-term RD&D projects. This issue was exacerbated by PERD funding, which is not dependent on 5 year funding cycles, and declined by over 50% during the period under review.  In the CEPG evaluation, many interviewees emphasized a need for additional funding for “testing, demonstration, and field trials to examine the cost-effectiveness, reliability and overall performance of CEPG technologies” (NRCan, 2011a). The 2013 transportation evaluation noted sharp declines in funding (approximately 50% decline over the past two years of the program), which “affected the extent to which the Program’s original priorities and objectives could be pursued” (NRCan, Evaluation of Clean Transportation Systems (CTS) Portfolio, 2013).
Lack of a Canadian clean energy regulatory framework in certain technology areas. Some of the previous evaluations mentioned that a lack of clarity and direction around regulations and strategy may contribute to reduced private sector investment in new technology, reduced coordination among stakeholders and government, increased cost and time for deployment of new technology, and unfocused research that does not meet the needs of decision-makers and end-users .
Weak state of the macro-economy. Interviewees said the economic recession of 2008-09 impacted industry’s ability to contribute financing to/engage in RD&D projects and adopt new technologies. The 2013 transportation evaluation noted that slower-than-expected rate of development of fuel cell technology, limited Canadian industry capacity, financial challenges facing the automatic sector, and general economic conditions over the past five years have impeded progress.
Staffing limitations. Interviewees noted challenges related to replacing staff that vacated positions before the end of projects, challenges related to attracting highly qualified personnel (e.g., not being able to offer research assistants in term positions longer-term employment), and hiring restrictions during pre-election periods. These factors generally did not affect outcomes but were perceived to have affected the efficiency of project delivery.
Intellectual property rights. The CEPG evaluation noted that constraints arising from issues around limited access and ownership of intellectual property have led to project delays and withdrawal of project partners. Intellectual property issues become increasingly important as R&D moves from materials-related projects to developing prototype reactor systems and other technologies. The 2013 transportation evaluation indicated that relations with the Canadian electric power sector have been hard to establish as utilities are protective of their data. These information constraints create barriers to the development and commercialization of technical change.
Limitations on the cost-effectiveness of clean energy alternatives. The CEPG evaluation noted that a key factor limiting uptake of new technologies is that they are not yet proved as being as cost-effective as traditional technologies. Therefore, the evaluation suggested that incentive programs are required to increase adoption. Likewise, the 2013 transportation evaluation found uptake of hydrogen and fuel cell technologies was slower than anticipated and attributed this, in part, to lower cost-effectiveness.
Regulatory and permitting barriers. The CEPG evaluation reported that “regulatory and permitting barriers have made deployment of new renewable technologies difficult and costly” (NRCan, Evaluation of NRCan’s Clean Electrical Power Generation (CEPG) S&T Sub-sub Activity, 2011). The evaluation attributed some of these barriers to a lack of codes or standards for new technologies that are unfamiliar to regulators and inspectors. Further, the evaluation noted that provincial regulatory regimes have made utilities hesitant to adopt new clean and renewable energy generation and integrate them into the electricity grid because of the need to keep rates low for consumers and maintain energy supply reliability. The CEF evaluation drew similar conclusions. Interviewees noted that the absence of codes and standards can be a significant barrier to the adoption of technology. For example, a CEF small-scale demonstration project involving a new type of heat pump system noted ‘regulatory issues’ delayed the project by more than two years. As the Canadian Standards Association (CSA) test standard for heat pumps stops at zero degrees Celsius, the new demonstration system could not be tested or approved at the sub-zero temperatures in which the system was designed to operate.
Interviewees also identified the following challenges:
Governments in other countries expressed interest in collaborating/partnering with the federal government; however, the short-term nature, and limited amount of available funding has limited Canada’s ability to engage with them.
It is becoming increasing difficult to carry forward funding into future fiscal years, which makes it challenging to run programs efficiently and effectively. It makes it difficult to ensure the right funds are allocated to the right projects at the right time.
Some provinces have unexpectedly introduced policies that counteract the RD&D being conducted (e.g., banning the use of bio-residue in power plants)
Evaluation question: Are the activities within each clean energy S&T funding program the most economic and efficient means of making progress towards the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program’s intended outcomes?
4.5.2 Performance Reporting, Leveraging and Program Design
Historically, performance reporting and financial tracking were areas that required attention in the OERD programs. As a result, the Synthesis was limited in answering questions of efficiency and economy over the ten year period as financial tracking was not consistent, particularly prior to 2008, and could not support a quantitative analysis of cost (e.g. the cost to administer project funding, the cost per new technology developed). However, using available information, the Synthesis did note the OERD  funding is effectively leveraging R&D investment from partners. Steps to improve financial tracking were also highlighted during data collection.  There was also evidence of process efficiency within the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program, the OERD has reduced the number of RD&D portfolios it is managing and it has begun using standardized proposal review and selection processes.
Performance Reporting
Over time, the previous evaluations noted various concerns about the performance reporting conducted for the research areas forming the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program, including the following examples:
	
Historically, performance measurement and reporting efforts were raised as an issue of concern as measurement efforts focused on technical outputs and immediate outcomes, did not  make linkages to higher level outcomes, , and “[were] inadequate to effectively demonstrate achievement of expected outcomes” (NRCan, 2011a). It was noted that “it is not always clear — when reviewing annual reports over the six-year period — the progress and key results that have been achieved for the specific fiscal year” (NRCan, Evaluation of Sustainable Bioenergy Strategic Priority, Case Study Report, 2011).
Although the Sustainable Bioenergy Strategic Priority had recently developed a spreadsheet to record data from submitted projects, it was difficult to determine how project results and the resulting technologies have been used. (NRCan, Evaluation of the Sustainable Bioenergy Strategic Priority, 2012).


In response to the previous evaluations, the OERD has made several attempts to develop systematic performance measurement tools. OERD is continuing its efforts to improve its performance monitoring processes.
	
Interviewees indicated that for future funding mechanisms, the OERD is including Technology Readiness Level (TRL) ratings as part its performance monitoring requirements. This information will help determine the extent to which the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program is facilitating movement along the innovation chain.
Interviewees noted that, as part of the CEF, ecoEII, and future funding mechanisms, the OERD is asking some projects to provide 5-years of reporting following the end of the funding agreement. This information will help support analysis of the extent to which the RD&D has contributed to the development, commercialization, and adoption of clean energy technologies.


Previous evaluations, encountered difficulties obtaining project-level financial information for the funding mechanisms forming the Clean Energy S&T Sub-program.
	
Although the individual funding initiatives maintained records of project funding, it was difficult to track individual projects across funding programs.
Funding levels included in annual reports did not always match funding levels reported in project financial databases and actual expenditures were typically not included in annual reports and project databases.
In cases where projects were funded by two programs, funding was double-counted; funding sources were not clearly labelled; and funding received via subcontracts with OGDs was difficult to track.
The available financial data did not include information on administrative costs or capital and operational expenditures.
It was difficult to calculate ratios of management costs to project costs as program “management” activities had not been clearly and/or consistently defined for each of the program areas.


Due to changes in the design of the program, the OERD did not have an aggregated reporting structure and it was not possible to provide a complete10-year funding history for PERD at the project level..
Despite the above-mentioned challenges, using the SMART protocol, the TEAM evaluation determined that, based on Phase III PMPs, the TEAM investment per tCO2e reduced/year was $78.70 (OERD, TEAM Program Wrap Up Presentation #3 SMART & GHG Assessment Framework, 2011).
Leveraging through funding from partners
Financial information collected during the Synthesis review indicated that government investment in clean energy and energy efficient research had been leveraged successfully through partner funding. Excluding PERD, the financial data available during the Synthesis indicated approximately $3.5 billion leveraged from a federal investment of $900 million.
Table 411 provides overall program funding for core RD&D programs covered by the Synthesis. The table includes both NRCan funding, as well as partner funding (both other government departments and other non-federal partners). Overall, excluding expenditures under the PERD program, the figures indicate approximately $3.5 billion leveraged on $900 million in federal investment (or approximately $3.90 for every $1 invested).
Source: information provided by OERD
Information provided by OERD indicated that the total cost of RD&D projects funded under PERD between 2003-04 and 2012-13 was $541M. Information on the contribution of PERD partners was not available at the time of analysis. PERD’s data was therefore not included in Table 11; however OERD is developing a database to report this information in the future.  Given the key role played by leveraged funds from other partners in achieving results, on-going monitoring of leveraged funds will be important for demonstrating program efficiency.
Program process and design
Senior management and representatives of OERD indicated that grouping of portfolios (RD&D areas) has been reviewed and revised. They noted that, over the past 10 years, the number of portfolios has been reduced from about 9 to 3, a process which is leading to efficiency in program management. Senior management and representatives of OERD expressed the view that the proposal review and project selection processes have an appropriate balance between rigour and efficiency. They used standardized assessment criteria and discussions on RD&D funding were made through a clearly defined interdepartmental governance system (including interdepartmental DG and ADM committees).
5.0 Conclusion and Recommendations
5.1 Conclusion
There is a strong rationale for continuing NRCan involvement in RD&D given the importance of maintaining Canada’s international leadership in promoting the responsible use of energy.
The governance structure built on partnership (leveraging of program funding) and collaboration with federal S&T departments, contributed to the production of well-known impacts. The delivery mechanisms that integrate internal and external research expertise and the proven long-standing funding mechanism (PERD) embedded into the other funding mechanisms, helped to ensure that programming responded to climate change and other environmental concerns, and contributed to Canada’s environmental and economic sustainability.
The evaluation synthesis found evidence of noticeable progress made towards the development and dissemination of scientific knowledge. The uptake of the developed knowledge and technology was qualitatively demonstrated, and the related challenges of performance measurement are currently being improved through the implementation of the ecoEII funding mechanism. The RD&D projects examined as part of this evaluation demonstrated collaboration and provided evidence of the contribution of the sub-program to the development and/or the revision of codes, standards, and regulations. In addition, it was found that RD&D conducted through this Sub-program has the potential to lead to enhanced competitiveness for Canadian companies. The completed clean energy RD&D projects analyzed were assessed to directly or indirectly have potential for the reduction of GHG emissions, or to carry other environmental benefits.
The information required to address issues of efficiency and economy for RD&D projects was limited to C-base funding mechanisms and for PERD after 2007-08. The Clean Energy S&T Sub-program is overseen by committees and working groups composed of federal departments’ senior managers who are assisted by team members with established expertise recognized by both internal and external partners. This process appears to be efficient and is producing the expected results. The evaluation identified this environment as a positive factor that allows an efficient and economical production of planned outputs, and drives the achievement of intended outcomes.
Recommendations
The objective of the Synthesis is to establish an easily accessible base of knowledge and to identify any outstanding gaps in program design and implementation. This knowledge base can inform program management on general trends noted in previous evaluations and identify key topics for future evaluations. The following recommendations are therefore meant to emphasize areas that should be considered in future programming.
Appendix A: Clean Energy S&T Sub-program Logic Model
Source: (NRCan, 2013a, p. 28)
Appendix B – Overview of case study projects
Appendix C- Use of RD&D results to inform development of codes, standards, and regulations
Appendix D- Collaborations to develop new technologies
Appendix E - Industry competitiveness
Appendix F - Linkages with other research
Appendix G - GHG emissions reductions
Appendix H - GHG EMISSION REDUCTIONS PARTIALLY ATTRIBUTABLE TO GOC/NRCAN/IETS ENERGY S&T PROGRAMS TO 2030
