Summary of the Evaluation of the West Coast Energy Infrastructure Initiative
Objective of the Evaluation
The objective of the evaluation was to assess the relevance, efficiency and effectiveness of the West Coast Energy Infrastructure (WCEI) Initiative delivered between 2014-15 and 2018-19.
Program Description
The purpose of the WCEI Initiative was to ensure that federal engagement with Indigenous communities on energy infrastructure on the West Coast of British Columbia (BC) resulted in concrete actions and investments that addressed Indigenous priorities. This was a direct response to recommendations made by Douglas Eyford, Special Federal Representative on West Coast Energy Infrastructure. The WCEI Initiative was not responsible for project-specific consultations (e.g., liquefied natural gas projects or pipeline expansion projects), as these were advanced by Natural Resources Canada’s (NRCan) Major Projects Management Office (MPMO), the National Energy Board (NEB), or the Canadian Environmental Assessment Agency (now Impact Assessment Agency of Canada [IAAC]).
The WCEI was a federal horizontal initiative involving four federal departments, led by NRCan. The initiative was comprised of four elements:
Strategic regional presence within NRCan through the establishment of the Major Partnerships Office – West (now Indigenous Partnerships Office – West [IPO-West]) in Vancouver, BC;
Skills and Partnership Fund - West Coast Energy (SPF-WCE) within Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC);
Strategic Partnerships Initiative - West Coast Energy (SPI-WCE), administered by Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada (now Indigenous Services Canada [ISC]); and
Cumulative Effects Monitoring Initiative (CEMI), led by Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC).
Evaluation Scope
The evaluation was completed in January 2019 and covered the period from 2014-15 to 2017-18. Total funding for the initiative was $103.67 million (M). The evaluation was conducted in accordance with the Treasury Board
Policy on Results
. It consists of an analysis based on the findings of the IPO-West evaluation conducted by NRCan, the SPI-WCE technical report done by ISC/CIRNAC, and the SPF-WCE technical report by ESDC. In addition, program information about CEMI was collected through documents and interviews.
The primary limitation of the evaluation is the limited number of interviews conducted with Indigenous respondents (11 interviews for IPO-West, interviews with members from 10 communities for SPI-WCE, and 2 interviews for CEMI).
Evaluation Findings
The evaluation of WCEI found that there is an ongoing need to support Indigenous participation in energy infrastructure development projects, which includes the provision of skills and tools. As energy infrastructure projects raise environmental concerns, communities continue to express an ongoing need to obtain baseline data, and monitor their effects, to inform discussions and decision-making on energy infrastructure development.
WCEI was generally aligned with federal priorities, roles, and responsibilities, although questions were raised as to whether the WCEI was well aligned with Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada’s mandate, and views about the effectiveness of the governance of WCEI were mixed. The horizontal governance structure facilitated information sharing and strategic alignment, however, many government respondents were unclear as to the exact role of IPO-West and the effectiveness of the single-window approach. It was noted that there were delays and challenges associated with decision-making processes to deliver grant and contribution (G&C) funding. All components of the WCEI were under-budget due to delayed hiring, delayed energy infrastructure projects, and the time required to build effective relationships with Indigenous communities.
Through WCEI, Indigenous communities were engaged in energy infrastructure. Indigenous priorities and interests were identified, including early and ongoing engagement outside of the regulatory process, increased access to jobs and economic growth, fish habitat restoration and environmental stewardship. Groups with diverse views and interests worked together and Indigenous participation in energy projects increased. Indigenous partners who participated in the evaluation raised concerns that if WCEI is downscaled or interrupted, relationships may be negatively impacted.
Recommendations
The Evaluation has resulted in four (4) recommendations.
Recommendation 1
Recommendation 2
Recommendation 3
Recommendation 4