Summary of the Evaluation of Trans Mountain Expansion (TMX) Phase IV Coordination
About TMX Phase IV Coordination
In June 2019, the Government of Canada (GOC) approved the Trans Mountain Expansion (TMX) project. This decision included a commitment to implement eight accommodation measures and responses to 16 recommendations of the Canadian Energy Regulator designed to mitigate or avoid potential effects associated with TMX and to build the capacity of and long-term relationships with Indigenous peoples. The GOC allocated a total of $31.6M to support the federal government’s post-decision (Phase IV) administration of TMX.
While each responsible department remains accountable for the delivery of its own accommodations and recommendations, Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) was allocated $17.5M of this total to lead the whole-of-government coordination across these initiatives. Partner departments - i.e., Fisheries and Oceans Canada (DFO), Canadian Coast Guard (CCG), Transport Canada (TC) and Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC) - have also established their own TMX Secretariats to support departmental coordination.
What The Evaluation Found
Planned  vs Actual Delivery
We found that the GOC has established suitable governance mechanisms to coordinate the  implementation and delivery of the TMX Phase IV activities. While the  organizational structure and titles have changed over time to account for  evolving roles, NRCan’s two key  coordination structures have been mostly operating as planned since 2019.  However, the workload related to TMX  coordination is not perceived as sustainable and partner departments report  having underestimated the level of effort that would be required for  coordination and reporting.
Effectiveness  of NRCan’s Strategic Policy and Coordination Team (NRCan-SPC)
NRCan-SPC was responsible for supporting  oversight and coordination among federal partners, and for tracking progress on  implementation of TMX Phase IV. We found that NRCan-SPC has created effective  tools and processes to support federal coordination. Key governance bodies are  well supported. While partner departments do not always agree on decisions,  NRCan-SPC is perceived to be open and transparent in working to resolve  cross-cutting issues. NRCan-SPC has also helped facilitate and expedite  regulatory approvals. Nevertheless, federal representatives perceived  inefficiencies in the processes used to create and update coordination tools  and improvements are required to ease the flow of information, including for  external communications.
Effectiveness  of NRCan’s Phase IV Partnership Office (NRCan-P4PO)
NRCan-P4PO was  responsible for facilitating coordination among federal partners and tracking  progress on implementation of accommodation measures and other custom  commitments to Indigenous groups. We found that NRCan-P4PO has been mostly  effective in this coordination role. It has played an innovative role helping  partner departments navigate complexity, address more sensitive issues  impacting a small number of Indigenous groups, and providing a coordinated federal  voice on whole-of-government issues.
NRCan-P4PO also  fulfilled its role for initial outreach to the 129 Indigenous groups with  specific eligibility to access to some or all TMX Phase IV accommodation  measures. However, its engagement strategy was finalized relatively late in the  implementation of Phase IV and key communications products (e.g., P4PO  newsletter and TMX Indigenous Portal) were either delayed or underused. Related  performance metrics and tracking systems do not provide information on the meaningfulness  of engagement.
Respondents from (a  limited sample of) Indigenous groups generally rated the effectiveness of  NRCan-P4PO’s engagement as “poor” to “fair”. Despite a few successful attempts  to triage and streamline the GOC’s engagement, NRCan-P4PO has not fully  fulfilled its intended role as a “single window” for Indigenous engagement. For  various valid reasons, partner departments have continued to develop or  maintain their own relationships and are interacting directly with Indigenous  groups. Indigenous respondents also perceived room to improve skillsets for  engagement (e.g., tailored communications) and reported challenges with  building and maintaining relationships, exacerbated by frequent federal staff  turnover. As a result, the majority of federal and Indigenous respondents  agreed that the federal approach to engagement on TMX has not been effective in  reducing engagement fatigue. NRCan-P4PO recognized this issue and has made  attempts to respond, but there is room for further improvement.
Facilitating  and Impeding Factors
TMX is a high  profile, complex and time-sensitive major project for which GOC post-decision  activity is unprecedented in scale or scope. Phase IV implementation was also  adversely affected by several unforeseen events (e.g., COVID-19 and major  natural disasters). While the evaluation found issues in the efficiency of  processes and achievement of results, federal coordination on TMX has been  reasonably effective in consideration of the broader context of the challenges  faced in implementation.
NRCan’s  effectiveness was impeded by the federal decision-making and accountability  regime for TMX. Specifically, NRCan was given the mandate and accountability  for coordination but does not have the authority to direct the actions of partner  departments. Regardless, the existence of a coordination function, facilitated  by the quality of support from NRCan and senior management, was a factor  critical to successes achieved.
Ongoing  Need for TMX Phase IV Coordination
The construction of  the twinned TMX pipeline is currently expected to be completed in 2023. The  evaluation found general agreement on the continued need for GOC coordination,  at least as long as TMX Phase IV accommodation measures are still being implemented  and/or construction is ongoing.
The coordination function’s location is not perceived to be important provided it  continues to ensure the Crown’s commitments made during Phase III consultations  and Phase IV are being met. That said, there is strong support for maintaining  NRCan-SPC. For senior managers, the key question relates not to continued need  for NRCan-SPC but rather the resource levels required to sustain oversight and  coordination.
However, the  evaluation found that the role of NRCan-P4PO could be reduced now that  accommodations are in progress and partner departments have built their own  direct relationships with Indigenous groups.
Lessons  Learned
The evaluation  identified the areas for improvement that could support ongoing delivery of TMX  Phase IV (e.g., clearer delineation of roles and responsibilities, increased  sustainability of federal workload, improved coordination for Indigenous  engagement). The evaluation also identified lessons related to post-decision  engagement on major projects, as well as a need to manage the precedent set by  TMX and further advance reconciliation with Indigenous peoples. Corporate  knowledge built during the implementation of TMX Phase IV should be preserved  and related lessons learned from current and past program reviews should be  reviewed collectively and shared across the federal government to inform future  initiatives.
About the Evaluation
The evaluation examined the extent to which TMX Phase IV coordination structures were implemented as planned and could demonstrate progress towards intended results. It also assessed the ongoing relevance of NRCan’s TMX Phase IV coordination and identified lessons learned from early implementation that could be used to improve future performance. The scope of the evaluation focused on NRCan’s lead in coordination from June 2019 to December 2021, with consideration for the role of partner departments in facilitating intended results. The scope excluded the performance of specific accommodations or CER responses linked to TMX and activities that took place during earlier phases of TMX (e.g., Phase III consultations). NRCan’s Evaluation Division collaborated with partner departments to design and complete this evaluation. The evaluation was conducted in accordance with the Treasury Board (TB) Policy on Results (2016) and related Standards on Evaluation.