Question: Is there an ongoing need for the two Sub-activity components?
Yes, there is an ongoing need for both Sub-activity components. Like many other countries around the globe, Canada has increased its focus on cost-effective risk reduction and loss mitigation efforts in response to rising hazard risks (both physical and financial) due to factors such as aging and deteriorating infrastructure and climate change. 
A number of sources confirmed an increased need for hazard monitoring, emergency management, risk reduction and loss mitigation activities, noting that proactive measures and mobilized efforts can provide significant and effective protection from natural hazards. PSG and CHIS stakeholders confirmed a need for a proactive, as opposed to reactive, federal government stance on geohazards research and emergency management and noted the important role of geohazards research in facilitating resource/economic development in a safe and environmentally responsible manner.
The evidence suggests that NRCan, through this Sub-activity, maintains unique and necessary scientific, technical and monitoring capabilities related to various natural and human-made hazards under its mandate in the Canadian context. The evaluation also found that PSG and CHIS addressed stakeholders’ needs by making important contributions to a diverse range of Canadian international organizations.
All lines of evidence confirmed there was a continued need for the Sub-activity, as PSG and CHIS were the principal sources of research, knowledge, guidelines, tools, analysis, monitoring and alerts in the Canadian context for the hazards covered under their respective mandates.
Continued risk: The risks posed by earthquakes, tsunamis, volcanoes and space weather are fundamentally present as extremely high-cost, low-probability events in Canada. This low probability leads to decreased attention paid to these events by most sectors of society, making it difficult for planning and loss mitigation work to move fully forward.  Increasing awareness of the risks posed by hazards events is paramount to the success of the Sub-Activity. The risk of these hazards continues to rise due to factors such as the increasing scale of human activities in hazard prone areas, obsolete infrastructure and a growing dependence on technologies susceptible to hazards.  Further, based on a 2010 Institute of Catastrophic Loss Reduction report, public infrastructure in Canada was deemed highly vulnerable following decades of underinvestment and might be severely challenged by a large earthquake. Additionally, increased demand for space weather forecasting has resulted from ever-growing technology developments, thus increasing the number of critical technological infrastructure and systems potentially affected by this hazard.
Historically, among meteorological and hydrological hazards, floods were the most frequently occurring natural hazard in Canada. According to the Canadian Risk and Hazards Network (CRHNet), a significant earthquake is perhaps Canada’s greatest potential natural disaster. A high percentage of urban infrastructure was constructed prior to the introduction of modern seismic construction provisions. Therefore, the CRHNet recommends that the vulnerability of critical older infrastructure such as hospitals, schools and bridges should be addressed before a major earthquake occurs.
Potential for financial loss: The financial cost of natural hazards in Canada is estimated to be large and increasing steadily due to aging infrastructure, increased development in hazard prone areas, climate change and low levels of personal preparedness. According to the Insurance Bureau of Canada, the 1998 ice storm in eastern Canada resulted in $5.4 billion in personal losses, the 1996 Saguenay flood cost $1.6 billion, and the 1997 Red River Valley flood cost $815 million in losses. Furthermore, geomagnetic disturbances could interfere with the operations of infrastructure systems (such as power grids, pipelines, phone cables and railway systems) and, in extreme instances, cause blackouts, again with related financial losses.
Proactive and coordinated approach: Organizations involved in emergency management globally agreed that a proactive approach, such as conducting risk reduction and loss mitigation research and implementing associated measures before hazards occurred, could significantly reduce the extent of damage from hazards. For example, Japan has had high levels of earthquake resilience. After the magnitude 9.0 earthquake in 2011, Japan was able to restore more than 90% of its power supply in ten days, 90% of its telephone lines in two weeks and 90% of its cellular base stations in 19 days.
Japan has strict building codes and has spent billions of dollars to develop the most advanced structural technology against earthquakes and tsunamis. Japan has also spent an estimated $500 million to build a sophisticated early warning system for earthquakes, which, according to experts, helped save millions of lives and mitigated the damage from the 2011 earthquake and tsunami.
Other countries around the world have adopted emergency management (mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery) policies and measures that tend to reflect country specific factors, such as the prevalence of different types of hazards, political environments and socioeconomic factors. A review of the emergency management practices conducted during the evaluation for four jurisdictions (Australia, New Zealand, Switzerland and the United States) highlighted targeted efforts in areas such as hazard research, disaster-resilient design of critical infrastructure, stakeholder engagement and coordination, hazard information dissemination, public education and outreach, active community involvement, and community capacity building. The efforts of some of these jurisdictions might have been somewhat more extensive than those implemented in Canada to date in some areas, particularly in terms of stakeholder coordination and active community involvement.
An Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction (ICLR) report Canadians at risk: Our exposure to natural hazards emphasized that implementing a proactive approach would involve developing a better understanding of natural hazards in Canada, building on initiatives such as the Canadian Disaster Database and the Canadian Risk and Hazards Network (CRHNet). The ICLR also noted that better data on the costs and benefits of mitigation activities were still needed to allow communities to identify the range of specific hazards they face and assess their level of vulnerability and risk. According to the report, data collection is uncoordinated across many departments and agencies; therefore, there was limited information on what cost savings might have resulted from such efforts. The report further identified case studies from Asia and North America where local communities, all levels of government and non-governmental organizations worked collectively in a coordinated manner in order to reduce the harm caused by disasters.
Also identified in the 2010 ICLR report was the need for increasing public awareness of hazards, risk and mitigation through federal and provincial programs. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) also identifies public awareness as a key factor for effective natural hazards risk management: "In this respect, recent experience has shown that public awareness of natural hazards and disaster risk reduction education constitute a foundation and pre-requisite for effective catastrophic risk management strategies at country and regional levels." Finally, a large number of internal and external stakeholders consulted also confirmed that the need for PSG and CHIS programming and services would increase going forward, citing the growing public awareness of hazard risks/impacts resulting in greater public demand for faster and better emergency management support/services.
PSG and CHIS contribution: The evaluation found that NRCan maintained unique and necessary scientific, technical and monitoring capabilities related to various natural and human-made hazards in Canada. PSG and CHIS made critical and important contributions to a diverse range of stakeholders such as municipal, regional, provincial, territorial and federal government organizations, critical infrastructure operators, emergency management agencies, industry and professional associations, research networks, international organizations, the media and the general public through the provision of research findings, knowledge products, advice, information and alerts.
All internal PSG stakeholders consulted noted an ongoing need for the activities carried out under PSG. The large and diverse number of collaborators and partners that supported PSG projects (financially and in-kind) was cited as an indication that PSG addressed demonstrable needs. For example, in 2012-13, external in-kind commitments for PSG projects were estimated at $1,429,500 and commitments from OGDs were estimated at $924,000. This is equivalent to 36% of the total PSG funding for that year. These estimates were collected from PSG project leaders and activity leads for the year 2012-13 as of March 6, 2013. Interviewees noted the high demand for PSG publications and this was further demonstrated through the volume and frequency of PSG publications downloaded from ESS’ online bibliographic database GEOSCAN relative to other ESS publications. Among the top ESS publications downloaded in 2012, 11 were from PSG and 4 from CHIS, which represented 19% and 12% of ESS downloads respectively (Table 4).
Source:  Compiled from data provided by PSG program from ESS (GEOSCAN) - Publications database; (*): filtered on the sum of downloads, for publications with >80 downloads.
Many geohazards-related media inquiries to NRCan were reported by NRCan interviewees. A media coverage analysis of NRCan showed that earthquakes were consistently in the top five issues. From August 2011 to December 2012, earthquakes were in the top five for seven months over the 17-month period.
All PSG external stakeholders consulted also indicated that there was an ongoing need for the activities carried out under PSG. They also advocated a proactive, as opposed to reactive, federal government stance on geohazards research and emergency management and noted the important role of geohazards research in facilitating resource/economic development in a safe and environmentally responsible manner.
Furthermore, Public Service Canada (PSC) and CHIS external interviewees reported that they relied heavily on NRCan information regarding seismic hazards, flooding and space weather to fulfill their mandates. CHIS data were directly used by the Government Operations Centre (GOC) together with other hazard information provided by different federal operation centres and Canadian and international partners under an information sharing and communication interoperability protocol.
Interviewees stated that even though they also received earthquake reports from the US Geological Survey (sometimes faster than those from NRCan), it was still crucial to maintain Canadian expertise.
All CHIS internal stakeholders consulted indicated that there was an ongoing need for the activities carried out under CHIS. Increasing prevalence of geohazards, reliance on CHIS for mission-critical services on the part of various industries, stakeholder/user and funding/support for CHIS activities and high demand for hazard information were cited as factors that warrant ongoing CHIS work. All CHIS external stakeholders also indicated an ongoing need for the activities carried out under CHIS for similar reasons. CHIS external stakeholders also noted the unique capabilities of CHIS for addressing national and international security concerns and CHIS support for emergency management.
Further, the survey of CHIS external stakeholders revealed several varied uses of CHIS products, tools and services. The majority of survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed (79%) that CHIS information products adequately addressed their organization’s needs. Also, the fact that CHIS products continued to meet stakeholder needs was further confirmed by the majority of surveyed stakeholders indicating that there was an ongoing need for the core CHIS activities, services and products (Table 8). Nearly all survey respondents (91%) either strongly agreed or agreed that there was a continued need for CHIS to maintain its geohazards monitoring networks, survey equipment, remote sensory components and map/data repositories. More than three-quarters of survey respondents also indicated that there was a continued need for CHIS to provide geohazards information on an ongoing basis and in response to critical events (85%), use advanced research and technology to improve geohazards information products (82%) and facilitate more timely and open access to geospatial information (76%).
Source: Survey of users of CHIS information products (N=33)
The need for further geohazards knowledge and tools in the Canadian/national context to minimize hazard risks/impacts was also reported by survey respondents. This expectation had placed increasing demand on organizations like CHIS that were charged with monitoring hazardous events to provide this information to the public as quickly as possible, while still ensuring quality and accuracy of content.
Data provided/facilitated by CHIS were also critical to some stakeholders for conducting research and served as a viable alternative to labour-intensive manual surveys necessary for some research programs. Real-time monitoring of geomagnetic activities and earthquakes, and related services enabled some stakeholders to provide quality and timely services to their clients, such as sending alert notifications, while the warnings, knowledge and know-how associated with CHIS information products assisted other stakeholders in carrying out emergency management tasks.
NRCan’s staff expertise was further highlighted by partners and collaborators of the six PSG/CHIS case study projects (see Table 12 in Annex A for an overview of project and partners/collaborators). NRCan was cited as the only organization that had adequate expertise, infrastructure or scientific credibility to carry out critical components of the projects. Further, all PSG and CHIS case studies were considered to be highly relevant to their respective target user groups by stakeholders. It was also noted that all examined projects were highly client-oriented and/or engaged in close collaborations with the project partners to deliver the best results, capitalizing on NRCan’s long experience in the field but drawing also on partners’ and collaborators’ capacity to deliver. Case study activities specific to PSG also noted an increasing need for the  section in the future due to the projected increase in development in northern Canada.
4.1.2        Alignment with Government Priorities (Issue 2)
Question: Are the two Sub-activity components consistent with federal government priorities and NRCan strategic objectives?
Yes, both PSG and CHIS are directly aligned with federal government priorities and NRCan strategic objectives related to public safety and security. The Sub-activity also contributes to federal and NRCan mandates related to S&T, economic growth and sustainable development.
Current alignment: PSG and CHIS are directly aligned with federal government priorities and NRCan strategic objectives related to public safety and security. Indirectly, the Sub-activity also contributes to federal and NRCan mandates related to economic growth and sustainable development. On the level of departmental priorities, the Sub-activity is aligned with the NRCan priority to leverage science and technology (S&T) knowledge for safety and security risk management and corresponds to the Strategic Outcome to ensure that Canadians have information to manage their lands and natural resources and are protected from related risks.
The 2011 Speech from the Throne stated that, "[T]he Government of Canada has no more fundamental duty than to protect the personal safety of our citizens and defend against threats to our national security." This overarching priority of the Government of Canada policy is to minimize the vulnerability from natural and other threats to public safety and security, including the threat of terrorism. In addition, the 2007 Government of Canada framework Mobilizing Science and Technology to Canada’s Advantage - to guide Canada’s science and technology policy for the future  notes that S&T is instrumental in modeling and predicting natural disasters, such as earthquakes, tsunamis, floods, landslides and forest fires and helping Canada prepare for and respond to these events. An internal assessment of the Sub-activity conducted in 2009 indicated that PSG and CHIS also highlighted a general alignment with the recommendations from this 2007 S&T framework and from another study on Canada’s S&T role and priorities (both reports noted the important role of science, research and technology in enhancing public safety and security). The assessment further noted that PSG and CHIS contributed to the strategic outcome of NRCan related to safety, security and governance (natural resource and landmass knowledge strengthen the safety and security of Canadians and contributed to the effective governance of Canada).
Nearly all PSG and CHIS internal stakeholders indicated that their respective programming/ service were aligned with both NRCan and federal government priorities and strategic objectives. PSG internal stakeholders noted specific NRCan Strategic Outcomes (Canadians have information to manage their lands and natural resources and are protected from related risks), specific NRCan priorities (leverage S&T knowledge for safety and security risk management) and specific federal government outcome areas (a safe and secure Canada) where the alignment was the greatest. Other internal stakeholders noted that PSG contributed to economic/ resource development by informing environmental assessments and facilitating critical infrastructure (e.g., pipelines) operations. It was also noted that that CHIS supported economic development by assisting industry (e.g., resource exploration) in providing hazard assessments for planned projects.
Similarly, based on documentary and interview evidence, all projects examined as case studies are highly aligned with the federal priorities and NRCan strategic objectives. For instance, the Improved National Earthquake Hazard Model for Canada carried out under PSG’s Assessing Earthquake Geohazards project is required by the Canadian National Committee for Earthquake Engineering (CANCEE) for the 2015 and a subsequent version of the National Building Code of Canada and other national codes/standards (e.g., dams, pipelines). As such, the uptake of the model directly contributes to the following two short-term outcomes: i) Use of ESS knowledge to assess, update and develop standards and ii) ESS products increase hazard mitigation by decision-makers. Further, based on the reports of participating stakeholders, CHIS project concerning the development of a surge capability to address extreme traffic flow on the earthquakescanada.ca website directly addressed NRCan’s national mandate to provide information on earthquakes in a timely and effective manner.
Possibility of shifting priorities: Interview data indicate that the current degree of alignment of the Sub-activity with federal and NRCan priorities could change with a shift in federal priorities. For example, the current federal government priority on developing Canada’s northern region may affect the Sub-activity as PSG and CHIS indirectly contribute to economic growth and sustainable development as noted earlier (e.g., contribution to economic and resource development by informing environmental assessments and facilitating critical infrastructure). The primary focus of PSG and CHIS programming remains on the south, where the majority of the Canadian population lives, where the bulk of Canadian infrastructure is concentrated and, consequently, where the actual risks are greater.
4.1.3        Alignment with Federal Roles and Responsibilities (Issue 3)
Question: Is there a legitimate, appropriate and necessary role for the federal government in each of the two Sub-activity components?
Yes, there is a legitimate and appropriate role for the federal government in PSG and CHIS. They clearly complement similar programming/services carried out by other organizations. At the same time, the roles and responsibilities of PSG, CHIS and these other organizations are not always clearly outlined or well understood. 
Consulted stakeholders envisioned that greater horizontal leadership for the federal involvement in geohazards research and emergency management, as well as greater guidance from Public Safety Canada (PSC), could contribute to more clarity in this regard. In particular, the enhancement of policy dialogue and policy guidance from key federal organizations would clarify the role of GHPS and other key federal organizations contributing to emergency management, risk reduction and loss mitigation efforts in Canada. Greater communication of GHPS roles and activities would support this by improving stakeholder awareness in general and other federal organizations in particular.
Context: The federal government has a legislated mandate related to hazard monitoring, national security, public safety and the provision of disaster financial assistance to the provinces/territories. Additionally, the Government of Canada (GC) works towards fulfilling the need for uniform and consistent hazard approaches and information across the country, in addition to having jurisdiction over certain regions of the country such as offshore areas.
Coordination across jurisdictions and organizations and minimization of duplication in emergency management is also facilitated by mechanisms such as the Federal Emergency Response Plan (FERP), departmental emergency management plans, strategic emergency management plans, the Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements (DFAA) and the Canadian Risk and Hazards Network (CRHN).
As for the specific role of NRCan, its involvement in hazard monitoring, emergency management, risk reduction and loss mitigation is mandated by the Emergency Management Act), the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty Implementation Act, the Federal Nuclear Emergency Plan, the Federal Policy for Emergency Management and the Department of Natural Resources Act. Additionally, NRCan possesses relevant geoscience expertise and provides a national perspective necessary to promote a unified and best practice approach to risk reduction and loss mitigation across the country. NRCan is the sole federal department responsible for monitoring, notifying and providing technical information about seismic events within or near Canada. On the other hand, despite its monitoring and information-sharing activities, NRCan is not a first agency in Canada to provide information with respect to some geohazards, such as landslides and space weather.
Legitimate role: The vast majority of internal and external stakeholders of both components indicated that there was a legitimate and appropriate  role for the federal government in the hazard activities carried out at NRCan under PSG and CHIS due to the federal government’s legislated mandate to provide disaster assistance to provinces and territories, its unique position to produce standardized and consistent national information and its jurisdiction over offshore areas.
NRCan was also seen as the federal organization best-positioned to deliver on this role. Based on the interview data, PSG either provided unique programming or was complementary to other organizations that had similar programming. External stakeholders noted that PSG collaborations with government, academia, research and industry organizations/networks on geohazards research minimized potential for overlap or duplication. Likewise, CHIS complemented similar programs/services administered by other organizations or jurisdictions. For example, while provincial emergency management organizations had the first-level responsibility for emergency management within their jurisdictions, they required reliable information in order to carry out their responsibilities. As raised by several interviewees, NRCan provided this key information and facilitated a common, best-practice, standard-based approach to mitigation, preparedness and response strategies across all provincial jurisdictions.
The appropriateness of the federal/NRCan involvement in geohazards risk assessment and mitigation was also corroborated by the case studies, which confirmed PSG’s/CHIS’s unique expertise and NRCan’s position to carry out these projects and support the relevant partners. For example, the work carried out under the "Risk Assessment Case Study in the District of North Vancouver", which helped to enhance and validate the previous work of the district on seismic hazards, would not have occurred without NRCan’s assistance. The Department was seen as the only organization having sufficient expertise, credibility and connections to the geo-science community to engage in this type of assessment.
Similarly, CHIS activities under the project "Development and validation of an operational capability to respond to radiological events" concerns national security and public safety and thus requires the involvement of the federal government to ensure the country’s preparedness to respond to natural and human-induced radiological hazards. Also in this case, NRCan contributed unique expertise and survey capabilities that could not be easily secured otherwise.
Despite the strong support for the appropriateness of NRCan’s initial involvement in the selected case study projects and the perceived increasing need for NRCan’s services in the near future, interviewed internal and external case study stakeholders were uncertain whether the Department should be involved in disaster follow-up activities due to a lack of clarity regarding the alignment of NRCan’s mandate and/or the lack of resources.
Clarity of roles and responsibilities: In general, the activities carried out by PSG and CHIS complement each other, as well as similar programming/services delivered by other actors in the emergency response management community in Canada. The transition case study noted that in designing PSG’s predecessor the RRNH, special care was paid to ensure that the RRNH did not infringe on any of the activities of CHIS. PSG was seen as being complementary to CHIS, providing it with new and enhanced products and techniques in order to support its outcomes. Most case study projects benefitted from collaboration and in-kind scientific support from other NRCan sectors, while almost all of PSG case studies reported a significant contribution from CHIS staff, in addition to other NRCan sectors.
Issues regarding the clarity of PSG and CHIS roles and responsibilities were noted throughout the evaluation. For instance, despite the efforts to firmly separate the RRNH’s work from that of CHIS, interviewees in the RRNH review believed that there was still overlap of work and responsibilities between PSG and CHIS due to the intertwined nature of their work. The evaluation found that the working and historical relationship highly influenced their interactions and contributions to each other.
Several of PSG case study projects and the evaluation fieldwork observation also indicated that the collaboration and communication between CHIS and PSG could be improved. In particular, PSG stakeholders indicated that CHIS had become less responsive to PSG needs, following the separation of the two components. This perception might have been caused by increasingly constrained resources on the side of CHIS. Inversely, the planned contribution of PSG to the improvement of CHIS tools and services was not clearly defined. Opportunities for the clarification of the roles of PSG research in supporting CHIS services/tools and vice versa are discussed in more detail in the performance section.
In addition, a need for clarity of the roles and responsibilities of other federal organizations involved was found throughout the evaluation. The federal government had discontinued some work related to geohazards research and emergency management carried out by PSG’s predecessor RRNH, PSG and other federal programs, as they were deemed to be under the jurisdiction of provincial and municipal governments, as outlined, for example, by the Federal Policy for Emergency Management. However, according to external stakeholders consulted, this approach had created gaps in some areas of geohazards research and emergency management work, as provincial and municipal governments did not always have the resources to become involved and replace the role of the federal government in these areas. Similarly, NRCan no longer engaged in Personal Preparedness activities, which were deemed to be in the mandate of Public Safety Canada (PSC). Nevertheless, some interviewees mentioned that the PSC had to suspend its activities in this area due to recent resource reductions.
While it was observed that the work carried out by PSG and CHIS did not overlap with the mandate of other departments or of the PSC, linkages and coordination between the organizations could be improved. Particularly, it was noted by internal stakeholders that the link between PSG activities and contributions to the emergency management policies, standards and regulations of various stakeholders–as well as the link between CHIS activities and facilitation of more proactive, coordinated and timely emergency preparedness, response and recovery efforts–could be significantly enhanced through greater coordination and guidance from PSC and stronger leadership at the federal level.
Given that the PSC was the lead federal government agency for coordinating emergency management activities in Canada, internal stakeholders stated that guidance from the PSC could contribute to greater clarity, consensus and coordination in the fields of geohazards research and emergency management. However, a number of constraints for the PSC in fulfilling such policy-level leadership and guidance activities were identified including the resource constraints and the complexity of the federal emergency management system. As a result, many interviewees recognized that the federal government faced a challenge in trying to unite all of the entities responsible for emergency management, under one collaborative federal approach.
In addition, a number of interviews highlighted that the operational nature of emergency management issues often guided the relationship and coordination efforts among federal organizations. On the one hand, organizations did not have expertise and resources to engage and sustain such policy-level discussions. Established federal coordinating structures often focus on day-to-day operations and tactical issues rather than developing a horizontal strategic vision for a federal approach to emergency management. For example, some internal and external interviewees reported that the ADM Emergency Management Committee (ADM EMC) (a committee coordinating the GC emergency response and chaired by PSC), often focuses on day-to-day operations rather than developing a horizontal strategic vision for a federal approach to emergency management. The interview data identified an opportunity for the Committee to engage in additional policy discussions.
Awareness and communication issues: The coordination of the federal players in emergency response management also faces communication issues. Given the amplitude of emergency programs and functions across participating federal entities, the current communication mechanisms have been reported by interviewees as not meeting the needs. Interview data suggest that there is a general lack of awareness of the key external players involved in emergency functions and activities (e.g., program, policy) across the federal government due to the limited direct contact with the different functions in each department. In particular, awareness has been low with respect to the key activities and appropriate contacts within NRCan, including PSG and CHIS components.
While PSG and CHIS collaborate frequently with OGDs in various projects and initiatives, the evaluation found that the effectiveness and efficiency of the Sub-activity could be further enhanced by strengthening coordination with OGDs that had a mandate related to geohazards, emergency management and/or national security (e.g., Public Safety Canada ; Environment Canada; Fisheries and Oceans; Defence Research Development ; etc.). The level of coordination between CHIS and the Government Emergency Operation Centre of PSC as well as the NRCan Emergency Operation Centre was perceived by some interviewees to be low.
Further, the interview data identified some specific examples where the lack of multilateral communication and information-sharing resulted in isolated work of some federal entities and potential lost opportunities for the federal government to approach emergency management as a whole. For example, the HAZUS tool adapted and tuned by NRCan for earthquake hazards would be equally useful for hazards related to water, which were outside NRCan’s mandate. Similarly, CHIS data could be integrated into hazard-related information systems operated by other departments such as Environment Canada.
While personal preparedness is not in NRCan’s departmental mandate, PSG and CHIS recognize the need to, "…ensure that public safety and emergency management organizations have the geohazard information they require to motivate Canadians to effectively prepare for natural hazard events". In 2010, NRCan surveyed EMOs across the country to better understand how geohazard knowledge and products are currently used in EMO product design and program implementation. This survey confirmed the need for the GHPS Sub-activity to work closely with other federal departments to ensure EMOs have the natural hazard information they need to continue to work with PSC supporting its "Know the Risk" piece and to make sure that municipalities have the geohazard information they require.
According to internal and external interviewees, closer coordination and collaboration with provincial and territorial EMOs and professional organizations (e.g., engineering and planning associations) would allow the GHPS to reach municipalities and local communities through the design work of engineers and planners.
4.2         Performance
4.2.1        Achievement of Expected Outcomes (Issue 4)
Question:  To what extent have the activities implemented for each Sub-activity component produced the intended outputs and generated the intended outcomes?
The outputs planned under both Sub-activity components have successfully been produced, although some of them experienced delays, due primarily to resource constraints and staffing shortages. There is ample evidence to show that both PSG and CHIS have made progress towards achieving their respective short-term and intermediate outcomes. 
However, it is challenging to identify and quantify the extent to which the ultimate outcomes have been achieved. The evaluation found that PSG information, advice, guidelines and tools are used by a variety of stakeholders. PSG has some ability to influence the policies, standards and regulations of external organizations for optimizing risk reduction and loss mitigation potential. Examples include: the established highly functional collaborative mechanism to ensure that PSG’s research informs the National Building Code of Canada; and other standards and regulations (e.g., Canadian Dam Safety Guidelines and the Canadian Highway Bridge Design Code [CSA-S6]).
While personal preparedness is not in NRCan’s mandate, PSG and CHIS recognize the need to ensure that public safety and emergency management organizations have the geohazard information they require to motivate Canadians to effectively prepare for natural hazard events. Limited information was available on the contributions of CHIS to the work of the organizations directly involved in natural hazards emergency response and recovery (e.g., provincial emergency management organizations).
GHPS outputs: The GHPS planned outputs had been produced during the evaluation period or were being produced at the time of the evaluation. There was adequate evidence of the development, compilation, processing and dissemination of the intended outputs under the  Sub-activity. For example, all planned outputs under the six case study projects had been delivered.
PSG outputs include hazard models and maps, hazard and risk assessments, related methods and guidelines, tools (e.g., the Canadian Hazus tool and related activities such as webinars, workshops, a resource website and course curricula), scientific and technical publications and presentations and lesson plans, posters and media interviews.
Lists of publications and presentations were provided by PSG for all 2011-12 projects (National-Scale Hazards Assessment, Quantitative Risk Assessment, National Guidelines for Natural Hazard Assessment and Mitigation, Landslides and Marine Geohazards, and Targeted Geohazard Assessments in Eastern, Northern, and Western Canada). While all PSG program outputs were captured in the GEOSCAN database, PSG scientific publications were not specifically tracked at the program level prior to 2011-12. Thus, this sample did not constitute the whole body of knowledge disseminated by PSG and impeded the review of such PSG outputs.
Note: * Conference presentations, posters and invited workshop and client presentations on seismic hazard; ** 24 published/in-press, 6 submitted; ***, including 12 invited or keynote
Source: Compiled from publication and presentation lists provided by PSG program staff for the evaluation.
With respect to the response of PSG Program to queries external to NRCan, data compiled by the Program provided further evidence that the GHPS Sub-activity was responding to the need of external stakeholders (Table 7). Over the last 6 years, the PSG Program had responded to 1,461 queries from diverse stakeholders groups and to 8,152 queries about earthquake event locations.
Note: *As of December 2012
Source: Compiled from data provided by PSG program staff for the evaluation.
CHIS outputs comprise departmental emergency management plans, geospatial and geomagnetic data, data archives and catalogues, maps and related analyses, seismic information (provided via staff, website and publications/maps), forecasts, alerts and notifications, presentations, joint peer-reviewed publications and media interviews.
Some PSG planned outputs were delayed primarily due to GSC staffing shortages. These delays were noted, at least to some extent, in all hazard areas (i.e., earthquake, tsunami, landslide, space weather and marine geohazards) and in the case studies.
Similarly, CHIS staff reported an instance in which certain stages of a project were delayed, as the staff did not receive necessary information/support from NRCan’s Shared Services Office (SSO) in a timely and effective manner. The performance of the Earthquakes Canada website was flawed during two earthquakes, which attracted media and public attention, and CHIS has taken steps to improve the server capacity of the site in order to prevent such disruptions in the future..
PSG Outcomes: Although progress toward short-term, intermediate and long-term goals has been noted, it is not possible to adequately capture the long-term results of PSG research within the evaluation timeframe of five years. The collection of data for geohazards research could take between six to nine years in some instances. Nevertheless, PSG has received, on average, a relatively high rating from both internal and external stakeholders in the following five outcome areas. These are discussed in more detail below.
improving the knowledge of the occurrence and impacts of geohazards, as well as mitigation strategies;
increasing awareness of the risks posed by geohazards;
improving understanding of geohazards risk reduction and loss mitigation options;
increasing the adoption of geohazards risk reduction and loss mitigation measures in the development of relevant policies, standards and regulations; and
optimizing risk reduction and loss mitigation potential for a more resilient built environment in terms of location, design and operations.
Improving knowledge: The geohazards research carried out by GSC staff generated considerable, important and useful knowledge on hazards such as earthquakes, landslides, tsunamis and space weather events as well as their potential risks and impacts. Interview data pointed out that PSG scientists were held in high regard for their work internationally. An example of a knowledge-enhancing project involved PSG conducting research to improve the seismic site provisions in the National Building Code of Canada for soft soils as well as updating provisions for design in the Canadian Foundation Engineering Manual and the Canadian Standards for Highway Bridges. In one instance, PSG collaborative research led to the discovery of a type of earthquake that was previously unknown. That had important implications for the west coast of Canada in terms of emergency management planning and hazard preparedness. Also, as one of the most effective ways to avoid impacts of extreme space weather events was to provide advanced forecasting, PSG scientists were developing several new forecast schemes in order to provide more robust forecasts 24 hours-several days ahead.
As demonstrated in the interview data, information and knowledge products produced by PSG and CHIS were important to Public Safety Canada (PSC), which relied on the GHPS Sub-activity components to fulfill its mandate. Although a high volume of data and information circulated on a daily basis through the PSC operations centre, data and images on earthquakes, flooding and space weather provided by NRCan had been assigned high importance and value due to the specific technical expertise of NRCan staff and scientists and, in some cases (e.g., space weather), the unique access to this data. The level of awareness beyond specific data or expertise was low at PSC with respect to the roles and responsibilities of PSG and CHIS, as well as of their key emergency management activities.
Increasing awareness of the risks posed by geohazards and understanding of geohazards risk reduction and loss mitigation measures: A wide range of PSG activities carried out independently as well as in collaboration (e.g., simulation exercises; media interviews; presentations to academia, governments, industry bodies and communities; provision of hazard information and advice through website, hazard maps, teaching kits, one-on-one interaction, etc.) contribute to raising the awareness of the risks posed by geohazards, particularly on the west coast of Canada. Internal and external stakeholders highlighted PSG collaborative projects, publications, guidelines and tools that facilitated better understanding of geohazards risk reduction and loss mitigation options, particularly among municipal government staff, critical infrastructure operators and industry professionals.
PSG reaches out to stakeholders through surveys/consultations with target audience groups, customized presentations to targeted audience groups as well as conference presentations, public information campaigns and posters, participation in networking and training events and provision of refereed and open file publications. Awards received by PSG staff and frequent solicitation of information from PSG (and CHIS) staff by the media further confirmed a high level of stakeholder awareness and reach. Multiple PSG (and CHIS) publications were among the most downloaded from the online database of the ESS, further confirming their extensive use.
Interviewed stakeholders reported that PSG work had helped to inform relevant risk reduction and loss mitigation policies, standards and regulations of some provincial and municipal governments, pipeline operators and power utility companies and industry regulators. The provincial emergency program in British Columbia, representing the most seismically active region in Canada, was a key user of PSG hazard assessments and regularly sought advice from NRCan related to hazards. Other partners and stakeholders included Hydro Quebec, TransCanada and the Standing Committee on Earthquake Design. PSG staff members also assisted their stakeholders through participation in committees and workshops, as well as in the provision of research papers and presentations. Finally, PSG’s successful partnership in quantitative risk assessment with the District of North Vancouver was noteworthy, as it led to the creation of a comprehensive disaster risk reduction strategy that incorporated responses to earthquake, landslide, debris flow and hurricane scenarios. This emergency preparedness work earned the District of North Vancouver the prestigious United Nations Sasakawa Award for excellence in disaster risk reduction.Interviewees noted that there was potential for PSG work to increase influence on policies, standards and regulations across the country.
Increasing the adoption of geohazards risk reduction and loss mitigation measures: PSG cannot directly influence the policies, standards and regulations of external organizations as it does not have legislative authority or direct control over the activities of other organizations involved in emergency response management. However, there is evidence that representatives from various levels of government, industry, critical infrastructure operators, research networks, academia, media and international organizations receive and utilize PSG information, advice, guidelines and software/tools related to hazard assessments and models, mitigation plans, risk scenarios and building and other construction codes.
The documentary evidence provides numerous examples of adoption and use of the information. Some of the larger projects, such as the advice provided to the seismic hazard assessment project of BC Hydro and Power Authority, have been initiated under the component’s predecessor RRNH. Some concrete examples of the adoption of information and tools produced by PSG over the five-year period are as follows.
The collaborative process in place for PSG research to inform the National Building Code of Canada has been effective in ensuring that the best scientific information gets embedded into building design and engineering at regular intervals to minimize seismic risks. 
Collaboration with PSG Program helped the District of North Vancouver better understand potential earthquake risks and impacts in terms of physical damage to buildings and infrastructure as well as financial losses and public safety losses. 
PSG space weather research resulted in a real-time geomagnetically induced current (GIC) simulator prototype that is being used by power utility companies to mitigate the impacts of geomagnetic storms on their critical infrastructure. PSG GIC simulator prototype was adapted by Hydro One and integrated into its system control centre so that system operators had immediate updates on the status of the geomagnetic effects on its power system and took appropriate action to protect the system.
PSG Program has developed a national probabilistic tsunami hazard map for all three Canadian coasts, one of the first of such maps in the world to aid hazard assessments and inform policy-making.
While PSG Program’s authority to directly influence policies, standards and regulation of other organizations involved in emergency management is limited (affecting the achievement of PSG Program’s long-term outcome), the Program has recorded some significant accomplishments in this area. Examples include: the established highly functional collaborative mechanism to ensure that PSG’s research informs the National Building Code of Canada; and other standards and regulations (e.g., Canadian Dam Safety Guidelines and the Canadian Highway Bridge Design Code [CSA-S6]). PSG Program’s continued participation in the Canadian National Committee on Earthquake Engineering and the provision of an updated seismic hazard model for use in the development of the Code are considered key accomplishments of the Sub-activity. Additionally, PSG Program’s research outputs and scientific expertise are integral to many federal Environmental Assessment (EA) review processes.
Other examples of longer term outcome progress include the collaborative projects to showcase and apply PSG methodologies/ tools, among which the most successful have been the risk assessment work with the District of North Vancouver and other similar work in the Vancouver/BC region. More generally, research produced by PSG Program has also been included in land-use policies of regional and municipal jurisdictions:
The Integrated Partnership of Regional Emergency Managers (IPREM) used three PSG/CHIS-developed earthquake scenarios in its Hazard, Risk and Vulnerability Analysis (HRVA) of the District of Metro Vancouver, undertaken in partnership with Defence Research Development Canada’s (DRDC). 
The City of New Westminster (CNW) used PSG risk assessment tools and expertise in a risk-based land-use planning scenario that considered flooding hazards. NRCan led the exercise for CNW city planners, engineers, geographic information systems technicians and permitting officers. 
These two examples of activities build on four similar tabletop exercises conducted in 2011-12 for other emergency management organizations in B.C. and Washington state (e.g., Heavy Urban Search and Rescue, Canada-US Northwest Coast Earthquake scenario, TransLink (Metro Vancouver’s regional transportation authority)).
PSG/CHIS earthquake information is used by Emergency Management BC in the design  of its public earthquake mitigation program Shakeout BC. Other examples of outcomes produced by PSG component are listed below.
The National Energy Board (NEB), the Canada Newfoundland Labrador Offshore Petroleum Board (C-NLOPB) and Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada (AANDC) rely on PSG information in fulfilling their respective mandates.
    
For example, they use PSG information to identify regions characterized by a high degree of geohazards risk or utilize PSG geohazards information to confirm and verify that industry strategies/plans address all known geohazards in a given region. 


PSG products and expertise are commonly included in the regulatory decisions associated with natural resource and critical infrastructure developments – especially as they relate to their environmental assessments (EAs).
    
PSG experts acted as reviewers in the federal environmental assessment of a proposal for a pipeline construction project submitted by Enbridge-Northern Gateway to determine whether or not the engineering standards and design features for the pipelines were adequate to withstand the impacts of various hazards such as space weather events, earthquakes and landslides. 
TransCanada Pipelines Ltd. also consulted with PSG’s Space Weather group during the design stages for the Alaska Highway pipeline to assess and mitigate hazards presented by the region's high telluric (geomagnetic) activity. A similar assessment was also conducted for the Mackenzie Valley Gas Project’s proposed pipeline route.


While no longer provided by PSG Program, the Ottawa microzonation map is still used by the City of Ottawa in relation to issue building permits in order to ensure that building design and materials are appropriate in relation to seismic site categories. The map is also regularly used by geotechnical consulting firms in Ottawa. 
BC Hydro and Power Authority applied updated seismic hazard information generated by PSG to retrofit its dams and related infrastructure.
PSG risk reduction demonstration projects resulted in hazard policy developments in participating communities (e.g., because of the work that started under the RRNH Program and continued under PSG Program, the official community plan of the District of Squamish now requires hazards to be considered for land use zoning).
Industry consults PSG seismic catalogues (seismic maps that contain information on various Canadian building codes, ground acceleration, etc.) regularly for information on hazard mitigation potential when developing various structures. These catalogues are not available from any other source.
Finally, PSG scientists have been approached to provide input into understanding the impacts of seismic activities around the world. PSG has provided such requested input, whenever feasible and has taken advantage of such occasions to apply PSG hazard modelling to real-life scenarios around the world for validation. As well, some PSG research data (e.g., plate motion and gravity measurements) have benefited NRCan’s Geodetic Systems and Infrastructures Section in fulfilling its non-hazard mandate (e.g., water management in Canada) and the Geodetic Systems and Infrastructures Section continue to leverage PSG data.
CHIS outcomes: CHIS stakeholders interviewed assigned highly positive ratings to the components’ activities and achieved outcomes in five areas that are discussed in greater detail below:
providing more customized and timely emergency preparedness, response and recovery resources;
providing more timely and open access to geohazards information;
increasing the use of emergency preparedness, response and recovery resources and information by government, industry, media;
fulfilling federal legislative and treaty obligations as they pertain to emergency preparedness, response and recovery; and
provide support for more proactive actions on coordinated and timely emergency preparedness, response and recovery efforts.
Providing resources: CHIS develops efforts to improve alert systems in order to minimize hazard losses and provide data and related products that are used to facilitate research for improving hazard and risk assessments, situational awareness of hazards, modelling and forecasting methods, emergency response and management plans and structural mitigation solutions, such as shelters and barriers. The component also provides customized earthquake notification alerts to critical infrastructure operators. Progress has also been achieved in improving the time interval within which information about a geohazard occurrence is provided to these operators (e.g., the time span to provide earthquake notification to railway operators has decreased from 10-15 minutes to about 4-6 minutes). Additionally, CHIS is capable of providing important intelligence which informs the official response of the Government of Canada (GC) in the event of nuclear incidents.
Facilitating access to geohazards information and advisories: As noted under PSG outcomes, some CHIS publications belong among the most popular downloads from the ESS website. Evidence also points to CHIS improvement in geohazards information dissemination by incorporating new methods to relay data and alerts over time. CHIS employs a number of measures to facilitate more timely and open access to geohazards information, such as the provision of information through multiple means (media interviews, website, telephone, email, fax, RSS feeds and Twitter); mobile communication devices for on-call CHIS seismologists; service agreements with a content delivery network provider to supplement CHIS’s web infrastructure capacity; an automated earthquake alert system; and integration of select CHIS resources (earthquake and space weather alerts, and satellite imagery based flood mappings) into the Multi-Agency Situational Awareness System Development Initiative. Some external stakeholders interviewed also expressed satisfaction with the speed with which CHIS provided the necessary seismic information. The timeliness and accessibility of CHIS information products were also rated highly by survey respondents.
CHIS is continuously working to improve its services. For instance, following the increased traffic on the earthquakes website after the Val-des-Bois, Quebec earthquake in 2010, CHIS implemented a number of changes to improve the robustness of web availability, as well as to take advantage of other complementary earthquake information dissemination vehicles such as social media. This was ultimately to achieve the goal of faster and more authoritative earthquake information for Canadians. Other ongoing efforts to make further improvements to information-dissemination/access include discussions with The Weather Channel to determine how to use this system to disseminate disaster information and discussions with the Canadian Institute for the Blind (CNIB) to determine how to deliver hazard information on CHIS website in a useful manner for visually impaired Canadians.
In the survey results, 75% of surveyed CHIS stakeholders reported having accessed CHIS information products or services. Table 8 provides an overview of services/information most frequently accessed by CHIS stakeholders that responded to the survey. Information on seismic hazards was by far the most frequently sought. As discussed in the limitations section, the survey results have to be interpreted with care because the number of responses was low (33), and there were representativeness issues. Provincial emergency management organizations were not highly represented in the survey population and a large proportion of respondents were not in a position to rate the adequacy of CHIS resources for emergency preparedness, response and recovery.
Note: NR=No response; Respondents could select more than one answer.
Source: Survey of users of CHIS information products
In terms of the adequacy of  CHIS information products, three-quarters of CHIS stakeholders (25 respondents) also considered the quality, timeliness/accessibility and the degree of customization of CHIS services/products to be very adequate or adequate, as seen in Table 9While the ratings on the adequacy of CHIS information products were positive, these results should be interpreted with caution. The survey population was not representative of CHIS users and a sizable number of respondents reported not having used CHIS information products during the period or did not know about CHIS products.
Source: Survey of users of CHIS information products
"CHIS makes valuable contributions and has an important role to play in the global effort."


"The research performed by the worldwide SuperMAG community largely hinges on Canadian ground-based magnetometers."


"The quality of service is excellent" 

"I have always been impressed with the degree of talent and NRCan is regarded very highly worldwide with respect to the topic of geomagnetically induced current impacts on human-made technological systems."
Source: CHIS Survey quotes
Finally, a majority of survey respondents also rated the quality and timeliness of CHIS service and the quality of their S&T-based products as adequate or very adequate. The improvement of CHIS products over the last five years was rated somewhat lower. More than one-quarter of the respondents indicated that the information products did not need any further improvements or improvements had already been made/were already underway.
Source: Survey of users of CHIS information products
Increasing the use of resources and information: CHIS data and services are utilized by different levels of government, emergency measures organizations, critical infrastructure operators, international organizations, the media and the general public. The research component of the Sub-activity through CHIS and its reach to industry sectors also contributed to mitigation plans for several industries, including power generation (e.g., BC Hydro and Power Authority for seismic hazards related to dams) and power systems, pipelines, air navigation and airlines (for hazards from geomagnetic storms).
While it was noted that government emergency management organizations had begun to recognize CHIS as the source of reliable, robust and authoritative information on the hazards that were under NRCan’s mandate, the level of awareness among those who could benefit from some CHIS emergency management resources (satellite images through CHIS Emergency Geomatics Services) varied and was especially low among some provincial emergency management organizations.
"The recent availability of near real-time geomagnetic data will play a key role in the ability of my organization to accurately estimate the global geomagnetic activity level, which is of fundamental importance to our 24x7 operations center."

"Operation and maintenance of the Canadian seismograph network have provided fundamental data necessary for the preparation of a technically defensible Seismic Hazard Assessment (SHA).  The continued maintenance of this reliable seismic monitoring program is integral to competent SHAs."

"CHIS geomagnetic observations provide the single most important dataset for understanding and monitoring the Earth-Space coupling."


"CHIS data, research, and services are critical to address the growing need for space weather services."

"The seismic alert system is the backbone of our response to earthquakes and has allowed us to react quickly, with priorities aligned with the potential consequences."

Source: CHIS Survey quotes
Survey respondents were asked to identify and explain operational changes, benefits or other effects that might have resulted from the use of CHIS information products/services. The contribution of  CHIS information products to research programs and services was cited by four respondents (e.g., data provided by  CHIS were critical for conducting research and served as a viable alternative to the very labour intensive task of performing manual surveys necessary for some research programs). Real-time monitoring of geomagnetic activities, earthquakes and related services were also reported as beneficial to respondents’ needs, particularly as it enabled them to provide quality and timely services to their customers such as sending alert notifications. Some respondents indicated that the warnings, knowledge and know-how associated with CHIS information products assisted them in carrying out emergency management tasks (e.g., setting up response procedures, response systems and staff training). Lastly, CHIS contributions to hazard inspection and facility/dam/installation assessment were highlighted by respondents more than once.
Fulfilling federal government obligations: CHIS has developed and maintained monitoring and radiological surveying networks and expertise in compliance with relevant acts. In particular, it has maintained nuclear incident monitoring stations and provided related intelligence/information to relevant organizations within and outside of Canada in order to fulfill the Government of Canada’s obligations under the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT). Similarly, CHIS provides emergency support resources under the Emergency Management Act (EMA). The achievement of this outcome was further corroborated by close to 40% of surveyed CHIS stakeholders who agreed that CHIS information facilitated fulfillment of federal obligations under legislation and international treaties. Another 45% of the surveyed stakeholders could not assess CHIS achievement in this area.
Achievement of long-term outcomes: The evaluation evidence is limited with regard to the achievement of the two long-term outcomes of the component: a) more resilient built environment as risk reduction and loss mitigation potential is optimized and b) more proactive, coordinated and timely emergency preparedness, response and recovery efforts. There is limited information on the extent to which CHIS contributed to the work of organizations directly involved in natural hazards emergency response and recovery, such as provincial emergency management organizations.
Half of the surveyed CHIS stakeholders agreed that CHIS information products facilitated more proactive, coordinated and timely emergency preparedness, response and recovery efforts. However, another third was not able to assess the degree of achievement in this area. Interview data provided very few indications of regular interaction between CHIS and the emergency management community to facilitate greater coordination of efforts. Some stakeholders also noted a lack of leadership from the federal government (and correspondingly weaker CHIS efforts) in this area.
Despite the lack of evidence regarding the long-term outcomes, CHIS has recorded an array of activities, outputs and short term and intermediate outcomes. Other examples of these are listed below.
CHIS and its predecessors have augmented existing hazard information dissemination mechanisms with new and varied methods over time for relaying information. For example, introducing online earthquake reports in 1996, delivering mobile/Short Message Service (SMS) earthquake alerts in 2000, incorporating Really Simple Syndication  (RSS) feed in 2006 and issuing Twitter earthquake event  feeds in 2011. 
Upgrades to CHIS web service infrastructure, as well as a service agreement with a content delivery network provider to supplement CHIS IT infrastructure, have improved CHIS’ ability to handle a sudden web traffic surge. Web capacity improved from 1.5 million hits per hour to 5 million hits per hour. 
 As per Canada’s obligations under the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT), CHIS hosts the National Data Centre that receives data from 16 primary and auxiliary seismic, infrasound and hydroacoustic stations. The data are then transmitted to the CTBTO’s International Data Centre in Vienna. 
 CHIS successfully provided nuclear intelligence and radiological surveying expertise (e.g., baseline mapping of radiological background, scientific reach back to assist detailed assessments of potential radiological threats, etc.) to other government organizations during key events. 
Examples include the North Korean nuclear tests, the 2010 Winter Olympics, the G8/G20 Summits and the Fukushima nuclear reactor incident in Japan (one case study examined the capability of CHIS to respond to radiological events).  
The information provided by CHIS in the event of a nuclear incident is integrated with the technical and political information from other federal sources so that policymakers will have a holistic understanding, which, in part, informs the Canadian government’s official response.
Question:  What are the major internal and external factors contributing to or constraining the performance of the Sub-activity?
Several key success factors enhanced the performance of the Sub-activity or its components, including collaboration with partners and stakeholders, an open and flexible approach, qualified and committed staff, an understanding of user needs and senior management support. 
On the other hand, the achievements of the Sub-activity have been restricted by factors relating to limited internal resources and staffing constraints (particularly high management turnover), a lack of a coordinated federal approach, changing federal focus and a lack of integration between PSG and CHIS.
Lastly, consulted stakeholders identified several areas for improved Sub-activity delivery. These included outreach activities, which would ensure the dissemination of targeted information on PSG/CHIS mandate and priorities to other federal organizations. This would help improve coordination of their activities with those of the key federal government departments and agencies involved in emergency management and/or national security. Finally, as discussed in the next section, significant potential was also seen and observed for closer integration of the two components.
Success factors: The performance of the RRNH/PSG Program was enhanced by collaboration with OGDs, other levels of government, industry and universities.  Collaborations with program partners and stakeholders also helped minimize the effects of internal resource limitations. This finding was corroborated by PSG activities reviewed in the case studies. All of these were highly client-oriented and/or involved close collaborations with the project partners to deliver the best results, capitalizing on NRCan’s longstanding experience in the field but also drawing on partner resources and expertise. Several of the case study projects had a formal outreach strategy in place, or the respective GSC staff stepped out of their more traditional scientific roles and engaged in networking and relationship-building with potential clients or intended end-users.
The Sub-activity also adopted an open and flexible approach towards the delivery of its activities, which allowed for easier adoption/greater scope of projects with varied partners. This was best exemplified in a case study, Geomagnetically Induced Currents Simulator, in which the flexibility of the NRCan management structure allowed staff to identify where they could make the best contribution and left it to staff to interact with the different user communities. In this particular case, this choice was proven to be a key success factor, as staff was able to link closely with the engineering aspects of the work, rather than focusing solely on the geophysical aspects. This flexible approach also facilitated the establishment of common goals and collaborative ties, sharing of best practices and leveraging of complementary resources and expertise vis-à-vis a diverse group of PSG and CHIS stakeholders within and external to Canada.
One of the most significant success factors for both PSG Program and CHIS related to their committed staff and unique expertise. The skills and dedication of the staff were deemed instrumental in achievement of the intended outcomes, particularly as the staff was able to deliver these outcomes with limited resources. The expertise of the staff was particularly valued by external stakeholders or partners who noted that the science produced by NRCan was credible and the scientists who produced it were in some cases world-renowned in their respective fields. The shortage of available qualified staff was also a serious limiting issue to the timely delivery of most PSG activities.
PSG Program maintains a clear focus on user needs in the process of operationalizing its research and applying the research findings. This helps to ensure that the user needs are being adequately addressed and that the knowledge/technology transfer mechanisms are effective. An example of such successful efforts is the validation of hazard modelling/forecasting and simulation tools.
Finally, CHIS mandate related to the provision of hazard information received strong management support, which helped raise the profile of CHIS. As well, the separation of CHIS from the research component of the Sub-activity (PSG) resulted in increased robustness of the 24/7 operations that responded to ministerial responsibilities under several acts, along with greater clarity of objectives and a clearer results chain within the program logic model. While benefitting CHIS’s mandate, as noted above, the separation of PSG and CHIS constrained, to a certain extent, PSG Program’s ability to conduct research. PSG interviewees reported a lack of local technical support from CHIS to maintain and repair research stations and instruments, which impacted the quality, breadth and depth of the seismic data used to develop seismic hazard maps.
The level of interaction and integration between the two Sub-activity components is further discussed in the next section, which is dedicated to this issue.
Constraining factors: Both Sub-activity components, particularly PSG (and previously RRNH) Program, operated with limited internal resources, which was reported to have had a negative impact on the success of their activities. Both internal reports and PSG stakeholders noted that the scope, breadth and depth of the intended PSG outcomes were not reflected in the level of NRCan resources. This had been a constraint for the RRNH Program as well.
In addition, both components experienced staffing constraints, which in some cases resulted in abandoned and delayed projects, particularly in the case of the RRNH and PSG Programs, which experienced key staff turnovers. For CHIS, the shortage of staff contributed to delays in decision-making. From the perspective of some interviewees, the head of CHIS had too many responsibilities and could not always respond to staff queries in a timely manner. Hiring additional staff would expedite decision-making.
Also, CHIS does not have the resources for dedicated day-and-night staff for earthquake notification in real-time. Instead, it uses on-call seismologists, but CHIS has only four staff members to cover the on-call roster.
It was further noted that both Sub-activity components lack effective succession planning and had a limited ability to hire staff (and students on a temporary basis) effectively due to the complex hiring policy and system in place. As a consequence, in some instances, staff left or moved to other positions and the vacant positions were not filled. These constraints also clearly impacted most of the six case study and, in some cases, they reached critical levels. These experienced serious delays in their outcome delivery. The staffing shortage did not compromise the final quality of the outputs as the Sub-Activity was able to leverage additional resources through agreements with external stakeholders.
Finally, the federal web accessibility standard and guidelines restricts the type of hazard information that can be made available online, as the formatting of all web content needs to accommodate a diverse group of users. These guidelines have had an impact on the information traditionally provided on the web to PSG/CHIS stakeholders and limited the dissemination of new information. On a related topic, a PSG website on landslide guidelines and best practices was taken offline to accommodate federal web content accessibility guidelines. It has not been updated in two years.
From the external perspective, a number of stakeholders interviewed identified many of these constraining factors:
"The Sub-activity seems to have less funding and fewer staff in recent times. CHIS/PSG work has been delayed for six months due to inadequate staffing"
"CHIS are operating at maximum capacity. Seismic data quality or frequency has not been affected but on the technical support side, it now takes longer for  CHIS to respond to support requests"
" CHIS seems to have insufficient resources/personnel to make seismic data available to the public  including academia in real-time, compared to the USGS"
"Due to inadequate PSG staffing, some of the outputs of a collaborative project have taken a lot longer than originally anticipated"
"CHIS website used to have more detailed earthquake information even two or three years ago. The information has been reduced partly due to federal web content accessibility guidelines and partly due to a past incident when the website could not handle the flow of traffic following an earthquake near Ottawa"
"A website on PSG landslide guidelines and best practices was taken offline to accommodate federal web content accessibility guidelines and it has not been updated for two years. Many landslide professionals are aware of PSG work in developing landslide guidelines and best practices but they do not have up-to-date information. The website could have been useful in addressing that need."
A lack of coordination among the key federal government departments and agencies that have a mandate related to geohazards, emergency management and/or national security was noted as a constraint for both PSG and CHIS efforts. In particular, the absence of a federal harmonized and coordinated approach to emergency management activities was identified as a constraining factor for CHIS’s ability to facilitate more proactive, coordinated and timely emergency preparedness, response and recovery efforts. The effectiveness and efficiency of the Sub-activity could be further enhanced by strengthening collaborations with other NRCan sectors or programs (e.g., the climate change program) or the academic research community. Some stakeholders across groups and components also noted the need for strengthened PSG and CHIS ties to other federal government departments that had a mandate related to geohazards, emergency management and/or national security (e.g., Public Safety Canada, Environment Canada;, Fisheries and Oceans, Defence Research and Development Canada, etc.). One way to enhance interdepartmental collaboration could be to adopt the staff secondments arrangement currently in place between Public Safety Canada and the Department of National Defence by encouraging staff exchanges among organizations working in related areas. A similar model (e.g., hosting engineers) and closer collaboration could also be applied in relation to professional organizations such as engineering and planning associations so that PSG knowledge could indirectly influence municipal and local government policies through the design work of engineers and planners. Stakeholders across all groups noted that with more resources, both components would be able to provide better services/resources.
Further, PSG internal interviewees noted that PSG contributions to the emergency management policies, standards and regulations of various stakeholders (with the exception of the National Building Code of Canada) were constrained because of a lack of guidance from the GC in general, as well as from the PSC. For example, the PSC’s work on risk mitigation has advanced slowly. This has restricted PSG agenda due to a lack of clear priorities vis-à-vis hazard preparedness and loss mitigation.
Examples of the impacts of scope change on the Sub-activity’s activities include the following:
PSG lost funding for personal preparedness activities in 2012, which resulted in the phasing out of some activities and terminating some activities earlier than planned; 
a four-year marine PERD geohazard project will end two years in advance as it is no longer deemed relevant to the revised PSG mandate; and 
due to a change in focus, no new microzonation maps will be generated under PSG.
The transition from RRNH to PSG and the accompanying shift of focus towards producing and feeding into national level products resulted in the decreased participation of a number of RRNH stakeholders that represent more regionally specific and targeted outputs. The change in direction and limited resources also led to some lost opportunities to build on previous work. In addition, it was noted by internal representatives interviewed for the RRNH transition case study that the RRNH was constrained by a lack of clear program direction, expected activities and actual allocation of resources from senior management, including the balance and nature of the program’s fundamental and applied science projects. Some stakeholders shared a view that the new program (PSG) was moving away from areas where it could clearly demonstrate reduced risk across the country at the regional/community level (e.g., developing municipal-level seismic hazard maps). It should be noted that the resources available to the Program over the last five years would likely prevent the staff from developing an appreciable number of these maps.
Best practices/lessons learned: Some of the tools and mechanisms developed under PSG Program and CHIS were identified as best practices by organizations external to NRCan that also adopted them to enhance their own hazard-related work. For instance, the ESS structure for emergency plans, which formed the basis for NRCan’s planning framework, was adopted in essentially unmodified form by Public Safety Canada as the best practice and de facto standard for federal emergency plans under the Emergency Management Act (EMA). As well, the hazard assessment methodology developed by PSG Program for the proposed Alaska Highway pipeline was adopted by the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS). On the other hand, NRCan also incorporates lessons learned from dealing with emergencies elsewhere in the world. For example, the Sub-activity’s program plans were adjusted following earthquakes and tsunamis in Chile, New Zealand and Japan.
Finally, for both PSG and CHIS, stakeholders interviewed called for continued, better and increased outreach activities in order to ensure dissemination of targeted information on PSG mandate, priorities and (actual and potential) contributions both within and outside of NRCan. In particular, better dissemination of mandate and priorities to other federal organizations would help GHPS in its efforts to improve coordination of its activities with the key federal government departments and agencies involved in emergency management and/or national security.
Question:  To what extent did the level of interaction and integration between the two Sub-activity components (as well as with other Sub-Activities and stakeholders) contribute to the production of measured outputs and the achievement of outcomes?
PSG Program and CHIS collaborate frequently with external partners, both within Canada and internationally. Much collaboration took place because individual PSG/CHIS staff members were personally engaged with partner organizations or as a result of planned encounters (e.g., conferences, committees, etc.) and unplanned encounters. These types of interactions had been useful for leveraging funding, as well as knowledge, data and instrumentation. 
Both PSG Program and CHIS have been more effective in collaborating with external partners than working with one another. Promoting greater alignment and integration between the two Sub-activity components was in fact the most frequent suggestion for improving the effectiveness of the Sub-activity cited by both PSG Program and CHIS internal stakeholders. In particular, opportunities exist for PSG to conduct more research to support CHIS information products and services/tools.
Multiple lines of evidence describe PSG’s collaborations with different levels of government, academia, industry and research networks. This has facilitated and/or funded research work and joint research outputs, sharing of research data, access to research instrumentation, hiring of research staff and consultation with user groups. CHIS also engages in collaborations with other government programs, academia and research networks in order to facilitate research and monitoring work and improve the provision of hazard information, alerts and forecasts.
The collaborations of both components with external stakeholders enabled significant leveraging of funding, staffing, complementary knowledge and expertise, instrumentation and technology, and data and data networks. As a result, PSG Program was more effective in carrying out research, applying research knowledge to improve geohazards risk/impact assessment and hazard loss mitigation potential and disseminating research findings/outputs and related tools. Likewise, CHIS achieved greater effectiveness in improving hazard monitoring and forecasting, applying uniform data standards, providing emergency management support resources and conducting radiological research because of external collaboration efforts. Many of the collaborations carried out by either component took place because PSG or CHIS staff had good rapport with the partner organization, or they were a result of unplanned interactions with representatives of these organizations at conferences, via participation in a committee, through the NRCan website and other means.
The evaluation data indicate that both PSG Program and CHIS have been more effective in collaborating with external partners than working with one another, despite the fact that there are interdependencies between the work of the two components. For example, access to CHIS seismic network, related instrumentation and technical staff is paramount for PSG research, whereas PSG research is intended to improve CHIS hazard monitoring and forecasting. In addition, it was common for PSG and CHIS external stakeholders to report interacting with both PSG and CHIS staff and/or accessing/utilizing both PSG and CHIS outputs and services.
While there was an annual interaction between CHIS and PSG (in which the managers of both components discuss common directions and how one could support the other in the fulfillment of their respective priorities), the evaluation found, based on interview data and observations, that PSG and CHIS approached issues from different perspectives, resulting in both components setting and implementing their priorities independently of one another.
Interviewees from both components also observed gaps and lost opportunities in the contributions of CHIS to PSG, as CHIS tended to only support the activities of PSG Program to the extent that its resources allowed. Inversely, PSG’s research did not significantly contribute to the improvement of CHIS operations. On a positive note, some interviewees highlighted some instances demonstrating efforts to achieve a higher degree of integration of the activities of each Sub-activity’s components. For example, following the Haida Gwaii earthquake in October 2012, PSG Program planned to work with CHIS and the Canada Centre for Remote Sensing (CSRS) for marine and land-based aftershock surveys.
Promoting greater alignment and integration between the two Sub-activity components are the most frequently cited suggestions by both PSG and CHIS internal stakeholders to improve the Sub-activity. As mentioned earlier, there are opportunities for the clarification of the roles and responsibilities of PSG research in supporting the improvement of CHIS services/tools and, similarly, for the clarification of the role of CHIS in providing services to PSG. On the one hand, PSG is conducting an array of activities from basic to applied research with multiple stakeholders without having a formal joint CHIS/PSG research plan for the improvement of CHIS information products and services. Such internal activity would benefit from being jointly prioritized, planned and formally integrated into the Program Sub-activity logic model. As CHIS is providing services to several external organizations, PSG’s expectations for CHIS internal services should also be managed with a more formal prioritization process and internal service coordination.
Further, with respect to strategic planning, a documented need was found for improved coordination between planning for emergency management within the ESS (the responsibility of CHIS) and business continuity planning of NRCan in order to avoid disconnection.
Question:  Have the allocated financial resources and human resources (FTEs) been adequate for the activities of each Sub-activity component?
Sub-activity total expenditures increased 35% over the evaluation period, but the resources internally allocated to the Sub-activity were inadequate in order to complete research projects compared to the significant amount of work carried out and infrastructure maintenance and upgrade investments required by both components. This issue was most strongly reflected by insufficient staffing levels due to high turnover and complex hiring policies, particularly in the case of PSG. The internal funding of the Sub-Activity has remained at a level where the PSG and CHIS have provided value to Canadians and results against departmental priorities and mandated responsibilities through the leveraging of external contributions. The level of external contributions has increased over the review period through recognition of the expertise and results. Nevertheless, both components were able to produce outputs with the allocated resources. To a large extent, these achievements were possible due to successful leveraging of financial and in-kind contributions, mainly from other federal departments and other NRCan sectors. 
The research and outputs produced under the Sub-activity generate considerable external benefits in terms of cost-effective prevention measures. 
Further, it was found that both PSG and CHIS have formal processes in place to plan and prioritize projects and activities and these contribute to the efficient use of resources. Also, each component has developed some performance metrics and service standards. Despite these efforts, there is room for improvement in the mechanisms and processes that both components use to collect and utilize performance data.
The evaluation concluded that the Sub-activity operates efficiently given the level of achievements in relation to costs. Both components operate with limited resources while mandated to deliver wide range of products and services which rely on sophisticated technologies.
PSG operated with fewer resources than originally allocated—over the evaluation period, planned expenditures exceeded actual by $6 million. The actual expenditures of CHIS exceeded the planned expenditures by $14.1 million. To examine the costs of producing outputs and outcomes in more detail, five themes are examined below: a) overall expenditures, b) adequacy of resources/staffing levels, c) external revenues/leveraging, d) the cost-benefit of preventative measures and e) suggestions for improved efficiency.
a) Expenditures: Based on available financial data the total expenditures for the Sub-activity increased from $9.8 million in 2008-09 to $15.1 million in 2011-12, which represents a 35% increase. This increase was in part a result of PSG program gaining 10 FTEs with the addition of the Marine Geohazards project, which increased the salary amounts associated with the program in 2011-12. A similar increase was observed for each of the two components as shown in Figure 2. Specifically, CHIS A-base expenditures increased 40% between 2008-09 and 2009-10 while PSG A-base expenditures increased almost 38% between 2008-09 and 2010-11. For CHIS a large but decreasing part of the expenditures was related to O&M ranging from 53% in 2008-09 to a projected 30.4% in 2012-13. Decrease in expenditure from 2011-12 to projected 2012-13 is mainly due to a decrease of vote netted revenue (VNR) and grant and contributions (G&C).
In the case of PSG, this increase is mainly due to the transition from the RRHN Program to the current version, PSG Program. This increase is explained by the increase of FTEs from 32-33 to 40-42 FTEs. In addition, the increased acquisition of external financial resources by both GHPS components contributed to increased total expenditures in 2011-12.
Figure 2 Expenditures of GHPS and by component, 2008-2009 to 2011-12
Text version

Figure 2 Expenditures of GHPS and by component, 2008-2009 to 2011-12
Expenditures for CHIS were just over $6 million in 2008-09,  rose to just under $8 million in 2009-10, increased to just over $8 million in  2010-11, and were at $9 million in 2011-12 (approximately).
      PSG expenditures were just under $4 million in 2008-09, rose  to $5 million in 2009-10, increased again to $6 million in 2010-11, and were at  just over $6 million in 2011-12 (approximately).
      Expenditures for GHPS were just under $10 million in  2008-09, rose to just over $12 million in 2009-10, increased again to just over  $14 million in 2010-11, and were at $15 million in 2011-12 (approximately).
Source: Compiled from financial information provided by program management
b) Adequacy of resources/staffing: In some instances, inadequate staffing caused significant delays (up to a year) in carrying out planned work in all PSG geohazards areas (i.e., earthquake, tsunami, landslide, space weather and marine geohazards). The shortage of staff was noted not only by internal stakeholders, who in several cases took on additional responsibilities to their regular duties, but also by external stakeholders in the case study reviews. In one instance, resources to hire staff for earthquake research became available in the last year of the evaluation period, even though the need was identified in 2009-10. As illustrated in Table 1, more resources to hire staff were available in the later years of the evaluation period, particularly in 2010-11 and 2011-12, partially due to contributions from other federal departments.
Both PSG internal and external stakeholders noted that the resources allocated to PSG were not adequate (particularly for earthquake, landslide and marine geohazard research) given actual mandate and expectations. CHIS stakeholders also noted that the resources allocated to CHIS were not adequate, particularly on the seismic side. It should be noted that despite these reservations, the funding of the Sub-Activity has remained at a level where the core functions of the PSG and CHIS could be completed. Additional research activities and further value-added work done to extend the reach of the two components beyond their core mandates has only been sustainable through the use of external contributions.
c) External revenues and leveraging: The delivery of the planned outcomes, albeit with some delays, was largely possible due to the capability of both PSG and CHIS to leverage significant external funds through their collaboration with diverse partners and stakeholders. PSG projects received external funding from the Canadian Space Agency and the Department of National Defence and in-kind contributions from Public Safety Canada. Resources were also shared in a collaborative project with Ontario Hydro One, which also provided in-kind support. Other projects involved in-kind contributions from provincial emergency organizations such as British Columbia Provincial Emergency Preparedness or financial contributions from other NRCan groups.
CHIS’s closest collaborators were the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) and DND; however, some activities also involved Health Canada (HC), Defense Research and Development Canada (DRDC), National Research Council (NRC) and the Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission (CNSC). Almost all activities analyzed in case studies (excluding the RRHN transition case study) for both components leveraged in-kind contributions from other sectors of NRCan and/or external partners. Financial leveraged resources included funding for equipment purchases, research grants or graduate students.
In 2012-13, the total revenues from other sources for the Sub-activity were approximately $2.6 million, which represented 17% of the total GHPS expenditures (Figure 3). TBC For the same year, the total revenues for PSG and CHIS reached 25% and 12%, respectively. Funding from other government departments (OGDs) is the main source of external revenues for PSG and the sole source for CHIS. It accounted for about 15% of total expenditures of PSG in 2012-13.
CHIS and PSG conducted minimal cost-recovery for information services and products. Such additional potential revenues were considered by CHIS for specific services. While internal stakeholders mentioned that users were used to free access to such services and consider them to be public goods, GHPS could explore cost-recovery opportunities for specific services within the limit of its mandate and NRCan policies.
Figure 3 External revenues* as Percentages of GHPS Expenditures, 2008-2009 to 2011-12
Text version

Figure 3 External revenues* as Percentages of GHPS Expenditures, 2008-2009 to 2011-12
* Includes funds from other government departments,  specified purpose accounts and cost recovery.
      CHIS percentage of external revenue was 17% in 2008-09, fell  to 9% in 2009-10, rose to 22% in 2010-11 and then fell again to 16% in 2011-12.
      PSG percentage of external revenue was 12% in 2008-09, fell  to 7% in 2009-10, rose to 12% in 2010-11 and then rose again to 25% in 2011-12.
      GHPS percentage of external revenue was 14% in 2008-09, fell  to 8% in 2009-10, rose to 17% in 2010-11 and then rose again to 19% in 2011-12.
* Includes funds from other government departments,  specified purpose accounts and cost recovery.
      CHIS percentage of external revenue was 17% in 2008-09, fell  to 9% in 2009-10, rose to 22% in 2010-11 and then fell again to 16% in 2011-12.
      PSG percentage of external revenue was 12% in 2008-09, fell  to 7% in 2009-10, rose to 12% in 2010-11 and then rose again to 25% in 2011-12.
      GHPS percentage of external revenue was 14% in 2008-09, fell  to 8% in 2009-10, rose to 17% in 2010-11 and then rose again to 19% in 2011-12.
* Includes funds from: other government departments; specified purpose accounts; and cost recovery
Source: Compiled from financial information provided by program management
After the initial increase between 2008-09 and 2009-10, the A-base expenditures as a percentage of total expenditures declined in 2011-12 to 73% (vs. 94% in 2009-10) and 62% (vs. 73%) for PSG and CHIS respectively, a reflection of the increase in resources from external sources.
d) Cost effectiveness of preventive measures: The Sub-activity’s research also generates external benefits, the most salient example being the seismic research conducted under the RRNH Program and CHIS that informed the National Building Code. It is believed that modifications to the Code based on this research resulted in reduced building losses from shaking and fire damage, as well as reduced loss of life and injuries. NRCan estimated that the safety benefits, net of the cost of new construction to comply with the modified building code, represent an annualized value of $42 million (in constant 1992 dollars). This amount represented ten times the cost of the associated earthquake research and did not take into account potential cost savings from modifications to other infrastructure codes (e.g., bridges and dams).
This estimate further supported the conclusion of various international organizations and documents that pro-active, preventative disaster mitigation measures were more cost-effective compared to reactive post-disaster activities. Countries that were well-equipped and prepared for natural disasters ultimately fare better in reducing costs on relief, reconstruction and recovery efforts and they suffer fewer casualties.  One 2009 American study estimated that one dollar spent on prevention was more than ten times more valuable than a dollar spent on relief in net present value. Geoscience Australia estimated that additional investment in natural disaster mitigation by all levels of government provided a 15% rate of return. Another analysis found that for every dollar invested in flood mitigation, more than AUD$2.10 was saved. Finally, the World Bank estimated that for every USD$1 spent in risk mitigation and disaster preparedness, $USD 7 was saved in reduced costs of response and recovery.
Qualitatively, some PSG internal stakeholders/external stakeholders stated that PSG provided the best possible value for money given the level of its achievements with limited resources. They also noted that it was essential for the component that external resources supplement internal resources, but they highlighted that PSG would not be able to effectively absorb any further external funds without a corresponding increase in staff capacity to assume the additional work.
On CHIS side, both internal and external stakeholders stated that CHIS provided the best possible value for money given the level of its achievements with limited resources. It was also highlighted that increasing dependence on external revenues could constitute a risk for the mandatory activities for which CHIS was responsible.
In sum, both components need to obtain additional external funding to supplement internal funding to deliver their programing as actual resources do not allow the flexibility to PSG and CHIS to implement identified best practices and to further engage in horizontal federal initiatives.
e) Improving GHPS efficiency: Despite the generally efficient operations of both components, it was found that nominal efficiency gains could be achieved by closer integration and coordination between the two components and among their locations. Particularly on the PSG side, some internal stakeholders noted the need for closer collaboration, which would include annual common planning of priorities and activities of the two components, as well as a more open exchange of information on the capacities and resources of each of the components.
On CHIS side, internal interviews identified a need for PSG to balance its basic and applied research for the benefit of CHIS operations and services. The interview data also indicated that "talks" and meetings between the leadership of the two components had been scheduled to establish integrated planning and execution of common priorities. As mentioned earlier, the evaluation that PSG and CHIS approach issues from different management perspectives resulting in both components setting and implementing their priorities independently of one another.
A discussion of efficiency and economy must also include an examination of management structures and mechanisms. In this regard, there is evidence of formal processes implemented under both PSG and CHIS to plan and prioritize their respective activities (e.g., through the ESS Executive Committee).
For PSG, these processes included mid-year and year-end reviews, annual review of Program activities and monthly meetings on projects. Several internal PSG stakeholders stated that effective structures and processes were in place to ensure optimal resource allocation and utilization, noting that senior management made resource allocation decisions in the context of ESS/NRCan programming, as well as other relevant federal/provincial government programming.
In addition, at the end of each fiscal year, PSG undergoes a formal program budgeting exercise for the following fiscal year, during which a Work Plan is also established. During this exercise, Project Leaders are asked to evaluate and rank each activity in their project in terms of its relative priority and performance. The priority is established based on criteria such as: contribution of project activity to the PSG program; appropriateness of Federal/GSC Role; relevance; and contribution of activity to GSC Strategic Plan. The performance is assessed against the following criteria: effectiveness; efficiency; management processes in-place & working; and contribution of activity to the advancement of science. During the budgeting exercise, Project Leaders are also invited to table ideas and proposals for new or continuing projects. The selection of supported is then primarily made based on an activity’s potential for geohazards risk reduction.
Planning exercises for CHIS include weekly and annual staff meetings, production of capital and ongoing operational plans with input from all staff, and creation of annual work plans per CHIS group. Consequently, all significant budget variances, major budget changes or staffing issues require discussion with the head of CHIS.
Due to a lack of information, the evaluation could not determine how CHIS projects and activities were prioritized and planned at a more strategic level, such as at the level of ESS as a whole.
Some form of project-level management structure/performance monitoring was also identified in all six case study projects. These included indicators such as:
the count of publications and presentations;
monitoring uptake of knowledge/products/tools by clients and international community;
popularity of website applications or monitoring of activity on  CHIS Twitter account;
after-action reports; and progress updates during weekly meetings;
mid-year review checks against project milestones; and
annual reports to NRCan and other departments that fund joint projects and activities.
Lessons learned from RRNH: The RRNH underwent a performance review in its final year, which was expected to inform the development of a new program. The review advocated for hazards work with a national perspective (as opposed to both regional and national as was the case under RRNH) to achieve greater efficiencies. This shift in program focus was seen as a way to direct limited available resources that would produce results for all provinces and municipalities. Given the potential for funding reductions, management identified key areas where the greatest impacts could be generated. This formed the basis for a shift towards high-level projects which would feed into national codes, standards and regulations. The consultations undertaken as part of the review also led to the development of the four major activity areas of PSG program: national hazard assessments, targeted hazard assessments, natural hazard risk assessments and influencing personal preparedness for natural hazards.
The transition process and planning of PSG Program was supported by several factors. With ESS management taking on a direct role in the development of the Program, the new PSG logic model and performance indicators became much more grounded in the realities of NRCan. Ensuring that the program was clearly tied to the department’s strategic objectives and that there was a clear link between the activities to be undertaken and the larger performance measurement strategy made PSG a much more focused version of RRNH.
Existing performance measures: Finally, in examining efficient and cost-effective Sub-activity operation, the evaluation found that performance measurement, management and reporting were taking place but could be improved as outlined below.
A set of service standards for  CHIS component has been developed and includes measures such as the 24/7 operation of the earthquakescanada.ca website, earthquake notification to emergency measures organizations and critical infrastructure operators sent out within 4-10 minutes after the earthquake, all sensor data from permanent seismic stations available to the public within 30 minutes after acquisition, etc. CHIS collects not only performance information on the timeliness of earthquake alerts and notifications but also the adequacy and effectiveness of monitoring networks. Despite this, the evaluation could not make a conclusive statement about whether or not CHIS had any target benchmarks and/or standards for such performance data and other key performance indicators on CHIS outputs and outcomes.
Some PSG measures reported in the departmental performance measurement framework included: number and scope of new or updated mitigation and emergency plans using ESS hazards assessment information; data and information are accessible electronically; and percentage of outputs completed or on track. Some interviewees also added that the number of PSG peer-reviewed publications served as a proxy performance indicator. The peer-reviewed publications are not systemically complied and analyzed from a performance standpoint and most internal stakeholders found the current performance measures inadequate. A PSG progress report also noted that a new tracking system had been implemented in October 2009 in order to document meetings with stakeholders for communication of hazard information to support risk reduction. Many less formal contacts could not be documented.
Challenges to performance measurement: The evaluation examined whether necessary mechanisms were in place to efficiently manage the two Sub-activity components. It was found that these could be improved with better performance measures and performance management practice. In particular, the mid-year and year-end PSG and CHIS progress reports did not report against targets, specific research performance indicators or service standards. Rather, they summarized the activities carried out during the period. In addition, information was not always collected and reported in a consistent manner to allow for comparisons across periods or against overall objectives.
Internal stakeholders reported a long-term effort to develop sound metrics for both components, particularly the high-level DPR metrics. However, it was considered a challenge to measure the results of activities that focused on the prevention of events that might not happen. Both components seek to avoid costs associated with geohazards and until these hazards have occurred, it is difficult to determine the investment that would be necessary to avoid the cost. The case study in which PSG collaborated with the District of North Vancouver was a good example of a natural disaster scenario that aided in estimating future costs. More scenarios would be necessary to obtain a more accurate estimate.
In addition, given the nature of the Sub-activity’s objectives and activities, the logic model that traditionally serves as the starting point for designing performance indicators may not work well for a service-oriented program such as CHIS. Instead, internal stakeholders expressed the need to align performance metrics with a risk assessment framework that targets emergency management support activities within the department to make these metrics more useful for the management of the components. This avenue would provide value to the management of the component and would improve the compilation and reporting of data from existing databases and systems.
Further, due to the research nature of the programming, challenges and difficulties associated with performance measurement were noted by PSG/RRNH researchers. In particular, their projects were producing information that was capable of influencing products and decision-making across the country but which was almost impossible to trace back to an individual project output in less than five years. Additionally, the RRNH end performance review noted that efforts to increase the number of hazard assessments used in mitigation efforts to reduce risks had not been achieved in a measureable way and was most likely not a workable goal given the budget and research nature of the program.
At the onset of the evaluation period and PSG programming, the component implemented a tracking system and developed noteworthy efforts to formally document how various stakeholders utilized PSG research outputs and identified any associated impacts. However, based on information collected by interviews, such efforts were discontinued as too time-consuming, especially in the context of inadequate staffing and limited resources. As a result, the evaluation found that basic research performance indicators were lacking and not systematically collected, reported and used for the management of PSG.
There is a need to develop a strategy to better track the interaction between the two components to inform a discussion on how to improve mutually beneficial collaboration and efficiency at the level of the Sub-activity.
Lack of clear profiles for GHPS and its components: The evaluation found that the activity profiles of CHIS and PSG documented internally and communicated externally were not complete or up-to-date. Such detailed activity profiles could help clarify the roles and responsibilities internally, for activities conducted individually, in collaboration or any service or expertise dependent activities. Another version of the profile could be developed for external public diffusion in order to improve the lack of awareness from external stakeholders identified during the evaluation.
Question:  Are there alternative approaches to the current design and delivery of the Sub-activity that would allow it to meet its objectives and mandate in a more effective and efficient manner?
In reviewing four international jurisdictions to answer this evaluation question, several common themes were identified. These include emphasis on an integrated, all-hazards risk approach that combines the various elements of hazard risk reduction, namely: 

engagement of stakeholders across levels of government; 
community capacity building and preparedness; and 
focus on collaborative and cost-sharing approaches. 

GHPS has been involved to varying extents in all of these areas. Other jurisdictions may have been more proactive and effective than Canada in coordinating key emergency management players and engaging a broader range of community stakeholders. 
In addition, a more detailed review of the Australian system and the work of a similar agency, Geoscience Australia, revealed a range of useful performance metrics and service standards that NRCan could consider adopting to enhance its performance tracking. In terms of available resources, Canada resides in the middle of the reviewed countries, spending more than Switzerland and New Zealand but less than Australia.
To address this evaluation question, alternative approaches and best practices in four other jurisdictions were examined (Australia, New Zealand, Switzerland and the United States). It is important to point out that the different international practices best suit each country’s context. Therefore, when making comparisons, the evaluation recognizes the contextual singularities in which entities responsible for emergency management operate. The differences in the scope, breadth and depth of geohazards activities carried out by NRCan’s GHPS, as compared to the other countries examined, were taken into consideration in the following findings.
Coordinated approach
As in Canada, all four of the jurisdictions examined have made efforts to apply integrated, ‘all-hazards risk’ approaches that combine the various elements of hazard risk reduction,( i.e., address various natural and human-made hazards in a uniform manner). The review suggests that other jurisdictions were more proactive and effective than Canada in coordinating key emergency management players and engaging a broader range of stakeholders. While PSG and CHIS have been active in all of these areas, Canada’s efforts lag behind those in other jurisdictions in some of the areas, particularly in terms of stakeholder coordination and active community involvement.
At the federal level, Canada also appears to lag somewhat in the level of coordination of various emergency response actors that can be found in some other jurisdictions, particularly in Australia. Australia’s emergency response system is based on the National Strategy for Disaster Resilience, a comprehensive, long-term, multi-hazard approach to disaster risk reduction that integrates all risk considerations, with a focus on disaster prevention, mitigation, preparedness and vulnerability reduction. The Strategy was introduced as a response to a fractured system in which disparate policy agendas and competing priorities resulted in gaps and overlaps in natural hazard preparedness and management.
In Australia, the Standing Council on Police and Emergency Management (SCPEM ) of the Council of Australian Governments and a hierarchy of committees underneath it, bring together the various levels of government, identify specific needs of the government in areas of hazards research and set the collective emergency management agenda. In particular, the goals of the SCPEM are to:
promote a coordinated national response to law enforcement and emergency management issues;
provide a framework for cooperation and shared strategic directions for the policing and emergency services of Australia and New Zealand; and
encourage and share best practice in police policy and operations and in emergency management, across jurisdictions.
Another approach is New Zealand’s National Civil Defence Emergency Management Strategy (CDEM). The supporting CDEM legislation aims to integrate and coordinate hazard and emergency management arrangements, policies and activities across the "4 Rs": reduction and emergency readiness, response and recovery. Recent CDEM reforms have further aimed to integrate the planning and coordination of resources across agencies and service providers. In particular, the CDEM ‘Cluster Approach’ aims to reinforce existing multi-agency relationships by clarifying goals, responsibilities and roles for disaster management; identifying gaps in capability and capacity; and addressing these gaps through action plans. These clusters include: CDEM Groups, Public Information & Education, Emergency Services, Research & Science, Health, Business Community, Welfare, Socio-Economic, Transport, Agriculture & Rural, Lifeline Utilities (by sectors) and International Assistance. The Natural Hazards Research Platform is aligned with this strategy and other initiatives of government agencies responsible for reduction, readiness, response and recovery from natural hazard events.
Another example of a highly integrated national approach to disaster risk reduction is the Swiss National Platform for Natural Hazards (PLANAT). PLANAT assumes an integrated and holistic risk management in which all types of measures for natural disaster reduction - preparedness, response and recovery (reconstruction) are considered, though its primary focus has been on the long-term prevention and mitigation of natural risks. Its mission is three-fold: to advise the federal government on strategic matters related to disaster risk reduction; to coordinate work in this field; and to raise awareness and promote a long-term shift towards averting danger through investment in disaster risk management. PLANAT’s 18 members come from all Swiss regions and sectors and possess complementary expertise across the fields of natural hazards and disaster risk reduction. PLANAT also cooperates with other organizations and institutions that work in the area of natural hazards, including the National Association of Natural Hazards experts Fachleute Naturgefahren Schweiz (FAN), the Working Group on Geology and Natural Hazards Arbeitsgruppe Geologie und Naturgefahren (AGN) and the Natural Hazards Platform of the Alpine Convention (PLANALP).
Stakeholder and community engagement
To various extents and degrees of success, the reviewed jurisdictions have also established mechanisms that facilitate interaction and knowledge transfer among different program components and key stakeholders such as the PLANAT platform in Switzerland. Further, the federal government of New Zealand established the Natural Hazards Research Platform to help research providers and end users work more closely together. Today, the platform is led by a Technical Advisory Group (made up of representatives of Platform partners), a Strategic Advisory Group (made up of end users) and a Platform Management Group (made up of the CEOs of GNS Science, the National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research and the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment).
The review of other jurisdictions highlighted targeted efforts in areas such as active community involvement and community capacity building. Under the Australian National Strategy for Disaster Resilience (NSDR), current efforts towards effective risk identification and mitigation involve cooperation with state governments and building capability at the local government level. Nevertheless, some challenges have been recorded in implementing the NSDR, particularly due to the wide array and large number of stakeholders within and across jurisdictions and beyond the emergency management sector, making it difficult to coordinate efforts and prevent duplication. Other challenges included: the coordination of the information and knowledge generated through the various mitigation and other programs by the states to ensure that best practice approaches are being shared and lessons learned; achieving agreed standardized approaches to information gathering and publication; and ensuring the relevance, accuracy and timeliness of information, both when published and ongoing.
In New Zealand, the vision of the CDEM strategy is resilient communities understanding and managing their hazards. The CDEM supports the government’s broader policy directions for sustainable growth and the safety of citizens and communities.
The US Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) developed several effective strategies for reducing risk, one of which is Risk MAP, which is aimed at delivering quality data to increase public awareness and support community action that reduces risk to life and property. It builds on flood hazard data and maps produced during the Flood Map Modernization program. It is contributing to a multi-hazard, integrated approach to disaster risk reduction for infrastructure and community development and land use planning. Further, the FEMA’s Comprehensive Preparedness Guidance 201: Threat and Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment, published in 2012, provides a common, consistent approach for identifying and assessing risks and their associated impacts. It provides Hazard Mitigation Assistance grants to communities in the pre- and post-disaster environments to reduce risk to undamaged facilities vulnerable to hazards. Finally, the Community Education and Outreach (CEO) group promotes effective hazard mitigation through community education, outreach, training and coordination with the public and private sectors.
Insight from Geoscience Australia
Considering all the international approaches described above, some particular insight from Geoscience Australia (re: stakeholder engagement, resource allocation and performance measurement) may be applied to GHPS as described below.
Resources: According to data provided by Geoscience Australia, funding for geohazards activities in 2011-12 was estimated to be AUD$28 million (approximately CAD$26.5 million) (see Table 11). The current Canadian funding of CAD $15.1 million represents 57% of the funding available to Geoscience Australia. Note, however, that Australia engages also in international work and that the number of Geoscience Australia staff devoted to geohazards activities was estimated to be between 90 and 100 FTEs.
Cost-recovery: Geoscience Australia underwent a strategic review to determine whether the agency was operated in the most cost-effective manner. Interestingly, like the GHPS at NRCan, Geoscience Australia’s revenues from external sources are primarily comprised of cost recovery for work performed on behalf of other agencies and other governments (inter-agency agreements); it conducts minimal cost-recovery from the private commercial sector. The review found several issues with this funding model. Firstly, due to the focus on the immediate service requirements as a discrete product to be funded, issues of funding capability development and other related investments were overlooked. Secondly, agencies sometimes had difficulty in seeing where their money was being spent in relation to outputs. Thirdly, the reliance on periodic inter-agency agreements had an impact on staffing and staff development policies at Geoscience Australia. The review suggested that the agency seek to recover more of its costs from commercial users of information through targeted, specialized data products, which would reduce its dependency on budget funding to support its products and services.
Stakeholder engagement and collaborations: As in the case of PSG and CHIS, Geoscience Australia collaborates extensively with external stakeholders and leverages considerable external funds in carrying out its geohazards activities. However, Geoscience Australia has closer working relationships with state governments, other jurisdictions and the insurance industry compared to PSG and CHIS, partly due to the strong leadership and coordination role on the part of the Standing Council on Police and Emergency Management (SCPEM) of the Council of Australian Governments. Geoscience Australia is also involved to a greater extent in emergency response and recovery than PSG/CHIS (e.g., through collaborative work aimed at determining post-disaster damage assessment, enhancing community resiliency to hazards etc.). On the other hand, PSG and CHIS tend to work more closely with academia, professional associations and critical infrastructure operators than Geoscience Australia.
Performance measurement: The performance indicators and service standards used by Geoscience Australia to report on its geohazards activities are more specific and more comprehensive than the existing performance indicators and service standards used by PSG and CHIS. The Australians track how the provision of hazard information/advice contributes to the emergency management functions of stakeholders and set specific benchmarks for the provision of geoscientific information. However, in the case of earthquakes, for instance, CHIS delivers alerts within a shorter period of time (4-6) minutes compared to Geoscience Australia (10 minutes) and ESS also uses Twitter to quickly relay hazard information to the public. Geoscience Australia is currently contemplating the use of social media to speed up its alert-issuing activity. An overview of performance measurement (service standards and performance metrics) implemented by Geoscience Australia is provided in Annex B.
Pro-active approach: Similar to Geoscience Australia, Canada focuses on and engages in geohazard risk preventive activities and measures. This constitutes a positive finding, as these were found to comply with the most cost-effective approach to risk and disaster mitigation policies. A general trend evident in the literature that facilitates greater cost effectiveness in disaster risk reduction programs and initiatives in the long-term is the overarching shift in many countries towards preventive approaches. The traditional public sector approach to disaster funding has focused on relief rather than prevention spending. When emergencies happen, funds are often diverted from key development projects in order to pay for relief and recovery efforts. A number of documents reference the fact that due to the growing financial cost of disasters for government (as well as businesses and individuals) a gradual conceptual shift is being made towards proactive, rather than reactive, strategies. Many of these reports have recommended that policy emphasis be shifted from disaster response to pre-disaster mechanisms. Governments and the donor community are now largely aware that it is more cost effective to fund programs that aim to reduce societal damage from disasters than to continually provide assistance for response and recovery.
5.0       Conclusions and Recommendations
Relevance: The Sub-activity addresses important and relevant needs for a diverse range of stakeholders related to geohazards and emergency management in Canada. In particular, the evaluation found that needs for hazard monitoring, emergency management, risk reduction and loss mitigation activities are expected to increase in the future, both in Canada and globally. The combination of PSG and CHIS knowledge, services and networks constitutes an important aspect of Government of Canada’s efforts in science-based geohazards risk preventive activities and measures.
NRCan, through this Sub-activity, maintains unique and necessary scientific, technical and monitoring capabilities related to various natural and human-made hazards under its mandate in the Canadian context. The activities carried out under PSG and CHIS are aligned with NRCan and federal government priorities directly related to public safety and security and beyond including S&T, economic growth and sustainable development priorities.
While a strong federal government mandate and role are envisioned by stakeholders in geohazards research and emergency management, the evaluation of the Sub-activity unveiled a lack of clear and consistent horizontal vision within the federal government. In particular, the enhancement of policy dialogue and policy guidance from key federal organizations, including Public Safety Canada would help clarify the role of GHPS component and other key federal organizations that contribute to the national emergency management, risk reduction and loss mitigation efforts. Such issues are beyond the scope of this evaluation, but must be addressed by NRCan to help clarify where the Sub-activity fits in relation to the other organizations involved and how best to position the development of its expertise, research, services and tools in the future.
Furthermore, the evaluation found that strategic-level discussions are needed internally within NRCan to facilitate policy dialogue with other key federal government organizations. Given the nature of geohazards-related activities, horizontal discussions have often been more operational than policy-focused. As such, the evaluation found that the GHPS would benefit having policy support from within NRCan to facilitate horizontal policy dialogue and initiatives. This would help clarify the role of its components and identify some opportunities where NRCan would have the most beneficial role within the suite of federal activities.
Although mitigating the vulnerability of communities to reduce the impacts of disasters is consistent with the objectives of the Emergency Management Act and the government’s priorities, there is a need to clarify the role of NRCan at the regional and community levels. Given recent shift in PSG’s focus towards national-level priorities away from municipal/provincial outreach, education and extension programs due to resource shifts, such dialogue will help PSG to position its role at the regional and community levels in relation to the activities led by other federal organizations. PSG and CHIS should leverage established relationships and communication channels and may wish to consider seeking assistance from other areas of NRCan.
Recommendation 1: NRCan should identify opportunities to develop a horizontal policy dialogue among key federal disaster organizations to improve communications, achieve a common understanding of roles and responsibilities, consider legislative and regulatory adjustments, enhance collaboration and thereby increase effectiveness.
Several lines of evidence indicated that the GHPS stakeholders (federal organizations in particular) were not aware of the complete suite PSG and CHIS roles, responsibilities and activities. This was also reflected by the review of available activity profiles of CHIS and PSG documented internally and communicated externally. These profiles are not clear, complete or up-to-date. Greater and more detailed communication of GHPS roles and activities would help improve stakeholder awareness. Importantly, such improved communication of GHPS profile should primarily aim at facilitating the horizontal dialogue with other key federal organizations.
Recommendation 2:  NRCan should develop and communicate a comprehensive GHPS profile that includes all activities of PSG and CHIS, for activities conducted individually and in collaboration, as well as for any service or expertise dependent activities. Such improved communication of GHPS profile should primarily aim at facilitating the horizontal dialogue with other key federal organizations.
Performance: PSG and CHIS produced the planned outputs and have made considerable progress in achieving the intended outcomes in spite of some challenges and constraints. As noted above, both Sub-activity components are constrained by the lack of clarity on the extent of federal government involvement in geohazards research and emergency management. On the positive side, there are several key success factors that enhanced the performance of the Sub-activity or its components, including extensive collaboration with partners and stakeholders, an open and flexible approach, qualified and committed staff and a good understanding of user needs. Both Sub-activity components have been effective in collaborating with external stakeholders and other federal departments for specific initiatives and services.
Internally, the evaluation found evidence of collaboration between PSG and CHIS but an improved mechanism is clearly needed to better integrate the priorities and activities of the Sub-activity components. While there is regular interaction between CHIS and PSG, the evaluation found, based on interview data and observations, that PSG and CHIS approach issues from different perspectives, resulting in both components setting and implementing their priorities independently of one another. This relates to the contribution of PSG research to the development of CHIS services and tools and the contribution of CHIS service to PSG research activities.
Clarifying and formalizing their interactions by establishing common goals would facilitate the relations between PSG and CHIS, help set expectations and improve the performance of the Sub-activity. Formal priority setting mechanisms, project management plans, performance tracking and service standards would also need to be established and overseen jointly. If such mechanisms were developed or overseen externally (see next recommendation), this would have the benefit of ensuring objectivity in the review of research and service priorities. This mechanism would consider the mandate and priorities of NRCan, but also the broader federal context and the perspective of key Canadian stakeholders. It should also consider international research, science and technological development.
Recommendation 3: NRCan should improve the priority setting process for GHPS in order to improve the coordination and to ensure integration between both the Canadian Hazard Information Service and Public Safety Geoscience (e.g., planning; communications; collaboration).
GHPS should consider enhancing the role of key external stakeholders and S&T experts (peers) in order to ensure that research priorities are validated to the highest degree possible in order to achieve greater cohesion between the two components. Importantly, this work should define how PSG directly supports the improvement or the development of new services or tools by CHIS. Making greater use of meetings with external stakeholders will help balance PSG research activities and ensure its contribution to applied S&T, for the benefit of both CHIS and external stakeholders.
It would also be important that this body review PSG research needs for CHIS expertise and information by considering the multiple activities and services provided to stakeholders outside NRCan, many of which are mandatory. This oversight body could help inform the GHPS planning in the light of international S&T developments and of the initiatives of other stakeholder organizations (OGDs and key federal players, provincial and territorial EMOs, municipalities, industry).
Recommendation 4: NRCan should continue to improve the performance measurement and financial tracking of CHIS and PSG (i.e., research and service standards) so that reliable information is available to manage the Sub-activity.
The evaluation recognizes the challenge in tracking the outcomes of science-based activities, especially for a Sub-activity that aims to mitigate risks from natural hazards. However, there remain opportunities to improve performance and financial monitoring and reporting. The current performance measurement practices used by both PSG and CHIS do not adequately capture their performance against set targets in a meaningful manner in order to support reporting and decision-making. Both components should continue to find opportunities to improve the quality and meaningfulness of existing performance information that is currently collected, including improvement of their reporting (i.e., research and service standards metrics). In addition, as external revenues are becoming increasingly important for both components in order for them to produce expected outputs and outcomes, there is a need to improve information on GHPS clientele and partners in order to support processes that help bring in external support while respecting the need to continue to provide publicly available data. The evaluation also found a lack of structured and complete information on past and current partners, collaborators and clients. PSG and CHIS should work collaboratively at rethinking their performance measurement approach in order to align performance information with existing program delivery and risk-based frameworks that are known and used. GHPS could also consult with performance measurement experts and NRCan SED for support and advice.
6.0       Annexes
6.1         Annex A – Characteristics of Case Study by Component and Program Activity
6.2         Annex B – Service standards and performance metrics implemented by Geoscience Australia
Performance monitoring
The progress made on high level Geoscience Australia priorities is monitored on a monthly basis for aggregated reporting to an internal Executive Board and the parent department (Department of Resources, Energy and Tourism). In addition, the 2011-12 Annual Report of Geoscience Australia reported on a performance indicator related to geohazards activities. These indicators are listed in Annex B.
According to agreed delivery timelines for advice and alert activities, Geoscience Australia and the Bureau of Meteorology need to deliver an alert or advice triggering an alert for tsunami within 10 minutes from the time tsunami activity is recorded. The time limit for issuing earthquake alerts is not mandated, but Geoscience Australia endeavours to publish information on any earthquake larger than magnitude 4 within 10 minutes from the time seismic activity is recorded. Geoscience Australia is currently contemplating the use of social media to further reduce this time limit.
Geoscience Australia also has its Website Service Standard (listed in Annex B). Moreover, it undertakes to continually improve service standards in response to customer requirements and ongoing feedback.
Apart from the aforementioned, Geoscience Australia has yet to implement a formal performance measurement regime at the operational level and utilizes ad hoc client and community feedback as proxy for performance. It recently established a Governance, Performance and Planning Section to strengthen performance measurement in support of more effective and integrated project management by following up on the recommendations from three separate audit, program and strategic reviews.
Geoscience Australia maintains a 24/7 hotline for media enquiries. According to the data provided by Geoscience Australia staff, between February 2012 and January 2013, Geoscience Australia received 495 media requests for interviews (including non-hazard related queries).
A preliminary search of Geoscience Australia databases conducted by Geoscience Australia staff identified 20 refereed publications (including abstracts), as well as approximately 65 client reports, abstracts for conferences and papers presented externally between February 2012 and January 2013 that were directly linked to geohazards.
Service standards and performance metrics
The Website Service Standard of Geoscience Australia states the following:
Geoscience Australia's website is monitored 24 hours a day 7 days a week by an external service. Any faults detected between 7am and 10pm will be investigated within two hours of their occurrence. Any incidents outside these hours will be investigated at the beginning of the following business day.
Applications on the Geoscience Australia website that depend on the Oracle Database environment will have an availability level of 97%. Static content will have an availability of 99.5%.
In addition, an example of reporting on the key performance indicator from a Geoscience Australia annual report is presented in the table below.
The Earth Monitoring (Geodesy) Customer Service Standard of Geoscience Australia includes the following:
95% availability in Geoscience Australia databases of acquired seismic, infrasound and hydroacoustic data; 
95% availability in Geoscience Australia databases of geomagnetic data;
Observed geomagnetic data submitted to INTERMAGNET compliant with INTERMAGNET specifications;
Calibration of compasses and magnetometers completed within 10 working days of accepted receipt;
90% of national geodetic information requests responded to within two working days;
90% availability at International GPS Service of total daily and hourly data from Australia Regional GPS Network sites within 24 hours of observation;
80% availability at International GPS Service total daily data from Australian Global Navigation Satellite System sites within 24 hours of observation; and
At least 400 passes per month delivered to the International Laser Ranging Service from each of Mt Stromlo and MOBile LAser Ranging System 5 Satellite Laser Ranging (SLR) observatories.
