Summary of the Evaluation of the Clean Growth Hub (Hub)
Figure 1: The Hub’s 16 federal departments and agencies
Transcript
Figure 1.
Infographic showing the 16 federal departments and agencies that are part of the Hub. NRCan and ISED are co-leads. Principal members are NRCan, ISED, AAFC, BDC, DFO, ECCC, EDC, GAC, NRC, and SDTC. The associate members are CCC, CIRNAC, ISC, SCC, TBS, and TC.
Departmental acronyms: Natural Resources Canada (NRCan); Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada (ISED); Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada (AAFC); Business Development Canada (BDC); Fisheries and Oceans Canada (DFO); Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC); Export Development Canada (EDC); Global Affairs Canada (GAC); National Research Council (NRC); Sustainable Development Technology Canada (SDTC); Canada Commercial Corporation (CCC); Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada (CIRNAC); Indigenous Services Canada (ISC); Standards Council of Canada (SCC); Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat – Centre for Greening Government (TBS); Transport Canada (TC).
About the Program
The Hub serves as a whole-of-government service model and focal point to help clean technology proponents navigate the federal clean technology innovation ecosystem. It has three core functions:
Provide advisory services to clean technology proponents.
Enhance the coordination of GC supports and programming for clean technology.
Strengthen federal capacity to track and report on results related to clean technology investment.
NRCan and ISED were each allocated $4.5 million over the evaluation period (fiscal year (FY) 2017-18 to FY 2019-20). Actual expenditures over that period were $3.45 million for NRCan and $3.25 million for ISED.
The Hub advances the “Clean Technology, Innovation, and Jobs” pillar of the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change.
What the Evaluation found
Relevance
All lines of evidence suggest that the Hub is relevant to meet the needs of stakeholders. The Hub helps clean technology proponents navigate the federal ecosystem. It also breaks down inter-departmental silos amongst federal organizations that have policies and programs that support clean technology.
Clients came from various technology areas, organisation sizes, and organisations types across Canada.
There is an ongoing demand for the Hub. More than half of the clients surveyed were satisfied. For those who were dissatisfied, the reasons were in part related to their misunderstanding about the Hub’s scope of activities. The Hub also attracts clients who are not ready for clean technology programs. The Hub could benefit from a more strategic and proactive focus on outreach and communications to better attract “program-ready” clients. The Hub aligns with federal and departmental priorities, frameworks, strategies, and legislated roles related to clean growth, climate action, as well as clean technology and innovation. The Hub is successful because of its horizontal structure and collaborative model.
Effectiveness
All lines of evidence suggest that the Hub is effective in achieving its intended outcomes. The Hub has made progress towards the immediate outcomes:
Progress towards the immediate outcomes may facilitate progress towards the intermediate outcomes and ultimate outcome. There are limitations in inter-departmental collaboration. The Hub could improve its inter-departmental collaboration to enhance the coordination of federal supports and programming.
The Hub is an agile organisation. It has continually enhanced its design and delivery.
The Hub is on track to be implemented as planned. The Hub’s delivery is effective, including its success in addressing early delivery challenges. The Hub is responsive to factors that affect its ability to achieve the intended outcome. The evaluation also found that the federal Information Technology system is not designed for horizontal initiatives, which contributed to some IT issues for the Hub.
Efficiency
All lines of evidence suggest that the Hub has attained operational efficiency. The Hub is efficient and economical. The Hub has clear roles, responsibilities, protocols, and accountability at the governance- and working- level.
During the evaluation period, NRCan spent $3.52 million and ISED $3.99 million relative to their planned budget.
Transcript
Image 1: Factors related to the Hub’s efficiency and economy
Infographic showing the Factors related to the Hub’s efficiency and economy: Inter-departmental collaboration, Physical co-location, resources and culture
Interviewees generally perceived that the Hub is an efficient model such that it could be replicated in other federal initiatives.
Although the Hub has updated the program logic model and indicators to better reflect its scope of activities and collect meaningful performance information, it has not created or implemented a performance measurement strategy. Current performance information is not the best to measure and indicate progress and accomplishment. The Hub needs to implement a performance measurement strategy tailored to its design.
GBA+: A Future Direction for the Hub
The evaluation found that the Hub has future opportunities to serve underrepresented groups, including women and Indigenous peoples, in the clean technology sector. The Hub has pursued several efforts to meet diverse groups’ needs. The Hub’s focal point design makes it an efficient entity to contribute to the Government of Canada’s priorities on reconciliation, equity, diversity, and inclusivity in the clean technology sector.
The current design and delivery have several limitations. The Hub could benefit from an equity, diversity, and inclusion (EDI) strategy.
Figure 2: Four lines of evidence
Transcript
Figure 2.
Infographic showing the four lines of evidence for the Hub’s evaluation: key informant interviews, program document review, secondary data analysis of a client survey, and consultant report review. Details on specific evaluation questions, methods and limitations are found in the full report.
About the Evaluation
The evaluation period covered FY 2017-18 to 2019-20. The objective was to examine the Hub’s relevance, effectiveness, and efficiency with an emphasis on program design and delivery. The evaluation also examined the Hub’s potential role to help address equality and diversity as they relate to relevance and performance.
This evaluation is consistent with the requirements of the Treasury Board Policy on Results (2016) and Directive on Results (2016). NRCan’s Audit and Evaluation Branch conducted the evaluation in consultation with its ISED counterpart.
Recommendations, and Management Response and Action Plan (MRAP)
Based on the areas for improvement, the evaluation provided the following recommendations. Given that the Hub is co-led by NRCan and ISED, both departments were engaged in the development of the evaluation and the MRAP (
the detailed actions of the MRAP are included in the evaluation report
). The actions outlined in the MRAP will be delivered jointly by both departments: