Summary of the Evaluation of the Geoscience to Keep Canada Safe Program
About the Geoscience to Keep Canada Safe Program
The Geoscience to Keep Canada Safe (GKCS) program carries out monitoring, research and planning related to natural geo-hazards (earthquakes, landslides, tsunamis, volcanoes, and space weather) to support public safety and resilience to natural hazard events. The GKCS program activities are delivered through the Canadian Hazards and Information Service (CHIS) and the Public Safety Geoscience (PSG) of the Lands and Minerals Sector (LMS) at NRCan.
The program is supported by ongoing funding (A-base), plus temporary project-based funding (C-based). Total program actual expenditures between 2014-15 to 2019-20 were approximately $93 million.
Text Version
Infographic showing the  program theory of Geoscience to Keep Canada Safe (GKCS), consisting of three  boxes and two arrows.
The first box explains  that “through the GKCS, NRCan’s Land and Minerals Sector carries out  monitoring, research, and planning related to hazards”. An arrow from the first  box points towards the second box.
The second box explains  that “PSG and CHIS establish a strong knowledge base, and develop tools to  support decision-making and the development of mitigation strategies and action  plans”. An arrow from the second box points towards the third box.
The third box explains  “this helps governments, the private sector, and professional organizations to  prevent, mitigate, prepare for, respond to, and recover from natural disasters.”
What the Evaluation found
Relevance
The Program remains highly relevant to government objectives    around public safety and emergency management. It is widely respected for its    role as the primary provider of information on geo-hazards to the Government    of Canada. The subject matter expertise found within the Program was a    valuable asset for Canada in disaster risk reduction (DRR) and emergency    management (EM) efforts. However, Canada’s implementation of the Sendai    Framework on Disaster Risk Reduction in 2015 and Canada’s Emergency Management    Strategy (2017) introduced a whole of society approach to disaster risk    reduction. This approach increased the demand for related geo-science and    hazard risk assessment beyond those with whom the Program had long-standing    relationships, which is expected to continue – at least in the mid-term –    with implications for the GKCS. As expectations rise, the Program should look    to its capacity to meet the increased demand as its role evolves.
Progress on Outcomes
Overall, the Program contributes to the understanding of    geo-hazards to a great extent. Stakeholders and decision-makers use the    Program information in their decisions. Stakeholders acknowledge the strength    of the contribution not only for themselves, but also on increased    understanding among those responsible    for making decisions. The Program experienced challenges in progressing on    outcomes that involved a higher need for engaging with stakeholders whose    needs for information were increasing, but who were outside the technical and    research groups the program was used to dealing with.
The GKCS Program was implicated in collaborative efforts due to    the need for multidisciplinary tables to address gaps in knowledge transfer    and the critical fact that expertise in Canada largely resided within NRCan. While    there was significant collaboration, plans to reduce information gaps often    lacked further development and resources to be implemented. However, some of    this activity fell outside of the responsibility and mandate of NRCan.
Stakeholders expressed cautious optimism that  Canada was ultimately more resilient but acknowledged that work was needed to  develop more robust indicators for measuring resilience.
Design and Delivery
The Program was well-designed to support outcomes related to    research and monitoring. Projects were delivered on time and on budget and    activities reflected existing stakeholder needs. However, the Program was    less well-designed to support the whole of society approach to disaster risk    reduction arising from factors largely inherent to structures outside the    LMS. Evidence suggests that information was not easily shared among other    NRCan programming with similar goals in public safety and resilience. NRCan could    improve coordination to avoid confusion and ensure common approaches to    reduce burden at the local level, where there is little capacity to conduct    hazard identification. A more permanent table for sharing information on    disaster risk reduction and emergency management could be established within    NRCan to address strategic cross-cutting issues related to DRR and EM    programming.
Equity, Diversity and Inclusion (EDI)
The Program made strides in integrating EDI considerations into    its activities, but there is more to do. Suggested improvements mostly relate    to consideration of Indigenous populations, including engaging with    communities to share research findings and knowledge affecting local    communities, and enhancing opportunities for employment in geo-hazards    research among Indigenous people.
Best Practices and Lessons Learned
The evaluation identified several practices within the Program    that facilitated effective operations (e.g., mid-year and year-end reports    for research projects that assisted in tracking project performance, CHIS    dashboard reporting). Canada’s membership in the Global Earthquake Model    Foundation involved multiple partners, which stretched the resources of    multiple stakeholders and established grounds for closer collaboration within    the country.
The evaluation identified several lessons  learned. Firstly, collaboration and relationship-building take time and  requires dedicated capacity. Taking this into account during the planning phase  of activities improved uptake of information. Additionally, poorly defined  roles in overlapping areas of NRCan limits intra-departmental interaction and  creates confusion among stakeholders. This reduces opportunities for  collaboration, creates confusion regarding reporting responsibilities where  objectives overlap, and can lead to an inefficient allocation of NRCan  resources.
About the Evaluation
The main objective of the evaluation was to assess the program contribution to i) achieving intermediate and longer-term outcomes and ii) meeting stakeholder needs, particularly in light of a changing operating environment. The evaluation scope included science, research, and monitoring activities carried out by the PSG and CHIS in relation to geo-hazards (earthquakes, volcanoes, landslides, tsunamis, and geomagnetic storms). The evaluation covered the period from 2014-15 to 2019-20. This evaluation is consistent with the requirements of the Treasury Board Policy on Results (2016). Details on specific evaluation questions, methods and limitations are found in the full report.
Recommendations, and Management and Action Plan (MRAP)
The evaluation found that the GKCS program was well managed and achieved its immediate outcomes, and was able to fulfill very well its primary role as the supplier of scientific and technical information on geohazards to the Government of Canada. However, the implementation of the Sendai Framework and the Emergency Management Strategy for Canada has impacted the context of the program and has implications for achieving its intermediate outcomes. The following recommendations thus reflect the evaluation’s conclusion that the Program should examine its role in view of the changes in the operating environment.