Summary of the Joint Audit and Evaluation of the Impact Canada Initiative – Clean Technology Stream
About the Program
The Impact Canada Initiative (ICI) is a whole-of-government effort, led by the Privy Council Office (PCO), which promotes the use of innovative funding models designed to help departments accelerate the adoption of outcomes-based approaches to deliver results to Canadians. Natural Resources Canada (NRCan)’s Clean Technology Stream (CTS) is one of the first program streams developed under this new initiative. Led by the Energy Technology Sector (ETS), the objective of the program is to co-develop and launch a series of prize challenges to achieve breakthroughs in clean technology innovation. Since 2017, the program has launched five challenges and one Indigenous innovation initiative. Each of these has its own mission and unique set of goals, performance targets, incentive structures, timelines, collaborators, participants, outreach strategies, and evaluation criteria. This program was allocated $75 million (M) from 2017-18 to 2020-21 (extended to 2021-22 in response to COVID-19).
What the Engagement    Found
Relevance
The    engagement found that the ICI-CTS is relevant. The program aligns with    federal government and NRCan priorities, roles and responsibilities and each    of the six selected focus areas meet key criteria that were set out for their    prioritization. More broadly, the ICI-CTS supports mandate commitments to    increase experimentation, and is structured to give more flexibility to    proponents to propose innovative solutions to problems for which solutions    are not apparent.
Governance
The    engagement found governance structures, processes and mechanisms for ICI-CTS    were defined, established and operating effectively. Differences in key    intradepartmental players’ interpretations of the ICI-CTS’ Terms and    Conditions in the initial stages of program design and development resulting    from the unfamiliar policy context have since been addressed with an ongoing    collaborative approach.
Processes    and Controls
Overall,    we found that processes and controls are in place to support compliance with    relevant departmental guidance and the Treasury Board (TB)
Policy    on Transfer Payments
. Key financial operational controls have been    designed and are operating effectively most of the time. However, there was    an opportunity to improve the retention of documentation related to key    decision processes. Proactive disclosure was not always performed within the    required reporting period. The program’s process for tracking, managing and    resolving recipient audit recommendations issued is not clear.
Program    Design
Overall,    we found that the design of focus areas under the ICI-CTS was consistent with    principles of Impact Canada and best practices in challenge models. While    communications strategies could have been more innovative and better    resourced, the program attracted a sufficient number of quality proposals.
Stakeholder    engagement in co-design was recognized as a key strength for the program. The    program was responsive to co-design feedback and, while there was some room    for improvement, the resulting funding flexibilities and non-financial    proponent supports built into the design of each focus area facilitated    participation from diverse solvers. NRCan also made good use of collaborators    to co-develop and/or deliver activities under the ICI-CTS.
Measuring    Expected and Unexpected Outcomes
Impact    Canada uses innovative approaches that necessitate new methods and strategies    for measuring program outcomes and impacts. While a notional performance    framework was included with program approvals, NRCan is still working on its    own and with PCO to enhance this framework and to develop challenge-specific    outcomes and related methodologies. Nevertheless, available evidence suggests    that the program has made some progress on each of its immediate outcomes –    increased collaboration and investment in clean tech, mobilization of new    talent (including in underrepresented groups), and enhanced public awareness.
It    is too soon to report on progress towards intermediate and ultimate outcomes.    However, a key difference in the design of challenge-based models is that if    the result is not achieved, the funding is not awarded. We found progress at    least insofar as finalists are progressing towards outcomes specific to their    project; projects are achieving expected project milestones.
Lessons    Learned
The    challenge model is a new tool that provides an alternative to traditional    funding programs, but decisions on when it is appropriate to use this model    should be carefully considered in light of the context of the outcomes to be    achieved. NRCan has gained a lot of experimental learning by testing    innovations in each focus area – we expect NRCan to also apply lessons    learned from the ICI-CTS in its own design of future prize challenges,    whether under the umbrella of Impact Canada or as part of a separate initiative.
ABOUT THE ENGAGEMENT
The  joint engagement examines the design and delivery of the ICI-CTS from its  announcement in Budget 2017 to March 2021, with updates reflecting the impact  of COVID-19. The objectives of the joint engagement were:
To  assess the extent to which the program’s design and delivery facilitates the  effective and efficient achievement of immediate results and complies with  relevant authorities.
To  identify and document lessons learned from the experimental approaches under  the Impact Canada – Clean Technology Stream that can be applied to future  interventions.
The scope of the engagement includes an  examination of outcomes for the program stream as a whole and the activities  and outputs for each of its six focus areas. While recognizing the importance  of the outcomes targeted by each challenge and initiative, the joint engagement  focused on expected results for the program as a whole. Although it considers  their role in facilitating design and delivery by NRCan, the engagement’s scope  excludes the performance of PCO and any other external collaborators.
NRCan’s Audit and Evaluation Branch  (AEB) conducted this engagement in accordance with the TB
Policy on Results
(2016) and the  Institute of Internal Auditors’ I
nternational  Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing
and the  Government of Canada’s
Policy on Internal  Audit
. Details on specific engagement questions, methods and limitations  are found in the full report.
In  future, NRCan’s AEB will look for evidence that lessons learned have been considered  at least in the proposed design of relevant programs and activities. Key  lessons learned include: