Summary of the evaluation of the Old Age Security program, phase 2
Alternate formats
Evaluation of the Old Age Security program, phase 2
[
PDF
- 312
KB
]
Large print, braille,
MP3
(audio), e-text and
DAISY
formats are available on demand by
ordering online
or calling 1 800 O-Canada (1-800-622-6232). If you use a teletypewriter (
TTY
), call 1-800-926-9105.
Allowances and pension deferral
The Old Age Security program includes the Old  Age Security pension, the Guaranteed Income Supplement and the Allowances.
The Old Age Security pension provides  a basic pension to nearly all seniors
The Guaranteed Income  Supplement is a supplement for low-income seniors
The Allowances are benefits for  low-income 60 to 64 year-old widows, widowers or spouses of Guaranteed Income  Supplement recipients
Key findings
The program contributed to reduce the proportion of seniors with low income. Only 4% of seniors had income below Statistics Canada's Low Income Cut-Off in 2015.
The Allowances address an important need for recipients as benefits represent 36% of their income on average. Who is benefitting? Most recipients are women and have:
very low income
low levels of education
limited attachment to the  labour market
There are many low-income 60 to 64 year-olds whose marital status or age of spouse makes them ineligible for the Allowances.  However, individuals in this age group may be eligible for provincial and territorial  assistance.
Awareness of pension deferral is low, as is the proportion of seniors who chose to defer. About a quarter of 60 to 64  year-olds are aware of this option and 4% of the first cohort of eligible  seniors chose to defer.
About 80% of the first cohort of eligible seniors worked during the deferral period, and nearly 60% had income above  $75,000.
Recommendations
The department should take into  account the evaluation findings to inform its analysis on the Allowances
The department should continue  to promote awareness of Old Age Security pension deferral
The full Evaluation of the
Old Age Security Program: Phase 2
is now available.
Report a problem or mistake on this page
Please select all that apply:
A link, button or video is not working
It has a spelling mistake
Information is missing
Information is outdated or wrong
Login error when trying to access an account
I can't find what I'm looking for
Other issue not in this list
Submit
Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries,
contact us
.
Date modified:
2022-04-21