Evaluation Summary for the Foreign Credential Recognition Program
On this page
About the program
Key findings
Recommendations
Alternate formats
Evaluation of the Foreign credential recognition Program
[
PDF
- 158
KB
]
Large print, braille,
MP3
(audio), e-text and
DAISY
formats are available on demand by
ordering online
or calling 1 800 O-Canada (1-800-622-6232). If you use a teletypewriter (
TTY
), call 1-800-926-9105.
About the program
The program is a contributions based program that provides funding to the provinces and territories, regulatory bodies and organizations to support foreign credential recognition processes in Canada.  Funding is provided in order to simplify and harmonize foreign credential recognition processes, which indirectly support internationally trained individuals. The program also provides direct employment support to internationally trained individuals through the loans and support services and the Canadian Work Experience pilot project.
Key findings
There have been improvements in the areas of fairness, consistency, timeliness and transparency of foreign credential recognition processes. However, it is difficult to determine the extent to which these improvements could be attributed to ESDC’s leadership and coordination, given that the program operates in a multi-jurisdiction regime and the lack of data
Early results of the Canadian Work Experience Pilot Projects indicate a contribution towards the acquisition of Canadian experience and job search skills among participants
The Foreign Credential Recognition Loans Projects are a successful initiative, with early results from this pilot indicating low default rates and positive employment outcomes.  In addition, results from this pilot indicate that two-thirds of recipients would have taken more time to complete their credential plan in the absence of the loans projects
Many internationally trained individuals continue to face multiple barriers as they attempt to work in positions that are commensurate with their qualifications. The extent to which the Program has contributed to attenuate those barriers is unclear
Recommendations
The department should continue to play a targeted leadership and coordination role to advance the recognition of foreign credentials across Canada, by supporting and influencing multilateral collaboration among provinces and territories, regulatory bodies, national associations, and other stakeholders
The department should explore how to build on the Canadian Work Experience Pilot and Foreign Credential Recognition Loans Projects to better support internationally trained individuals
The department should build on efforts to mitigate barriers that internationally trained individuals face as they attempt to work in positions related to their field of study
Report a problem or mistake on this page
Please select all that apply:
A link, button or video is not working
It has a spelling mistake
Information is missing
Information is outdated or wrong
Login error when trying to access an account
I can't find what I'm looking for
Other issue not in this list
Submit
Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries,
contact us
.
Date modified:
2022-04-22