Evaluation of Literacy and Essential Skills
From:
Employment and Social Development Canada
On this page
Executive summary
Management response
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Program context and description
2.1 Context
2.2 Background
2.3 Program budget
3.0 Relevance findings
3.1 Continued need for program
3.2 Alignment with government priorities and federal roles and responsibilities
4.0 Performance findings
4.1 Coordination, knowledge sharing and dissemination of information
4.2 Adequacy of performance information
4.3 Outcomes: LES in the Labour Market
4.4 Outcomes: Progress toward systemic change
4.5 Operational efficiency
5.0 Conclusions and recommendations
5.1 Conclusions
5.2 Recommendations
Appendix A – Evaluation questions
Appendix B – Methodology
Literature and document review
Administrative data and file review
Key Informant interviews
Survey of funding recipient organizations
Alternate formats
Evaluation of Literacy and Essential Skills
[
PDF
- 448
KB
]
Large print, braille,
MP3
(audio), e-text and
DAISY
formats are available on demand by
ordering online
or calling 1 800 O-Canada (1-800-622-6232). If you use a teletypewriter (
TTY
), call 1-800-926-9105.
Executive summary
This evaluation report assesses the relevance and performance of the activities of Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC) related to the development of workplace literacy and essential skills, through the Office of Literacy and Essential Skills (hereafter referred to as “the Office”) and the grants and contributions programs funded under the Consolidated Revenue Fund - Adult Learning, Literacy and Essential Skills Program and Employment Insurance Part II - National Essential Skills Initiative.
The evaluation covers fiscal years 2011 to 2012 to 2015  to 2016 and focuses on how the  Department and its programming have supported the development of workplace  literacy and essential skills in Canada, and how it has more recently, 2015  to 2016,  shifted its focus to systemic change by encouraging the integration of literacy  and essential skills into labour market programming, services, and policies.
The evaluation was limited by the availability of performance information.  Performance measures are currently being reviewed and should better support the next evaluation. This evaluation addresses key questions related to the continued need for the Program, whether the activities contribute to the achievement of workplace literacy and essential skills outcomes, if the shift in funding approach is making progress towards supporting systemic change in the labour market, and the availability of quality performance information. The structure of the program involves providing support to non-governmental organizations to develop and disseminate tools and supports that contribute to improving literacy and essential skills for the work place. Given this program design, it is indirect support which is provided to Canadians; and for this reason, net impacts could not be assessed.
Key findings
Relevance of the program
There is a continued need for literacy and essential skills programming and activities in Canada.
There is a need and a role for the federal government in literacy and essential skills programming.
The Office’s activities do not duplicate those of other funders.
There is a need for the activities, including those not related to project funding, such as research and analysis and the development of partnerships and networks.
Effectiveness of the program
Communication with provinces and territories has been limited, but shows recent signs of improvement.
Some efforts have been made to facilitate knowledge sharing and networking, but more can be done.
The activities have contributed to many of the expected outcomes, although it is difficult to determine their role in progressing towards systemic change.
The Adult Learning, Literacy and Essential Skills Program and the National Essential Skills Initiative projects have achieved results but delays in funding decisions have tempered results and affected networks.
Performance information (for example, indicators, logic model,  data collection tools) exists, but is not systematic or uniform. Given the  evolution of the program mandate, performance information could benefit from  updating.
Efficiency of the program
The evidence is mixed as to whether the operational transition of literacy and essential skills grants and contributions delivery has had an observable impact on efficiency.
Recommendations
Based on the evidence presented in this evaluation, it is recommended that the Office:
Consider working with provinces, territories and partners to develop formal partnership strategies to support stakeholder network development and the sustainability of effective approaches;
Continue to improve communications with provinces and territories, partners and stakeholders; and
Update the performance measurement information and related tools to reflect recent changes.
Management response
Introduction
Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC) welcomes the evaluation and its contribution to program policy development. ESDC will give careful consideration and commits to effective implementation of evaluation recommendations and lessons learned.  As such, ESDC has started to implement activities related to all three recommendations.
In 2013, the Programme for the International Assessment of Adult  Competencies (PIAAC) results found that 50% of the general population tested in  PIAAC scored at or below level 2 on a 5 level literacy scale. Given the  magnitude of public need, it was acknowledged that efforts needed to be  broadened significantly. Accordingly, in 2015  to 2016, the decision was taken to  shift the focus of ESDC’s Office of Literacy and Essential Skills (OLES) to  support the integration of essential skills into direct delivery programs  within ESDC, with other government departments and agencies, with provincial  and territorial governments, and other key stakeholders such as post-secondary  institutions, employers and labour.
In addition, further research showed that there are particular groups at  greater risk of marginalization. Since 2015  to 2016, efforts have placed a  greater emphasis on addressing the needs of individuals with low skills and  facing multiple barriers to employment such as Indigenous people, youth,  newcomers and Official Language Minority Communities.
Given this shift in policy direction was introduced near the end of the timeframe of the evaluation, it is useful to see evaluation evidence has found that recent activities are showing promise. The evaluation recommendations will help OLES, working in close collaboration with Program Operations Branch, to enhance effectiveness and efficiency of Program efforts to deliver on expected results.
Recommendations
Recommendation #1
Consider working with provinces, territories and partners to develop formal partnerships strategies to support stakeholder network development and the sustainability of effective approaches.
Response
ESDC agrees with the recommendation. Respecting that provincial and territorial governments are primarily responsible for the delivery of employment and training systems, the development of partnerships amongst governments is key to making significant progress in terms of integrating essential skills into labour market programming. In addition, working horizontally across the federal family will be central to improve resource strategies to support the sustainability of effective practices.
In line with the shift in program directions introduced in 2015 to 2016, ESDC has established four multilateral tables which align well with the findings and recommendations of the evaluation:
Federal, Provincial and Territorial (FPT) Literacy and Essential Skills Network (Fall 2016)
eLearning Federal, Provincial and Territorial (FPT) Advisory Committee (June 2017)
Essential Skills and Apprenticeship Community of Practice (June 2017)
Government of Canada Federal Network on Essential Skills (Spring 2017)
FPT Literacy and essential skills network
This network was created in Fall 2016
The FPT Literacy and Essential Skills Network, which includes all jurisdictions except Quebec (who chose to abstain from participation), serves as a forum for knowledge sharing on integrating literacy and essential skills into labour market programming.
Members of the network developed terms of reference for the group collaboratively and have identified the sharing of knowledge on how governments are levering labour market transfer agreements to support literacy and essential skills as an area of focus.
Given governments’ mutual interest in improving the evaluation of the effectiveness and outcomes achieved resulting from essential skills programming in the lives of Canadians, performance measurement has also been identified as a key discussion topic.
eLearning FPT advisory committee
The eLearning FPT Advisory Committee was created in June 2017. This volunteer group includes BC, MB, NB, NS, ON and YK.
ESDC is supporting Minister Hajdu’s mandate letter commitments around “improving workers’ access to quality job training that provides Canadians with pathways to good careers” by developing options for eLearning solutions to support Canadians who need to upgrade their skills, particularly essential skills.
This is a new area of focus and, as part of early exploration, ESDC will aim to do so in collaboration with PTs to ensure complementarity of efforts. Ultimately, it will inform the development of an eLearning platform to support Canadians to develop their essential skills.
Essential skills and apprenticeship community of practice
Launched in June 2017, the Community of Practice is a peer assist network amongst federal, provincial and territorial government officials responsible for the integration of essential skills into labour market programming. The purpose of this group is to support government officials responsible for policies and practices to support apprentices to overcome essential skills barriers to complete training and acquire certification. This will support members of the community to draw from efforts across the country to inform their government’s respective efforts and to identify areas of mutual interest where the federal government could facilitate collaborative approaches.
Government of Canada federal network on essential skills
Spring 2017, ESDC formed a Government of Canada Federal Network on  Essential Skills which includes departments and agencies who are actively  involved in supporting Canadians to improve their skills to support a range of  outcomes (for example  digital literacy, financial literacy, health literacy, etc.).
Membership to date includes Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada, Public Health Agency of Canada, Financial Consumer Agency of Canada, Status of Women Canada, Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada, and CANNOR. Membership may be expanded over time, should other government departments express interest.
This network will serve as a forum to share information and learn more about respective activities and identify opportunities to better complement each other’s efforts and, improve capacity to work collaboratively on areas of mutual interest.
It will also provide a means to gather relevant information to be shared with stakeholders and partners to improve awareness of the breadth of federal programming related to essential skills.
Recommendation #2
Continue to improve communications with provinces and territories, partners and stakeholders.
Response
ESDC agrees with the recommendation.  As such, ESDC is currently developing strategies and conducting activities that contribute to improving its communications with provinces and territories, partners and stakeholders.
Communication strategy
ESDC is presently developing a communication strategy which will assist  in aligning communications vehicles (for example webinars, eBulletins,  etc.) to be relevant to different target groups. The primary objectives of this  communication strategy will be to share information on ESDC’s current and  upcoming activities as well as reinforcing knowledge sharing such as results of  projects funded by ESDC. While this strategy is being developed, ESDC will  continue to offer webinars, send eBulletins, organize face-to-face meetings and  engage in various other communication activities.
As noted above, the FPT Literacy and Essential Skills Network will also contribute significantly to improving communications with PTs. In addition, ESDC will continue to engage with PTs bilaterally to deepen the department’s understanding of each jurisdiction’s unique realities, priorities and gain a greater appreciation of areas of mutual interest to help ensure complementarity of efforts.
Project database
ESDC is currently collecting information and identifying results from  projects funded. Starting in Fall 2017 the OLES database website will be  updated to include projects from 2017  to 2018 onward.  Results will  also be identified from a few projects funded over the past few years to share  resources, models developed and, lessons learned.
Recommendation #3
Update the performance measurement information and related tools to reflect recent changes.
Response
ESDC agrees with this recommendation. The Performance Information Profile (PIP) is currently being updated and will be completed by June 2018. The updated PIP will:
Be expanded to include the performance measurement of OLES operations and the Grants and Contributions programs;
Include a stronger focus on outcomes measurement (for example skill gain, psycho-social  indicators), data collection and reporting (to be developed in collaboration  with the Program Operations Branch);
Seek greater consistency in the measurement, tracking and reporting on program results; and,
Account for recent program changes such as testing new training and employment models and working to integrate LES into other employment training programming.
It is expected that these key improvements to OLES’ performance measurement profile will help detect program success factors, strengthen its ability to demonstrate achievement of results, and communicate a more complete and evidence-based performance story.
1.0 Introduction
This evaluation report assesses the relevance and performance of the activities of Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC) that support efforts to enhance the development of workplace literacy and essential skills, through the Office of Literacy and Essential Skills (hereafter referred to as “the Office”) and the grants and contributions programs funded under the Consolidated Revenue Fund - Adult Learning, Literacy and Essential Skills Program and Employment Insurance Part II - National Essential Skills Initiative.
The evaluation covers fiscal years 2011  to 2012 to 2015  to 2016 and focuses on how the  Department and its programming have supported the development of workplace  literacy and essential skills in Canada, and how it has more recently, 2015  to 2016,  shifted its focus to systemic change by encouraging the integration of literacy  and essential skills into labour market programming, services and policies. It  also examines progress in addressing the recommendations from the 2012 Adult  Learning, Literacy and Essential Skills Program evaluation.
Multiple lines of evidence were used to inform the evaluation, including: literature and document review, administrative data and file review, key informant interviews and a survey of funding recipient organizations. Appendix A presents the evaluation questions which are linked with the section of the report where those findings can be found. Appendix B provides details about the methodology and limitations. The evaluation was limited by the availability of performance information. Performance measures are being reviewed and should better support the next evaluation. The Office provides support to non-governmental organizations to develop and disseminate tools and supports that contribute to outcomes for beneficiaries and does not provide direct support to the ultimate beneficiaries.
2.0 Program context and description
2.1 Context
Literacy and essential skills contribute to developing and maintaining a strong labour market and healthy economy in Canada. The labour market continues to evolve and the composition of the country’s population is changing. There are increasingly fewer Canadians in the labour force as baby boomers transition into retirement.  These factors are giving rise to an increased reliance on immigration, pools of non-traditional sources of labour and the participation of vulnerable populations, as potential sources of skilled labour.  At the same time, the skills that adult Canadians need to perform their work today are, in many cases, vastly different than they were a few decades ago. Many workplace tasks that were once manual and routine are now being replaced by non-routine, analytical and interpersonal tasks.  New and emerging technologies are also accelerating the pace of change, offering opportunities for working age Canadians to adapt to workplace demands, through continuous learning and skills upgrading.  Ensuring that skills training meet the realities of the labour market helps employers find workers with the right skills which in turn improves workplace efficiency, productivity and competitiveness.
Within this context, the barriers faced by vulnerable populations in developing literacy and essential skills are an ongoing social and economic issue in Canada and across the globe. According to the Program for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies (PIAAC) survey
Footnote
1
, in 2011 to 2012, Canada’s results are average (see Figure 1), with notable variations in scores across provinces and territories.
Figure 1: Canada’s Scores Compared to Other Countries (2011 to 2012)
Sources: Survey of Adult Skills (PIAAC) (2012, 2015), International Adult Literacy Survey (IALS) and Adult Literacy and Lifeskills Survey (ALL).
Text description of Figure 1
Figure 1 is Canada’s Scores Compared to Other Countries: Results from the Programme for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies Survey (2011 to 2012). The bar graph illustrates the mean numeracy score and the mean literacy score for individuals between the ages of 16 and 65 in 14 countries belonging to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, including Canada. These are the 14 countries belonging to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development that participated in the first round of the Survey (2011 to 2012). The highest attainable score for numeracy and literacy is 300.
Japan’s mean numeracy score is 288.2 and its mean literacy score is 296.2.
Finland’s mean numeracy score is 282.2 and its mean literacy score is 287.5.
Netherland’s mean numeracy score is 280.3 and its mean literacy score is 284.0.
New Zealand’s mean numeracy score is 279.1 and its mean literacy score is 280.7.
Australia’s mean numeracy score is 278.3 and its mean literacy score is 280.4.
Sweden’s mean numeracy score is 278.3 and its mean literacy score is 279.2.
Norway’s mean numeracy score is 275.8 and its mean literacy score is 278.4.
Estonia’s mean numeracy score is 275.7 and its mean literacy score is 275.9.
Czech Republic’s mean numeracy score is 273.1 and its mean literacy score is 274.0.
Slovak Republic’s mean numeracy score is 271.1 and its mean literacy score is 273.8.
Canada’s mean numeracy score is 267.6 and its mean literacy score is 273.5.
England (United Kingdom)’s mean numeracy score is 265.5 and its mean literacy score is 272.6.
Korea’s mean numeracy score is 263.4 and its mean literacy score is 272.6.
Denmark’s mean numeracy score is 261.8 and its mean literacy score is 270.8.
The bar graph shows that Canada placed eleventh out of the 14 countries belonging to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development that participated in this survey.
More specifically, in Canada:
Four out of ten adults lack sufficient levels of literacy to be fully competent in most jobs.
Literacy and numeracy scores are highest at ages 25 to 34, and are lower among older age groups.
Individuals aged 16 to 34 are found to be the most proficient, in problem solving in technologically rich environments.
Men have higher numeracy skills than women across all age groups, while both genders display similar proficiencies in literacy and in problem solving in technology rich environments.
Information-processing skills of Indigenous populations, immigrants, and official-language minority populations vary considerably across provinces and territories and across skills being measured.
2.2 Background
Employment and Social Development Canada is committed to the development  of a skilled, adaptable and inclusive labour force and an efficient labour  market. The Office contributes to the achievement of this strategic outcome by  supporting Canadians to improve their literacy and essential skills to help  them better prepare for, to get, and to keep a job and to adapt and succeed at  work. For these  purposes, essential skills include  the skills associated with literacy (that is reading, writing, document use  and numeracy), but go beyond these to also include thinking skills, oral  communication, computer use/digital skills, working with others and the skills  associated with continuous learning.
The Office supports the integration of essential skills into direct delivery of employment and training programs funded by the Department, by other government departments and agencies, and by provincial and territorial governments. To this end, it also supports stakeholders such as post-secondary institutions, employers, and labour market groups by providing funding and encouraging the development of networks. Its efforts are focused on programs supporting individuals with low skills and facing multiple barriers to employment such as Indigenous people, youth and official language minority communities. For example, one project identified literacy and essential skills challenges that prevent First Nations and Inuit men from participating in education and employment, as well as built partnerships in order to improve education outcomes and employability of First Nations and Inuit men in Northern Canada.
During the evaluation period, 13 projects were funded. Estimation of the number of Canadians that directly or indirectly benefitted from this support is limited by the nature of the funded projects, which do not deal directly with the ultimate beneficiaries and the absence of requirement for funding recipient organizations to report on impacts on Canadians.
The Office uses a combination of internal resources and grants and contributions to conduct four main activities:
The Office uses a combination of internal resources and grants and  contributions to conduct four main activities:
research  and analysis;
development and dissemination of tools and  supports;
development and maintenance of partnerships;  and,
delivery  of grants and contributions programming.
These  four activities relate to five outputs that support the achievement of its  early, intermediate and ultimate outcomes:
evidence-based  knowledge and policy options,
literacy and essential skills tools and  supports,
partnerships and networks,
calls  for proposals, and
funding provided to projects using grants and  contributions funding.
The grants and contributions programs are delivered by the Program Operations Branch which works closely with the Office to provide funding to projects that replicate and scale up proven approaches to skills upgrading across Canada, and that develop innovative approaches to improve employment and training supports so they are more responsive to employer and worker needs.
Support is also provided to the Roadmap for Canada’s Official Languages 2013 to 2018, a government-wide commitment of $1.15 billion over five years (2013 to 2014 to 2017 to 2018) to meet the needs of Canada’s official language minority communities.
Footnote
2
The evaluation was limited by the availability of performance information. Performance measures are being reviewed and should better support the next evaluation.
2.3 Program budget
In 2011 to 2012, the first year covered by the evaluation, the budget for the Adult Learning, Literacy and Essential Skills Program decreased from $25,009,000 to $21,509,000 (14% decrease) in comparison to the year before and then remained stable throughout the evaluation period. The National Essential Skills Initiative budget decreased from $13,200,000 annually from 2010 to 2011 to 2012 to 2013, to $4,200,000 (68% decrease) in 2013 to 2014. Disbursements for both programs were lower than their budgets and have generally been decreasing over the evaluation period.
The following table lists the budgets for the grants and contribution programs for fiscal years 2011 to 2012 to 2015 to 2016.
Table 1: Budget for the office’s grants and contributions programs 2011 to 2012 to 2015 to 2016
Program expenditures
Footnote
3
2011 to 2012
2012 to 2013
2013 to 2014
2014 to 2015
2015 to 2016
ALLESP - Budget
$21,509,000
$21,509,000
$21,509,000
$21,509,000
$21,509,000
ALLESP - % of budget spent
80.5%
56.7%
69.1%
56.5%
38.9%
NESI - Budget
$13,200,000
$13,200,000
$4,200,000
$4,200,000
$4,200,000
NESI - % of budget spent
89.8%
69.4%
88.7%
16.1%
Not available
Source: Chief Financial Officer Branch
To select  projects for funding the Department held calls for proposals and calls for  concepts. It also made efforts to support a continuous intake of proposals by  soliciting proposals for  projects addressing specific gaps in priority areas. Additionally, the  Department accepted unsolicited proposals addressing a labour market issue  linked to a literacy and essential skills problem, need or gap. Continuous intake was ongoing  throughout the evaluation period.
The  Office began to shift its strategic direction during the evaluation period.  Funding recipients were informed in 2011 that the non-competitive core funding  was not sustainable and were encouraged to work together to find efficiencies  and other sources of support. Core funded agreements approved during this time  were extended until June 30, 2014.
During this  time, two calls for proposals were held. In 2012, 44 applications for project  funding were received, and 12 were funded. In 2013, a Call for Proposals was  held for the Pan-Canadian Network to replace the non-competitive core funding  approach with a more innovative and sustainable approach. It was expected that  organizations funded from this call would cover a range of functions that had  been identified as integral to an effective pan-Canadian network and an  efficient literacy and essential skills system. One project out of 106  applications was approved for funding.
In  2014, when core funding agreements ended, all unsolicited or  solicited projects in negotiations at the time were ceased, and proponents were  asked to re-submit in the 2015 call for concepts. Beginning with the 2015  call, efforts have focused on the integration of literacy and essential skills  into labour market programming, such as employment and training supports to  improve labour force participation. The Department is now making strategic  investments in transformative projects to improve Canadians’ access to job  training. Funding is directed to projects that replicate and scale up proven  approaches to improve the quality of employment and training supports that are  more responsive to employer and worker needs.
3.0 Relevance findings
3.1 Continued need for program
There is a continued need to support literacy and essential  skills to improve labour market outcomes in Canada. While there continues to be  a demand from employers and industry for a workforce with improved literacy and  essential skills, there is a lack of awareness among them about these issues  and the ways to address them. The needs are heterogeneous across groups and  regions.
Literacy  and essential skills are central to addressing challenges of an ageing labour  force and the unprecedented pace of technological change in the labour market.  An increasing number of jobs are requiring essential skills
Footnote
4
. Across Canada, there are  skills mismatches and skills shortages in particular occupations and regions
Footnote
5
. A mismatch implies that  the employees occupying given positions are either over- or under-qualified, or  that the available pool of labour to fill an open position has different skills  than required or lives in a different region. A skills shortage means that  there are not enough people with a particular skill or skills to meet demand.
Evaluation  findings confirm an ongoing need by industry and employers for better essential  skills in the workplace. A survey was completed by 61 funding recipient  organizations to collect information on the achievements of funded projects.  Approximately 70% of all survey respondents (and a larger proportion (79%) of  the sub-group of employers), indicated that there was a large or very large  demand among employers and industry for employees with strong workplace  essential skills.
There are  various perspectives in the literature regarding which skills are most needed  by employers. Some authors indicate that transferable, flexible, “soft”  essential skills are paramount, while others emphasize the need for improvement  in skills such as reasoning, mathematics, numeracy, as well as capacity for  critical thinking and problem solving
Footnote
6
. All of these skills are  considered part of the nine essential skills supported by the Department. Through extensive research over  approximately 10 years (1992 to 2003), the Government of Canada, along with other  national and international agencies, identified and validated nine key literacy  and essential skills: reading text; document use; writing; numeracy; oral  communication; thinking skills; working with others; computer use; and,  continuous learning.
As part of  the research conducted for the evaluation, 33 key informant interviews were  conducted with ESDC personnel, partners, provincial and territorial representatives  and non-governmental experts in adult literacy and essential skills. Most key  informants indicated that there is a lack of awareness amongst the general  population and employers about the fact that many people have weaknesses in  literacy and essential skills, and about the importance and impact of this.  According to the interviewees, some employers do not realize the problems they  experience in their workforce are often caused by literacy and essential skills  issues, and/or some employers do not have the ability or tools to assess the  literacy and essential skills capacities of employees or potential employees.
According  to some key informants, the extent and nature of the needs for improved  literacy and essential skills are not homogenous by province or by group, and  as such, service providers working in the field sometimes require adopting a  case-by-case approach.  According to  them, it may be more relevant to talk about needs according to different regions,  such as rural and urban, the North, or regions in economic decline. The  literature review similarly highlights that there are regional differences in  the nature of skill shortages and mismatches.
Some  interviewees suggested that further defining areas of common need for essential  skills across the country could be helpful in enabling programming to work at  the intersection of needs that are common to all partners and stakeholders, and  those that are particular to certain contexts or among sub-populations.
3.2 Alignment with government priorities and federal roles and responsibilities
The Office’s main objective is aligned with both Employment  and Social Development Canada’s departmental strategic outcomes and federal  government priorities.
The Office’s objective, which  is “to support Canadians to improve their literacy and essential skills to help  them better prepare for, to get and keep a job and to adapt and succeed at  work” is aligned with the departmental strategic outcome of “a skilled,  adaptable and inclusive labour force and an efficient labour market”.
A large majority of  interviewees agreed that there is a link between literacy and essential skills  and labour market outcomes and workplace productivity, as lower skill levels  present challenges for securing and maintaining employment, and can detract  from productivity.
The Office’s priorities for  2015 to 2018 are focused on supporting stakeholders and projects that target  individuals with low skills and facing multiple barriers to employment such as  Indigenous people, youth, newcomers and official language minority communities.  This corresponds with government objectives from the 2015 Speech from the  Throne, supporting the economic success of immigrants, cooperation with  Indigenous peoples, and the promotion of both official languages. These  priorities also align with the federal government’s commitments towards more  inclusive growth, as expressed in Budget 2016.
There is a need to further  integrate literacy and essential skills development into labour market  programming. The federal government has a key role in encouraging co-ordination  and communication between provinces and territories, partners, and stakeholders  to support the integration of literacy and essential skills into labour market  programming. The current efforts do not duplicate the efforts of others.
Need for federal government support
Both  interviewees (including partners, province and territories, stakeholders and  non-governmental experts) and surveyed funding recipient organizations indicate  that there is a need for the federal government to support provinces and  territories and stakeholders in the area of literacy and essential skills.  Eighty-four percent of all surveyed funding  recipient organizations indicated that there is a large or very large need for  the federal government to support provincial, territorial and other stakeholder  efforts in adult literacy and essential skills in the context of labour market  programming.
Some  interviewees indicated that although the provinces and territories have the  responsibility to implement labour market programming funded through the Labour  Market Transfer Agreements and other labour market programming, literacy and  essential skills are important determinants of Canada’s labour market outcomes.  According to them, it would be desirable if there was further integration of  literacy and essential skills elements into more labour market programs. For  example, one partner suggested that the federal government work with provinces  and territories to develop a common plan of action for integrating literacy and  essential skills in Labour Market Transfer Agreements.
Need for conducting and disseminating research and analysis
Most key  informants indicated that research and analysis, or the funding of projects  that involve research and analysis, is an appropriate role for the Office. This  was also reflected in the survey of funding recipient organizations, where 90%  of respondents somewhat or completely agreed that there was a need for the  federal government to conduct research and analysis on adult literacy and  essential skills and labour market outcomes in Canada.  A large majority of survey respondents (89%)  similarly supported the federal government disseminating this research and  analysis.
Need to build knowledge and expertise
Most  interviewees and a large majority of survey respondents were in agreement that  there exists a need to build knowledge and expertise in literacy and essential  skills. However, views were divided on whether the Office has the capacity  and/or expertise to fill this role.
Need to develop tools and supports
A large  majority of survey respondents (89%) either somewhat or completely agreed that  there is a need for tools and other supports related to literacy and essential  skills. Some provincial and territorial representatives also indicated that  tools were needed and that they should be developed in close coordination with  provinces and territories. Non-governmental experts had a different view on the  need for tools as they did not express a need for tools, they are likely aware  of and informed about other existing tools.
Need for partnerships and networks
The need to  support the development of partnerships and networks was expressed by both  interviewees and surveyed funding recipient organizations, and could be a key  element of the Office’s unique role in the support of literacy and essential  skills. The vast majority (92 %) of survey respondents somewhat or completely  agreed that there was a need to support partnerships to address Canadians’  literacy and essential skills needs as they relate to the labour market.
Most  interviewed experts and provincial and territorial representatives expressed a  need for the Office to help develop partnerships and networks and to work  across jurisdictions, especially to coordinate across provinces and  territories. Some indicated that cut-backs in the core funding of organizations  may have affected the ability of some stakeholders to continue being part of  existing networks, and there is a need to rebuild.
Complementarity rather than duplication
Interviewees  and survey participants stated that there was little duplication of programming  between the various actors who provide services or funding for the development  of literacy and essential skills. According to interviewees, the needs are  great, and overall, more programming in this area would be useful. Evidence  from the survey of funding recipient organizations suggests that there is  little duplication of federal efforts. Very few survey respondents (less than  one in ten) reported that they had received funding from other federal government  departments. Among those that did get funding from other federal government  departments, most (57%) indicated that the funding was complementary.
Other  sources of funding such as provincial/territorial governments, non-profit  organizations, and private sector organizations were also described as funding  different kind of projects with complementary objectives.  Individual donor and municipal government  funding sources were identified by a few survey respondents, and this work was  described as separate and different than the projects funded by the Department.
Thus  the evidence suggests that the federal government plays a distinct and  complementary role within the realm of literacy and essential skills, namely  through provision of funding and promoting cooperation. However, concerns were  raised about the lack of flexibility in federal government programming, such as  the requirement to focus on the nine essential skills identified by the federal  government, despite the fact that some provinces have different frameworks.
4.0 Performance findings
4.1 Coordination, knowledge sharing and dissemination of information
The  communication and coordination between levels of government has been somewhat  limited, often focused primarily on projects, and have decreased from earlier  years. Provinces and territories value communication from the Office, and there  is room for more regular and formalized communication. Recent improvements have  been noted.
The Office  has facilitated knowledge sharing and networking to proactively disseminate  results of research, and information on resources and tools to some  extent.  Evaluation evidence suggests  that these efforts have been modest and that more can be done.
Provinces and Territories
There is  evidence that the Office has reached out to provincial and territorial  representatives through presentations at conferences and engaged in labour  market programming activities and cooperative work with provincial and  territorial governments and stakeholders.
Administrative  documents provide some evidence of coordinated federal/provincial/territorial  initiatives related to the development of literacy and essential skills. For  example, the Apprenticeship Initiative by the Canadian Council of Directors of  Apprenticeship, supported by the Department, is meant to support the  integration of essential skills into apprenticeship systems for the benefit of  apprentices, trade qualifiers, and trades people. This initiative was supported  by a federal, provincial and territorial working group that was co-chaired by  officials from the Office and the Government of Manitoba. Six other provinces  were represented on the Working Group including British Columbia, Saskatchewan,  New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island, and Newfoundland and Labrador.
Most provincial and territorial representatives interviewed  indicated that communication and coordination by the Office was valued but was  limited and irregular, with slow response times. Furthermore, a number said  that information sharing was infrequent, and that the needs of provinces were  not always addressed. Some interviewees indicated that meetings had become more  ad hoc in recent years, and communications were mostly limited to funded  projects. However, others indicated improvements of communication in recent  months. While there has been some valuable communication, overall, the evidence  does not suggest that the recommendation from the 2012 Evaluation of the Adult  Learning, Literacy and Essential Skills Program to “improve communication with  the provinces and territories” was fully addressed.
Partners and stakeholders
A list of  over 200 instances of collaboration has been extracted from the administrative  data. This list includes partnerships and other relationships that have been  established or maintained either internally within the Department, with other  Government of Canada entities, with external stakeholders, or with provincial  and territorial jurisdictions. Through these partnerships and relationships,  the Office has engaged organizations representing Indigenous persons,  apprentices and trades groups, and organizations servicing job seekers and  workers, employers and entrepreneurs, immigrants and newcomers, and official  language minority communities, among other actors.
During the  evaluation period, activities were conducted to incorporate stakeholder  perspectives in its activities and policy development. In 2011, the Office held  consultations on the role and use of its Literacy and Essential Skills tools.  This included a series of four roundtables across Canada, supplemented by key  informant interviews and the development of a report which informed future  directions of program activities. In 2013, it conducted a survey of 499  stakeholders across Canada to support the development of a communications  strategy.
There is  evidence to suggest that the Office has facilitated knowledge sharing and  networking among partners and stakeholders. Dissemination of research, tools,  and resources among partners and stakeholders has taken many forms, including  presentations, conferences, publications, bulletins and newsletters, and  meetings. There have been some examples of renewed engagement in partnerships  and knowledge-sharing activities with stakeholders, partners, and employers.
Partners  and federal government interviewees indicated that the Office actively  disseminates information to them. However, other external stakeholders  indicated that it has undertaken modest efforts at information sharing and that  more could be done. Similarly, 57% of surveyed funding recipient organizations  agreed that the Office proactively disseminated funding research, resources and  tools.  The fact that 43% of surveyed  funding recipient organizations disagreed suggests that sharing has been  stronger with some stakeholders, such as those involved directly in programming  and internal government partners, while external partners and funding recipient  organizations reported low levels of information sharing.
The  evidence regarding the extent to which awareness and capacity in best practices  have been developed also varies. The administrative data review provided  examples of awareness-building in a range of activities and for various target  groups. In contrast, a few interviewees said there was a lack of awareness as  to which programs currently exist in Canada, including a lack of awareness  about the Department’s activities. This suggests that communications could be  improved with potential partners and stakeholders to raise awareness of the  opportunities available to support projects that focus on the integration of  literacy and essential skills into labour market programming, and could  encourage improved communications between the many stakeholders.
Similarly,  more than half (57%) of surveyed funding recipient organizations agreed that  the Office has built awareness of proven practices. In terms of whether it has  built capacity in proven practices, a similar number of respondents agreed and  disagreed with this notion. Again, evidence suggests that awareness and  capacity in proven practices have been developed to some extent, but that more  can be done.
Likewise,  evidence from interviews suggests that the Office has facilitated  knowledge-sharing and networking among partners and stakeholders to some  extent, but that the degree to which this is occurring can be improved.  Two-thirds of survey respondents agreed that  it has facilitated knowledge-sharing and networking.
All  of the experts interviewed indicated that there has been some effort at  knowledge-sharing and the facilitation of networking among partners and  stakeholders. Although it was outside of the period covered by the evaluation,  the conference of stakeholders hosted by the Department in October 2016 was  mentioned as being a very helpful event that brought people together from  different jurisdictions. However, other efforts at knowledge sharing were cited  as modest or decreasing, for example, the website was mentioned as being out of  date.
4.2 Adequacy of performance information
The Office  does have a large amount of performance information available regarding the  achievement of outputs and outcomes. However, the information available is not  always of sufficient quality for accurately measuring the achievement of  outcomes, particularly intermediate and ultimate outcomes.
The Adult  Learning, Literacy and Essential Skills Program has a performance measurement  strategy with a logic model that was developed in 2011, and the Office has a  separate logic model that was created in 2008. The documents have not been  updated to cover the new areas of work including the integration of literacy  and essential skills programming into labour market programming.
The file and administrative data review shows that performance data is  collected regularly, most notably through the final close-out reports which  provide information on the advancement, outputs and outcomes of funded  projects. According to ESDC personnel that were interviewed, the Office ensures  that measures and indicators are established for projects, and final reports  are checked for results against outcomes.  Internal quarterly performance  reports on its activities, which are largely based on information from the  final close-out reports and activity reports from funding recipient  organizations, are also available for fiscal years 2011  to 2012 to 2014  to 2015. However, due to the  inconsistency in the quality, quantity and type (for example, sometimes all that is  available is a description of project activities, other times there is data on  outcomes and/or outputs) of performance data available, the information is  often insufficient for accurately assessing the achievement of  expected  outcomes, especially at the level of intermediate and ultimate outcomes.
4.3 Outcomes: LES in the Labour Market
The  Office’s activities have resulted in a number of outcomes contributing to the  achievement of literacy and essential skills improvements within a labour  market context. These include the creation of partnerships and encouragement of  network development, the provision of tools and supports, capacity building,  and the support of the integration of literacy and essential skills priorities  into policies and programs.
The  Office’s activities contribute to change in the labour market system through  support for the development of sustainable partnerships, the provision of tools  and supports, the support to integrate literacy and essential skills priorities  into policies and programs, and organizational capacity-building.
Partnerships
The evidence indicates that the Office contributes to the formation and  sustainability of partnerships. For instance, 90% of the 50 internal quarterly  reports completed between fiscal years 2011  to 2012 and 2014  to 2015 indicate that the Office has  been engaging in collaborative activities and consultation with stakeholders,  beneficiaries, associations and other partner groups. The administrative  documents provide some examples of long-running collaboration with partners and  also provide an overview of collaboration with various sections of the  Department, especially Service Canada, leading to increased communication,  outreach, promotion, and the development of new approaches with regards to  essential skills. Examples include the Office collaborating with Service Canada  to embed literacy and essential skills content on their outreach intranet page,  developing a blog on Essential Skills for the Youth.gc.ca website, and updating  and increasing essential skills content in the Canada Benefits Finder website.
The Office and most partner informants interviewed provided examples of  partnerships that were formed and spoke to the resulting benefits (for example,  training, expertise and information sharing, etc.). Furthermore, most survey  respondents (78%) completely or somewhat agreed that the Office’s activities  have led to the development of partnerships to support literacy and essential skills  related to the labour market. The majority of respondents (61%) agreed that  partnerships developed through these activities have been sustained. The  inception and success of these partnerships can be considered a significant  contribution to the achievement of literacy and essential skills outcomes  within a labour market context.
Provision of tools and supports
There is  also evidence that the Office contributes to the provision of tools and  supports related to developing and integrating literacy and essential skills.  It makes 88 tools and resources available to support job-seekers, workers and  employers to be better informed about the importance of essential skill, and to  help assess employees’ strengths and support skills development. During the  evaluation period, approximately 2 million copies of resources and tools were  ordered and viewed online. The Department has received and approved copyright  requests to support stakeholders, provinces, and territories, to adapt its  tools for their own use.
Between 2010 and 2012, the Department disseminated information through  stakeholder meetings, conferences, booths and in-person workshops. Due to the  cost and limited reach of such activities, the Office introduced webinars and  eBulletins as a means to disseminate information. Although not consistent in  terms of frequency, the eBulletins are circulated to over 800 stakeholders and  partners, and the webinars have had high participation rates (for example  over 100 participants in a webinar).
Capacity-building
Evidence indicates that the Office contributed to organizational  capacity-building. Specifically, efforts were undertaken to enhance or increase  the capacity of employers, organizations, practitioners, and communities to  engage with literacy and essential skills programs and delivery of services.  There are also multiple examples of tools and best practices aimed at building  capacity. Some key informants mentioned capacity-building as a benefit of their  collaboration with the Office (for example, through the  implementation of a “train the trainer” approach). Although the definition of  capacity-building can be multifaceted and complex, evidence shows that funded  projects do assist organizations in securing the means required to achieve  their goals related to literacy and essential skills integration within a  labour market context.
Integration into policy and program
There is  some evidence that the Office’s activities also contribute to the integration  of literacy and essential skills as priorities related to training, programs  and policies. The document review revealed instances in which literacy and  essential skills considerations were embedded into new or existing programs,  namely to focus on the needs of target groups (employer training, homeless  populations, Indigenous groups, etc.).
Almost all provincial and territorial key informants mentioned at least  one instance in which the Office had contributed to the integration of literacy  and essential skills into training, programs and/or policies (for example,  collaboration for technical training programs, to increase advocacy about  literacy and essential skills, etc.). Some interviewees indicated that they  agreed that their project contributed to the outcome of developed and improved  organizational policies that integrate literacy and essential skills. At the  same time, 82% of survey respondents indicated that they agreed that the  project they were referring to contributed to the outcome of integrating  literacy and essential skills into programs and services.
Issues of  project sustainability began to be addressed with the 2015 Call for Concepts in  which applicants were asked for a sustainability strategy with the expectation  that interventions will be sustained in whole or in part by partners or other  interested parties. Non-governmental experts interviewed as part of this  evaluation expressed concerns as to the sustainability of pilot projects beyond  initial funding. The survey of funding recipient organizations also reflects  this uncertainty: just under half (48%) of respondents did not feel that the  Office’s activities and funding had led to sustained, systemic change to  address adult learning, literacy and essential skills issues related to the  labour market, while 35% felt that they had.
In  addition, concerns were expressed about the lack of flexibility in federal  government programming, such as the requirement to focus on the nine essential  skills identified by the federal government, despite the fact that some  provinces have different frameworks.
Overall,  the evidence suggests that the Office’s activities (especially through project  funding, but through its own activities as well) have resulted in concrete  positive outcomes contributing to improvements of literacy and essential skills  within a labour market context. However, it is too early to assess results  related to sustainability.
4.4 Outcomes: Progress toward systemic change
It is too early to determine  whether the Office’s shift in focus in 2015 has contributed to progress towards  systemic change as it takes time to see these effects. The funding approach  currently being pursued and the elimination of core funding to organizations  might have influenced the achievement of literacy and essential skills  outcomes.
The evidence shows that the  Office has achieved to various degrees, the expected outcomes related to the  labour market, although it is too early to determine whether or not they have  contributed to progress toward systemic change. The documentation available  suggests that some projects addressed adult learning, literacy and essential  skills issues in a sustainable way, generating lasting change. It was, however,  too early to establish firmly whether or not these changes were sustained or  systemic over time.
The interviewed key informants  suggested that funded projects have generated many positive outcomes for  employers and for people needing to improve their literacy and essential  skills, and in some cases, have contributed to progress toward systemic change.  However, it is worth noting that some interviewees raised questions regarding  the funding approach currently being pursued and whether it is the best model  to lead to systemic change. The Department funds pilot projects in the area of  literacy and essential skills, but some interviewees reported that there are  limited sources of funding available to implement the models after a pilot is  over.
Based on early findings,  results achieved for the following outcomes will support the progress toward  systemic changes:
The funded projects present a wide range and variety of knowledge  dissemination and transfer training activities across provinces and territories  and have contributed to raising awareness and knowledge in the labour market  system about challenges and opportunities related to literacy and essential  skills. Almost 90% of project reports indicated achieving a degree of knowledge  dissemination. According to the survey, there is ample evidence of  dissemination, transfer and application of knowledge and information among  partners, stakeholders and employers. The most frequently reported type of  output developed by organizations as a result of funding is “essential skills  tools, resources, materials and supports (for example ‘train the trainer’  materials)”, which was reported by 70.5% of survey respondents. “Awareness  raising and/or promotional products” received the second highest response and  was identified by 54.1% of respondents. Eighty-seven percent of respondents  completely or somewhat agreed that funded projects increased outreach to  partners, stakeholders and/or employers.
A vast  majority of project summary reports (92%) indicated increased awareness and  understanding among target groups and employers of various literacy and  essential skills-related needs and existing tools.
A large  majority of survey respondents also agreed that funded projects contributed to  an increased awareness of the benefits and opportunities for adult learning,  literacy and essential skills in the labour market.
Of the  project summary reports examined, 90% indicated enhanced or increased capacity  to successfully equipping and training individuals to complete particular  assignments and/or refers to institutional activities (planning,  resource-building) aimed at increasing performance in certain areas. Results  have been observed across provinces and territories.
The table below lists some of the most cited ways in which capacity was said to be  built.
Table 2: Types of capacity building for funded projects
Nature of capacity built by a funded project
Survey results
For the organization involved in the project
Increased organizational capacity to address literacy and essential skills issues
Eighty percent completely or somewhat agreed
New or improved partnerships
Seventy-nine percent    completely or somewhat agreed
Increased responsiveness to address client needs
Seventy-nine percent completely or somewhat agreed
For other organizations
The products were used to implement training in literacy and/or essential skills
Seventy-three percent indicated that the products were used in this manner
The products were used to better understand the needs of their clients
Sixty-eight percent indicated that the products were used in this manner
LES opportunities and  resources created
The file review showed that  72% of funded organizations identified participation in literacy and essential  skills activities as a key output.  A  number of these activities focused on immigrants and immigrant-serving organizations,  on job seekers, on adult learners, and on training activities both of  beneficiaries and of instructors. In the survey, 79% of respondents agreed that  the funded projects contributed to the outcome of creating adult learning,  literacy and essential skills resources and 77% agreed that their project  contributed to creating and/or enhancing awareness amongst partners and  stakeholders of the benefits and opportunities of adult literacy and essential  skills.
Seventy-five percent of  project reports mentioned the inclusion of literacy and essential skills into  new and existing programs, including business and human resources activities,  health and safety programs, sustainable development and high capacity workplace  strategies, and others.  Seventy-three  percent of survey respondents indicated that products were used to implement  training in literacy and essential skills. Also, 82% of survey respondents  agreed that funded projects contributed to the integration of literacy and  essential skills into programs and services.
Elimination  of core funding to organizations
Between 2007 and 2012, the  Office provided core operational funding through a non-competitive process to a  network of twenty-two national, provincial and territorial organizations.  In 2011 it began to phase out core funding and  shifted towards a funding model focused on innovative and sustainable projects  that scale up or replicate effective approaches to integrating literacy and  essential skills into the labour market. The core funding ended in 2013,  although the pan-Canadian network organizations continue to be eligible for  project-based funding.
Most interviewees agreed that  the elimination of core funding to organizations resulted in the closure of a  number of organizations. However, there were divergent views as to the effects  of this change on literacy and essential skills outcomes in Canada.
Many interviewees agreed that  some organizations were not accomplishing significant results when they were  being funded. A similar proportion of interviewees and survey respondents did  not identify any negative impacts resulting from the cuts to core funding. Just over  half of survey respondents observed positive instead of negative impacts to:  their organization’s capacity to address literacy and essential skills issues  (42% positive, 38% negative), the integration of literacy and essential skills  into organizational policies (53% positive, 24% negative) and into programs and  services (42% positive, 36% negative). The exception to this was on the quality  of literacy and essential skills opportunities and resources for adult  Canadians (where 42% saw a negative impact and 40% saw a positive impact). These were mostly interviewees and survey respondents  who did not have direct involvement with those organizations whose core funding  was cut. However, some interviewees indicated that organizations which had been  effective and doing good work also had their funding discontinued, and in their  view impeded literacy and essential skills results.
In contrast, interviewees and  survey respondents from organizations which had received core funding, or that  worked with these organizations, saw the impacts of the cuts as negative,  particularly in relation to: the integration of literacy and essential skills  into programs and services (88% indicating a moderate or large negative  impact); and the quantity and quality of literacy and essential skills  opportunities and resources for adult Canadians (88%).
Outcomes of  the roadmap for Canada’s official languages 2013 to 2018
The results of the review of the Official Language Minority Communities  Literacy and Essential Skills Initiative that was the Office’s contribution to  the Roadmap for Canada’s Official Languages 2013  to 2018, found that projects  completed by 2015  to 2016  have contributed to the achievement of Roadmap outcomes through the  strengthening of partnerships and the enhancement of knowledge and capacity  among stakeholders.
A  few interviewees indicated that the elimination of core funding may have had a  particular impact on the official language minority communities. Because the  community is a minority and thus small, the closure of key organizations after  the elimination of core funding were reported to have had a significant impact  on the stakeholders working in this area, reducing their cohesion and  activities.
4.5 Operational efficiency
The evidence is mixed as to  whether the operational transition of literacy and essential skills grants and  contributions delivery has had an observable impact on efficiency.  Departmental processes have been streamlined,  simplified and standardized to an extent, but the administrative burden for  recipient organizations remains high, and interactions with the department  remain complicated.
In 2012, as a  result of the ESDC Grants and Contributions Modernization Agenda, the  responsibility for literacy and essential skills operations functions were  transferred to the Program Operations Branch. The intent of this was to improve  the design, administration, and delivery of grants and contributions programs  by, among other things, reducing administrative burden for applicants and  recipients and streamlining and simplifying grants and contributions  processing.
According to  interviewed personnel, most processes have been streamlined and standardized.  For example, one single unit (Program Operations Branch) has been assigned the  task of reviewing all grants and contributions applications which ensures  consistency, approval processes have been streamlined, and forms and templates  have been standardized.
Evidence regarding  whether there has been a reduced administrative burden for recipient  organizations was mixed. Surveyed respondents from funding recipient  organizations indicated that the delivery of services is complicated for  funding recipient organizations and the majority of respondents found the  funding application process somewhat complicated (54%) to very complicated  (28%).
Similarly, the majority of respondents assessed  the administrative requirements as medium or high, and very few said that it is  low. Other interactions with the Department were said to be somewhat  complicated (43%) and very complicated (20%), with a small proportion  indicating they are somewhat simple (23%).
5.0 Conclusions and recommendations
5.1 Conclusions
There  is a continued need for literacy and essential skills programming and  activities in Canada
There  are many employees who need improved literacy and essential skills to maintain  their jobs, to advance, to improve productivity, and to develop the flexibility  necessary to effectively navigate the changing labour market. There are also  many people without jobs, who are either currently part of the labour force, or  who face barriers to joining it, who need improved literacy and essential  skills in order to join the labour force and secure employment. Given that an  ageing workforce and shrinking labour market is one of the major challenges the  Canadian economy is expected to confront in coming years, developing the  literacy and essential skills of Canadians is key to a healthy economy.
There is demand  from employers for better literacy and essential skills in the workplace.  However, evidence also suggests that there is a lack of awareness about  literacy and essential skills issues; for instance, some employers may be  unaware that low literacy and essential skills are one of the causes of their  challenges with their workforce, and of the ways in which those issues impact  the workplace. Employers also sometimes are challenged to find ways to assess  the literacy and essential skills and needs of their employees.
There is a need and a role for the federal government in literacy and essential skills programming
The  evidence confirms that there is a need for the federal government to provide  programming to support the literacy and essential skills of Canadians to  improve labour market outcomes.  Because  of the government’s pan-Canadian scope, coordination and communication between  stakeholders, including provinces and territories, is an important part of this  role.  While the Office does some coordination  and communicates well with some provinces, territories and stakeholders,  especially those with whom they cooperate on projects, this communication is  uneven across the country, and there is a desire from some provinces and  territories for more.
There  is opportunity for the Department to work more closely with the provinces to  develop a common plan of action on literacy and essential skills and to  increase the integration of literacy and essential skills into the Labour  Market Transfer Agreements. Concerns exist about the lack of flexibility in the  Department’s programming, such as the requirement for projects to use the “nine  essential skills” framework which may, from the point of view of provinces and  territories, be considered different than their frameworks.
The Office’s activities do not duplicate those of other funders
The  Office’s activities do not duplicate those of other funders, but are  complementary. However, there do not seem to be a plethora of other funders in  the area of literacy and essential skills and indications are that the needs  are greater than the supply of funding. Provinces and territories have limited  budgets, and some provide more funding for literacy and essential skills than  others.
There  is a need for the Office’s activities beyond grants and contributions funding
There  is also a need for the Office’s activities that are not related to funding  projects, although there were divergent views regarding which activities should  be part of their role. For example, most agreed that research and analysis is a  needed role for the Office, but there was disagreement as to whether they  should have a role in the building of knowledge and expertise and the  development of partnerships and networks. In part, that disagreement reflects  the needs and situations of the different informants. Therefore, this leads to  the conclusion that future work in these veins should consider whom is being  targeted as a user, ensuring that the tools being developed or research being  undertaken is what is needed by that target user group.
Communication  with provinces and territories has been limited, but shows recent signs of  improvement
Although  interactions do take place between federal, provincial and territorial  governments with respect to adult literacy and essential skills activities,  results indicate that communication and coordination between levels of  government has been somewhat limited, often focused primarily on projects, and  had decreased in the earlier period of the evaluation. However, there have been  some recent improvements in communication within the last year.
Provinces  and territories value communication from the Office, and there is room to make  communication more regular and formalized.
Some  efforts have been made to facilitate knowledge sharing and networking, but more  can be done
Overall,  evidence suggests that the Office has facilitated knowledge sharing and  networking amongst partners and stakeholders to proactively disseminate results  of research, and information on resources and tools to some extent.  However, evidence suggests that these efforts  have been modest and that more can be done.
The  Office’s activities have achieved many of their expected short-term and  intermediate outcomes, although it is too early to determine if they have led  to systemic change
The Office’s activities have resulted in a number of positive outcomes contributing to the achievement of literacy and essential skills improvements within a  labour market context. This has included the development of successful sustained partnerships and integration of literacy and essential skills priorities into policies and program, and organizational capacity-building. However, it is more difficult to assess their contribution to progressing towards sustainable systemic change as the shift in focus to systemic change  began at the end of the evaluation period.
Performance  information on projects exists, but is not systematic or uniform, and this  information and related tools could benefit from updating
The  Office does have a large amount of performance information available regarding  outputs and direct outcomes, through quarterly reports, provincial profiles and  project close-out reports. However, the information available is inconsistent  in the quality, quantity and type which makes it challenging to do a  comprehensive assessment of progress towards achieving expected outcomes.  Additionally, the Adult Learning, Literacy  and Essential Skills Program Performance Measurement Strategy and the Office’s  logic model could benefit from being updated.
The evidence is mixed as to whether the operational transition of literacy and  essential skills grants and contributions delivery has had an observable impact  on efficiency
Departmental processes have been streamlined, simplified and standardized to an extent, but the administrative burden for  recipient organizations remains high, and interactions with the department  remain complicated.
5.2 Recommendations
Recommendations  based on the evaluation findings are provided below.
1. Consider working with provinces,  territories and partners to develop formal partnership strategies to support  stakeholder network development and the sustainability of effective approaches
The Office plays a key role in encouraging the development and  co-ordination of partnerships and networks to support the integration of  literacy and essential skills into labour market programming. However, formal,  clearly defined partnership strategies focusing on the development of  stakeholder networks across Canada and the resources required to ensure  sustainability would help improve understanding of, and coordination with, the  literacy and essential skills needs and integration efforts of provinces,  territories, and partners. This could include integration of literacy and  essential skills into labour market programming (for example, Labour Market Transfer  Agreements).
Additionally,  working with provinces, territories and partners to develop a formal  partnership strategy that includes approaches to stakeholder network and  resource development would indirectly help stakeholders transition from a  core-funding approach to one focused on sustainability and scaling up or  replicating effective interventions. A few interviewees requested that consideration  be given on ways to support the official language minority communities’  networks on literacy and essential skills, saying that they tend to have fewer  resources available to them than other organizations.
2. Continue to improve communications with  provinces and territories, partners and stakeholders
The evidence shows that the Office has made efforts to improve  communication and collaboration with partners and stakeholders since the last  evaluation (2012). However, there is room for improvement in the frequency and  the structure (that is  a formal structure) of communications, particularly with relation to changes in  priorities and/or funding, and with information sharing on research, tools and  resources.
3. Update the performance measurement information  and related tools to reflect recent changes
The performance measurement information (for example, logic model, indicators,  data collection) and related tools should be updated to provide more  consistent, reliable and relevant measures related to the achievement of  expected outcomes and that could increase the likelihood that the next  evaluation can assess the Program’s contribution to systemic change. It may  also be beneficial to consider having one single logic model and performance  measurement strategy for the Office and the grants and contributions programs  (including the role of the Program Operations Branch) in order to tell a  comprehensive performance story.
The existing logic model for the Office (developed in 2008) and  performance measurement strategy for the Adult Learning, Literacy and Essential  Skills Program (developed in 2011) should reflect the recent strategic changes.  These should be updated to reflect the changes in outputs and outcomes (for example,  funding of core activities is no longer a relevant output), as well as to  reflect the shift to focus on integrating literacy and essential skills into  labour market programming. Indicators and associated data collection tools  should also be updated accordingly to provide valid, reliable measures to  inform the achievement of outcomes.
Consideration should also be given to revising the  internal quarterly performance reports completed by the Office, as well as the  close out reports as data collection tools. The type of data provided in these  reports is dependent on what recipients choose to report in their activity  reports and in Program Operations Branch’s close out reports. The type of  information collected in these reports has been inconsistent in terms of  providing data for indicators that are specific to the achievement of outcomes.
Appendix A – Evaluation questions
Evaluation issue/Question
Section of this report
Source documents
Relevance – Continued need for the program
1. Is there a continued need to support the literacy and essential skills of Canadians to improve labour market outcomes?
3.1
Literature and Document Review
Key Informant Interviews
2. Is there a link between program
Footnote
7
objectives and federal government priorities and departmental strategic         outcomes?
3.2
Literature and Document Review
Key Informant Interviews
3. What are the roles and responsibilities of the federal government to support the literacy and essential skills of Canadians to improve labour market outcomes?
3.3
Literature and Document Review
Key Informant Interviews
Performance – Effectiveness
4. Is there still a need for the         Office to facilitate knowledge sharing and networking amongst partners         and stakeholders to disseminate results of research, and information on         resources and tools?
Footnote
8
4.1
Literature and Document Review
Key Informant Interviews
5. Has the Office improved the communication and coordination between the federal, provincial and territorial governments with respect to adult learning, literacy and essential skills activities focused on improving Canadians labour market outcomes?
Footnote
9
4.1
Administrative Data and File Review
Key Informant Interviews
6. Does the Office have performance    information to accurately measure and report on its outputs and outcomes on a    regular basis?
4.2
Administrative Data and File    Review
Key Informant Interviews
7. Have the Office’s activities contributed to the achievement of literacy and essential skills outcomes within a labour market context?
4.3
Administrative Data and File Review
Key Informant Interviews
Survey of Funding Recipient Organizations
8. Has the Office’s funding components (Adult Learning, Literacy and Essential Skills Program and National Essential Skills Initiative) progressed towards achieving the LES  expected outcomes, especially those related to producing systemic or institutional change?
Footnote
10
Footnote
11
4.4
Administrative Data and File Review
Key Informant Interviews
Survey of Funding Recipient Organizations
9. Has the Office facilitated knowledge sharing and networking amongst partners and stakeholders to proactively disseminate results of research, and information on resources and tools?
4.4
Administrative Data and File Review
Key Informant Interviews
Survey of Funding Recipient    Organizations
Performance: Efficiency
10. Has the operational transition of         literacy and essential skills grants and contributions delivery had an         observable impact on efficiency?
5.1
Administrative Data and File    Review
Key Informant Interviews
Survey of Funding Recipient Organizations
11. Has the Office implemented         strategies to reduce resource expenditures and maximize achievement of         outcomes?
5.2
Administrative Data and File    Review
Key Informant Interviews
Appendix B – Methodology
Multiple lines of evidence were used to inform the  literacy and essential skills evaluation, including: a literature and document  review, administrative data and file review, key informant interviews and a  survey of funding recipients.
Evidence is presented in the report using the  following scale to depict the frequency of the comment:
“A few” indicates less than 25%       respondents (but at least 2)
“Some” indicates between 25% and       49% of respondents
“Half” indicates 50% of respondents
“Most” or “majority” indicates between       51% and 74% of respondents
“A large majority” indicates 75% or       more of respondents
One limitation of the evaluation is that no consultations were  undertaken directly with employers, or with beneficiaries of the programming (that is  the people who received training or support in the development of literacy and  essential skills). However, in order to get some indication of an employer  perspective, the survey results for respondents who represented employer  organizations were analyzed separately for select questions.
Literature and document review
A literature and document review was produced for the  2012 evaluation and was updated to inform the current evaluation.
The literature and documents reviewed included  material that is internal to the Government of Canada, including but not  limited to the Ministerial Mandate Letters, Employment and Social Development  Canada’s Report on Plans and Priorities, the Speech from the Throne, Budget  documents, legislation, and program documents. External material, including  academic research, information from provincial and territorial websites, and  organizational reports, as well as other relevant material were also analyzed.  The review included both peer-reviewed and grey literature.
Administrative data and file review
The administrative data and file review addressed  particular evaluation questions related to the performance of literacy and  essential skills activities, including the achievement of expected outcomes.  There were two components of the literacy and essential skills administrative  data and file review. The first component examined the administrative data for  the Office’s internal activities while the second component analyzed data for  the grants and contributions programs.
The Office has produced quarterly performance reports on its internal  activities from fiscal year 2011  to 2012 to fiscal year 2014  to 2015.  The reports provided updates on indicators for select outputs and  outcomes. This data was primarily in the form of textual information  contained within word documents.
A review of the administrative data and files from projects funded under  the literacy and essential skills grants and contributions programs, the Adult  Learning, Literacy and Essential Skills Program and the National Essential  Skills Initiative, between fiscal years 2011  to 2012 and 2015  to 2016 was conducted.  The  Common System for Grants and Contributions, the departmental database for the  administration of grants and contributions, was an important source of  information on the funding programs. All Close-Out Summary reports of projects  completed in fiscal years 2011  to 2012 to 2015  to 2016 were reviewed.
Limitations:
There were some cases where the evidence in the review of Close-Out  Reports, administrative data, and other files did not agree. As well, these  sources also contained differing amounts of detail on projects. However, it was possible to identify trends in each and to determine a similarity or difference  among these trends, as well as to use the different sources to complement information where it would be missing in another source. There wasn’t explicit data supporting whether  the Office is conducting its activities and funding with greatest efficiency, and whether it is, through its projects, implementing strategies to reduce  expenditures and maximize outcomes. Indicators trying to measure the extent of achievement of outcomes were often challenging to establish. There is a lot of  variability in the data available, and it is difficult to make generalizations about all of the reports, files and data examined.
Key informant interviews
Key informant  interviews were used to answer all of the evaluation questions both on  relevance and performance. Thirty-three key informant interviews were conducted  with representatives from four groups. The groups, which provided a diversity  of views about Employment and Social Development Canada’s literacy and  essential skills activities, included:
The  Office’s and Program Operations Branch personnel at national headquarters (3);
The  Office’s partners (11);
Provincial  and territorial representatives (10); and
Non-governmental  experts in adult literacy and essential skills (9).
These key  informant groups represented a range of views, both internal and external to  the Government of Canada. They provided a balanced understanding of the  relevance and results of literacy and essential skills activities.
Limitations:
The level of familiarity with the Office varied  by respondent, with some being familiar with the Office, some with one of the  funding programs, and some with little familiarity. Therefore, not all  respondents could comment on all of the evaluation questions.
Survey of funding recipient organizations
Recipient  organizations of funding from the Adult Learning, Literacy and Essential Skills  Program and the National Essential Skills Initiative, whose projects were  completed between fiscal years 2009 to 2010 and 2015 to 2016
Footnote
12
were surveyed to collect information on the achievements of funded projects.
The survey of  funding recipient organizations focused on whether program outputs (for example tested  models to support the development of literacy and essential skills, resources  to support learning, workshops, training sessions, etc.) were achieved and  whether these products were sustained and integrated into programs, services,  and policies.
In all, 137  survey invitations were sent out. Of those 137, 51 were invalid contacts as  their emails bounced back and could not be reached by phone. Additionally, 3  individuals were ineligible as they were not the right person to complete the  survey or were not familiar enough with the funding topic.  The survey of funding recipient organizations  received 61 complete responses online, for a response rate of 73.5%. The  largest number of respondents (77%) were from non-profit/charitable  organizations and the voluntary sector. Approximately 8% were from educational  organizations such as universities and colleges. Respondents were most commonly  working to improve adult learning and education, employability skills, literacy  and basic skills and essential skills training in the workplace.
The Office is  conducting an impact study for projects completed between April 1, 2009 and  March 31, 2014 related to the labour market.   The survey of funding recipient organizations will be used to provide information  for the impact study. The questions asked in the survey needed to meet the  needs of both the LES evaluation and the impact study.  Consent was sought from survey respondents to  share their responses with the Office.
Limitations:
The survey received 61 responses, for a response  rate of 73.5%. Due to a sizable number of bounce backs (37%), the resultant  size of the sample was not large and it is not possible to know if there were  important differences between projects for which the email bounced back and  those for which the email was successful. Thus, some findings should be  interpreted with caution.
Footnotes
Footnote 1
The survey
measures the key cognitive  and workplace skills, including literacy skills, needed for individuals between  the ages of 16 and 65, to participate in society and for economies to prosper. It  defines “literacy” as the “ability to engage with written texts (print-based  and digital) and thereby participate in society, achieve goals, and develop  their knowledge and potential”.
Return to footnote
1
referrer
Footnote 2
Canada’s  official language minority communities are Anglophones in Quebec and  Francophones outside of Quebec.
Return to footnote
2
referrer
Footnote 3
ALLESP  (Adult Learning, Literacy and Essential Skills Program), NESI (National  Essential Skills Initiative). Funding provided by these two programs are from  distinct sources, but there is no distinction between the types of projects  funded.
Return to footnote
3
referrer
Footnote 4
Lane  and Murray (2015), p. 14.
Return to footnote
4
referrer
Footnote 5
Lane  and Murray (2015), p. 36.
Return to footnote
5
referrer
Footnote 6
Heisz, Notten, and Situa (2016), Cartwright (2011), Stuckey and Munro (2013), Windisch  (2015).
Return to footnote
6
referrer
Footnote 7
The program includes the Office of Literacy and Essential Skills, the Adult Learning, Literacy and Essential Skills Program and the Employment Insurance  Part II—National Essential Skills Initiative.
Return to footnote
7
referrer
Footnote 8
Question 4 refers to the recommendation from the previous evaluation, “to more fully develop into a Centre of Expertise, the Office should be more proactive in the dissemination of the Adult Learning, Literacy and Essential Skills Program funded research, resources and tools.”
Return to footnote
8
referrer
Footnote 9
Question  5 refers to the recommendation from the previous evaluation that “the Office  should continue to improve coordination between the federal government and  provincial and territorial government representatives with respect to adult  learning, literacy and essential skills, as well as improve transparency  regarding its decisions in relation to priority-setting for the program and the  funding of individual projects.”
Return to footnote
9
referrer
Footnote 10
Question  8 will include an assessment of the impact of eliminating core funding to LES  network organizations on the LES network itself and on service providers.
Return to footnote
10
referrer
Footnote 11
For  question 8, “systemic or institutional change” is associated with the  integration of literacy and essential skills into policies, programs,  practices, training, accreditation, etc.
Return to footnote
11
referrer
Footnote 12
The survey of funding recipient organizations goes beyond the scope of  the evaluation by including organizations whose labour market-related projects  closed in fiscal year 2009  to 2010. The inclusion of the 2009  to 2010  labour market projects is to support the Office’s “Office of Literacy and  Essential Skills Grants and Contributions Performance Assessment”.
Return to footnote
12
referrer
Report a problem or mistake on this page
Please select all that apply:
A link, button or video is not working
It has a spelling mistake
Information is missing
Information is outdated or wrong
Login error when trying to access an account
I can't find what I'm looking for
Other issue not in this list
Submit
Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries,
contact us
.
Date modified:
2022-04-19