Summary of the evaluation of the Connecting Canadians with Available Jobs initiative
From:
Employment and Social Development Canada
Alternate formats
Summary of the evaluation of the Connecting Canadians with Available Jobs initiative [
PDF
– 175
KB
]
Large print, braille,
MP3
(audio), e-text and
DAISY
formats are available on demand by
ordering online
or calling 1 800 O-Canada (1-800-622-6232). If you use a teletypewriter (
TTY
), call 1-800-926-9105.
Evaluation  of the Connecting Canadians with Available Jobs initiative
The Initiative came into force in 2013 and comprised a set of four measures to help unemployed workers return to work more quickly.
Key findings
The evaluation found there was a need to facilitate more effective job searches and encourage Employment Insurance claimants to accept all suitable work. While some of the measures somewhat contributed to the initiative's objectives, others had mixed effects.
1. Legislative changes to the definitions of "reasonable job search" and "suitable employment" and enhanced integrity measures
Enhanced integrity measures led to better monitoring of claimants and helped them return to work faster.
However, the legislative changes did not encourage them to increase their job search efforts.
Claimants had low awareness of the changes.
2. Enhancements to Job Alerts and labour market information
Awareness and take-up of Job Alerts increased.
However, there was no significant improvement in labour market outcomes.
3. Improved connections between the Temporary Foreign Worker Program and the EI Program
The measure had a minimal impact on the number of Canadians considered and hired for jobs for which employers requested temporary foreign workers.
4. Collaboration projects with British Columbia and Manitoba
The effectiveness of the measure was limited.
Evidence suggests that this type of intervention could be effective if it is better targeted at certain subgroups of Employment Insurance claimants.
The full
Evaluation of the Connecting Canadians with Available Jobs Initiative
is now available.
Report a problem or mistake on this page
Please select all that apply:
A link, button or video is not working
It has a spelling mistake
Information is missing
Information is outdated or wrong
Login error when trying to access an account
I can't find what I'm looking for
Other issue not in this list
Submit
Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries,
contact us
.
Date modified:
2022-04-20