Summary of the Evaluation of Providing Services and Information to Canadians through Service Canada
Alternate formats
Summary of the Evaluation of Providing Services and Information to Canadians through Service Canada
[
PDF
- 785.5
KB
]
Large print, braille,
MP3
(audio), e-text and
DAISY
formats are available on demand by
ordering online
or calling 1 800 O-Canada (1-800-622-6232). If you use a teletypewriter (
TTY
), call 1-800-926-9105.
About the Program
Canadians can access services and obtain information on  Employment and Social Development Canada and other Government of Canada  programs through Service Canada’s In-Person, Online, and Telephone channels.
8.4 million client visits to In-Person  points of service across Canada from April 2018 to March 2019
1.6 million calls to the 1 800 O-Canada  general information telephone line from April 2018 to March 2019
253,000 new and returning visitors to the Canada  Pension Plan Retirement Pension website in March 2019
Client Satisfaction Rates
Canada Pension Plan – 87%
Old Age Security – 86%
Employment Insurance – 83%
Footnote
1
Key Findings
Service Canada is meeting most client needs for access to  services and general information, although challenges exist with timeliness and  access to Specialized Call Centres.
The Department has already initiated efforts to address the  concerns raised in the 2019 Spring Report of the Auditor General of Canada  pertaining to Specialized Call Centres.
Canadians need and expect improved information to support  informed and optimal decision-making regarding complex programs such as the  Canada Pension Plan Retirement Pension.
The Department is exploring innovative options to meet  clients’ needs for specific, personalized information about their Canada  Pension Plan Retirement Pension.
Some Canadians living in rural and remote areas as well as  Indigenous people and people with lower levels of education experience barriers  to the services and information they require.
The Department continues to identify and reduce barriers in  accessing services and benefits amongst potentially vulnerable populations and  explore inclusive approaches to providing those services.
The full
Evaluation of Providing Services and Information to Canadians through Service Canada
is now available.
Footnotes
Footnote 1
Service Canada Client Experience Survey (2017).
Return to footnote
1
referrer
Report a problem or mistake on this page
Please select all that apply:
A link, button or video is not working
It has a spelling mistake
Information is missing
Information is outdated or wrong
Login error when trying to access an account
I can't find what I'm looking for
Other issue not in this list
Submit
Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries,
contact us
.
Date modified:
2022-04-21