Evaluation Summary: Occupational Health and Safety
From:
Employment and Social Development Canada
Alternate formats
Evaluation summary: Occupational Health and Safety
[
PDF
- 606
KB
]
Large print, braille,
MP3
(audio), e-text and
DAISY
formats are available on demand by
ordering online
or calling 1 800 O-Canada (1-800-622-6232). If you use a teletypewriter (
TTY
), call 1-800-926-9105.
This evaluation focuses on the Occupational Health and Safety  program, which is part of the Labour Program of Employment and Social  Development Canada, for the period between 2011 and 2016. The program enforces  the occupational health and safety provisions under Part II of the
Canada  Labour Code
and the
Canada Occupational Health and Safety Regulations
in  federally regulated workplaces.
Key findings and recommendations
Modernization and recommendations
There are emerging occupational health and safety challenges  (for example, mental health and non-standard employment) that are leading to a  rise in vulnerable workers.
Recommendation:
Increase awareness of occupational health and safety to address emerging  challenges, prevent future issues and risks, and further support vulnerable  workers.
Proactive activities
Proactive inspections declined by 45%, while the Disabling Injury Incidence Rate increased by 7%  during the evaluation period.
Recommendation:
Explore ways to  increase proactive activities, including strategically targeted inspections in  high risk sectors, in order to detect violations and prevent potential injuries  and/or illnesses.
Reactive activities
All surveyed employers are satisfied  with the results of the internal complaints resolution process; however, 60% of  employees
are less satisfied with the overall  process.
Recommendation:
Identify and  address issues that may have hindered the effectiveness of the internal  complaints resolution process, and develop service standards to address  violations in a timely and effective manner.
Performance measurement practices
The performance measurement practices  in place do not fully support the monitoring and measuring of the program’s  expected outcomes.
Recommendation:
To support  monitoring and reporting activities, the program could improve performance  measurement practices to capture reliable information with respect to key  metrics, such as incidence rates, compliance levels, and the severity of  violations.
Report a problem or mistake on this page
Please select all that apply:
A link, button or video is not working
It has a spelling mistake
Information is missing
Information is outdated or wrong
Login error when trying to access an account
I can't find what I'm looking for
Other issue not in this list
Submit
Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries,
contact us
.
Date modified:
2022-04-20