Summary of the Evaluation of the Guaranteed Income Supplement
From:
Employment and Social Development Canada
Alternate formats
Summary of the Evaluation of the Guaranteed Income Supplement
[
PDF
- 257
KB
]
Large print, braille,
MP3
(audio), e-text and
DAISY
formats are available on demand by
ordering online
or calling 1 800 O-Canada (1-800-622-6232). If you use a teletypewriter (
TTY
), call 1-800-926-9105.
The
Guaranteed Income Supplement
is a monthly benefit available to low-income
Old Age Security
pensioners residing in Canada. It provides a monthly non-taxable benefit to Old Age Security pension recipients who have a low level of income. For fiscal year 2018 to 2019, an average of 2 million seniors received Guaranteed Income Supplement payments in addition to their monthly Old Age Security pension, totaling $12.4 billion.
The evaluation examined barriers to take-up of the Guaranteed Income Supplement, with a focus on vulnerable populations and non-tax filers.
Key findings
Among all seniors:
barriers to take-up of the Guaranteed Income Supplement still exist for immigrants and those who live in rural areas, including language and difficulty understanding the application process
Among non tax-filing seniors:
only about 15% of eligible non-recipients have applied for the Guaranteed Income Supplement
barriers to take-up among non tax-filing seniors relate to having difficulty accessing information about the Guaranteed Income Supplement. Barriers are experienced by seniors from all socioeconomic groups
Recommendation
The program should continue its efforts to better reach seniors and enhance take-up of the Guaranteed Income Supplement.
The full
Evaluation of the Guaranteed Income Supplement – Phase 2
is now  available.
Report a problem or mistake on this page
Please select all that apply:
A link, button or video is not working
It has a spelling mistake
Information is missing
Information is outdated or wrong
Login error when trying to access an account
I can't find what I'm looking for
Other issue not in this list
Submit
Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries,
contact us
.
Date modified:
2022-04-21