Horizontal evaluation of the Youth Employment Strategy - Skills Link stream - Summary
From:
Employment and Social Development Canada
On this page
About the program
Main findings
Observations
Alternate formats
Evaluation of the Youth Employment Strategy – Skills Link Stream
[
PDF
- 173.9
KB
]
Large print, braille,
MP3
(audio), e-text and
DAISY
formats are available on demand by
ordering online
or calling 1 800 O-Canada (1-800-622-6232). If you use a teletypewriter (
TTY
), call 1-800-926-9105.
About the program
The former Horizontal Youth Employment Strategy consisted of 3 program streams: Summer Work Experience, Skills Link and Career Focus. A new Horizontal Youth Employment and Skills Strategy (YESS) that came into effect in June 2019 merged these 3 streams.
Skills Link targeted youth who faced barriers to employment. Skills Link funded local and regional organizations from various sectors. These organizations provided youth with opportunities to gain employment experience and acquire knowledge and skills.
In 2017 and 2018:
19,000 + youth participated in Skills Link
the government provided $170M in funding to organizations
Main findings
Immediately after participating in Skills Link, more than 70% of youth worked or had returned to school, exceeding the program target of 60%.
Overall, the magnitude of the incremental impacts on participants’ labour market attachment was limited, suggesting challenges associated with helping youth with barriers to employment
Youth who received “work experience” through the program resulted in stronger labour market attachment relative to youth who received “group-based workshop” interventions
Analysis suggests that interventions involving a workshop approach had generally negative incremental impacts. However workshops were relatively more effective for youth who had a lower level of education.
Observation
Findings suggest that there are potential challenges associated with the group-based workshop approach. Especially when it is applied to a mixed group of youth facing various barriers to employment. This points to the benefits of better tailoring interventions, in line with the needs of the different segments of participating youth.
The full Evaluation of the Youth Employment Strategy – Skills Link stream is available at
Skills Link Stream
.
Report a problem or mistake on this page
Please select all that apply:
A link, button or video is not working
It has a spelling mistake
Information is missing
Information is outdated or wrong
Login error when trying to access an account
I can't find what I'm looking for
Other issue not in this list
Submit
Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries,
contact us
.
Date modified:
2022-04-21