Summary of the Evaluation of the Apprenticeship Grants
From:
Employment and Social Development Canada
Alternate formats
Summary of the Evaluation of the Apprenticeship Grants
[
PDF
- 320
KB
]
Large print, braille,
MP3
(audio), e-text and
DAISY
formats are available on demand by
ordering online
or calling 1 800 O-Canada (1-800-622-6232). If you use a teletypewriter (
TTY
), call 1-800-926-9105.
Evaluation of the Apprenticeship  Grants
The  Apprenticeship Grants program, which is composed of the Apprenticeship Incentive Grant, the Apprenticeship Completion Grant and the Apprenticeship Incentive Grant for Women, allows apprentices to receive up to $4,000
Footnote
1
in lifetime grants to pay for tuition, travel, tools, or other expenses. They aim to increase access to skilled trades in Canada by reducing financial barriers and encouraging progression and completion of an apprenticeship program. In 2017 to 2018, over 66,000 grants were issued – totalling almost $89 million in disbursements.
Key findings
The  Apprenticeship Grants have made a limited contribution towards attracting  individuals to apprenticeships due in part to lack of awareness of the program.  However, they have contributed to the decision to continue in, and ultimately  complete, an apprenticeship training.
Financial burdens continue to be an issue for apprentices, especially for some under-represented groups, such as women and the Indigenous population.
In 2016, 48.8% of the grant recipients were not using other federal financial supports beyond the Apprenticeship Grants.
Apprentices face significant non-financial barriers such as job instability, lack of access to  apprenticeship training, unsupportive employers and a stigma regarding women entering the trades as a career choice.
Recommendation
Examine how the grants could be modified  as part of the broader suite of federal apprenticeship supports by taking into account key evaluation findings, including challenges/ barriers faced by groups such as, women, and Indigenous people.
The full
Evaluation of the Apprenticeship Grants
is now available.
Footnotes
Footnote 1
Since the introduction of Apprenticeship Incentive Grant for Women in December 2018, female apprentices can receive up to $8,000 in grants.
Return to footnote
1
referrer
Report a problem or mistake on this page
Please select all that apply:
A link, button or video is not working
It has a spelling mistake
Information is missing
Information is outdated or wrong
Login error when trying to access an account
I can't find what I'm looking for
Other issue not in this list
Submit
Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries,
contact us
.
Date modified:
2022-04-21