Summary of the evaluation of the Opportunities Fund for Persons with Disabilities (Phase I)
Alternate formats
Evaluation of the Opportunities Fund for Persons with Disabilities (Phase I)
[
PDF
- 118.66
KB
]
Request other formats online
or call 1 800 O-Canada (1-800-622-6232). If you use a teletypewriter (TTY), call 1-800-926-9105. Large print,   braille, audio cassette, audio CD, e-text diskette, e-text CD and DAISY   are available on demand.
The Opportunities Fund for Persons with Disabilities fills gaps in employment services for unemployed 
persons with disabilities who are not eligible for Employment Insurance benefits or who cannot access the 
employment and training supports delivered under Part II of the
Employment Insurance Act
. Through the 
Program, persons with disabilities are given the opportunity to acquire or develop skills, and to obtain 
paid employment experience or assistance in becoming self-employed.
Evaluation results
About 22% of survey respondents noted that they would have been unlikely to find work without participating in the Program.
Post-program, more participants were employed, self-employed or returned to school:
55% in fiscal year 2016 to 2017 compared to
42% in fiscal year 2012 to 2013
Post-program employment and self-employment is conditioned by many factors, including:
illness or disability
the inability to obtain an employment income that exceeds available social assistance benefits
lacking access to adapted transportation
family or other personal responsibilities
The Opportunities Fund could serve more clients and there is opportunity to increase awareness of the Program among employers
Recommendations
Continue enhancing employers' awareness of the valuable contribution that persons with disabilities can make and of the various supports available to facilitate their hiring and workplace integration.
Explore the possibility of extending the availability of supports and follow-ups with participants.
Better link the Program's logic model to the reforms and new policy directions of the Program, and continue improving indicators used for performance measurement purposes.
Further clarify the concept of social innovation and its application within the context of the Program, and establish specific criteria for assessment and monitoring purposes.
The full
Evaluation  of the Opportunities Fund for Persons with Disabilities (Phase I)
is now available.
Report a problem or mistake on this page
Please select all that apply:
A link, button or video is not working
It has a spelling mistake
Information is missing
Information is outdated or wrong
Login error when trying to access an account
I can't find what I'm looking for
Other issue not in this list
Submit
Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries,
contact us
.
Date modified:
2021-05-17