Evaluation of the Canada – Alberta Labour Market Development Agreement
From:
Employment  and Social Development Canada
On this  page
Executive summary
Management response
1. Introduction
1.1 Labour Market Development Agreement  background
1.2 Methodology
1.3 Overview of the studies summarized in this  report
2. Evaluation findings
2.1 Rationale and Labour Market context
2.2 Skills Development
2.3 Skills Development-Apprentices
2.4 Targeted Wage Subsidies
2.5 Self-Employment
2.6 Job Creation Partnerships
2.7 Employment Assistance Services
3. Comparison of key findings by program type
4. Conclusions
5. Recommendations
References
Acronyms
Appendix A - Methodology
Appendix B - Detailed results Skills Development
Appendix C - Detailed results Skills  Development-Apprentices
Appendix D – Detailed results Targeted Wage  Subsidies
Appendix E - Detailed results Self-Employment
Appendix F - Detailed results Job Creation  Partnerships
Appendix G - Detailed results Employment  Assistance Services only
Appendix H - List of nine studies included in  the synthesis report
Alternate formats
Evaluation of the Canada – Alberta Labour Market Development Agreement Synthesis Report
[
PDF
- 1.15
MB
]
Large print, braille,
MP3
(audio), e-text and
DAISY
formats are available on demand by
ordering online
or calling 1 800 O-Canada (1-800-622-6232). If you use a teletypewriter (
TTY
), call 1-800-926-9105.
Executive summary
Introduction
Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC) worked  jointly with Alberta and 11 other Provinces and Territories (P/Ts) to undertake  the 2012 to 2017 second cycle for the Labour Market Development Agreement  (LMDA) evaluation. The first cycle of LMDA evaluation was carried out between  1998 and 2012 and involved conducting bilateral formative and summative  evaluations in all provinces and territories. Under  the second cycle, the evaluation work consisted of conducting two to three  studies per year on the Employment Benefits and Support Measures (EBSMs)  similar programming delivered under these agreements. The studies generated  evaluation evidence on the effectiveness, efficiency and design/delivery of  EBSMs for Canada overall, for Alberta and for the 11 other P/Ts.
Under LMDAs, Canada transfers $2.14B Employment Insurance  (EI) Part II funds to P/Ts for the design and delivery of programs and services  to help unemployed individuals, mainly those eligible for EI, to find and  maintain employment.
Programs and services delivered  by P/Ts have to correspond to the EBSM categories defined under the EI Act. The  following is a short description of the five programs and services examined in  the evaluation:
Skills Development (Work Foundations /  Occupational Training)
helps participants obtain employment skills by  giving them financial assistance in order to attend classroom training. This program also includes  apprenticeship training.
Targeted Wage Subsidies (Workplace Training)
help participants obtain on-the-job work  experience by providing employers with a wage subsidy.
Self-Employment
provides financial  assistance and business planning advice to participants to help them start  their own business.
Job Creation Partnerships (Integrated Training  Program and Immigrant Bridging)
provide participants with opportunities to gain  work experience that will lead to ongoing employment. Employment opportunities  are provided by projects that contribute to developing the community and the  local economy.
Employment Assistance Services
includes services
such as counselling, job search skills, job placement services, the  provision of labour market information and case management.
Three additional programs and services are available under  the LMDA and they are: Labour Market Partnerships, Research and Innovation and  Targeted Earnings Supplements. They were not evaluated as part of this  evaluation. The Targeted Earnings Supplements program is not implemented in  Alberta while Labour Market Partnerships, and Research and Innovation will be  evaluated at a later stage.
Table i provides an overview of the share of funding  allocated to the five EBSMs examined under the second cycle for LMDA evaluation  in Alberta and the average cost per participant.
Table  i. Share of LMDA funding and average cost per participant
Program and service
Share of funding 2014 to 2015
Average cost per participant 2002 to 2005
Skills    Development
69%
$5,081
Employment    Assistance Services
22%
$252
Targeted    Wage Subsidies
1%
$7,440
Self-Employment
1%
$7,038
Job    Creation Partnerships
7%
$8,790
Total
100%
–
Sources: EI  Monitoring and Assessment Reports 2002 to 2003 to 2014 to 2015.
This report presents a summary of the findings from nine  studies. Results are presented for active and former EI claimants as well as  for long-tenured workers
Footnote
1
, youth (under 30 years  old) and older workers (55 years old and over) when the number of participants  was sufficient to conduct quantitative analyses. Active EI claimants were  clients that received EI at the time of their EBSM participation. Former EI  claimants received EI up to three years before starting their EBSM  participation.
Key findings
Effectiveness and efficiency of EBSMs
Incremental impacts and cost-benefit analyses assessed  EBSM effectiveness and efficiency. Overall, incremental impacts demonstrate  that LMDA programs and services are improving the labour market attachment of  active and former EI claimant participants in Alberta. As well, social benefits  of participation exceeded the cost of investments for most interventions over  time. Finally, providing Employment Assistance Services interventions earlier  during an EI claim (first eight weeks) produced larger impacts on earnings and  employment and facilitated earlier return to work. This demonstrates the  importance of targeting early participation of EI active claimants.
Figure i presents the  incremental impacts on the incidence of employment for active and former  claimants by type of program. The estimates can be interpreted as a change in  the probability of being employed following participation. For example,  participation in Skills Development increases the probability of being employed  by 9.6 percentage points for active EI claimants relative to unemployed non-  participants.
Figure i. Change in probability of being employed in participants relative to non-participants
Footnote
2
Text description of Figure i
Percentage Points
Active Claimants
Former Claimants
Skills Development
9.6
5.8
Targeted Wage Subsidies
7.3
3.9
Job Creation Partnership
10.8
5.2
Employment Assistance Services
2.2
Figure ii presents the cumulative increase in employment  earnings for active and former claimants over the 5 years post-participation.  While the estimates for Employment Assistance Services are not statistically  significant, providing these services earlier during an EI claim (first 8  weeks) produced larger impacts on earnings and employment and facilitated  earlier return to work.
Figure ii. Increased cumulative earnings of participants relative to non-participants
Footnote
3
Text description of Figure ii
Cumulative Gains in    Earnings
Active Claimants
Former Claimants
Skills Development
16952
9464
Targeted Wage Subsidies
12700
10665
Job Creation Partnership
17283
4832
a
Employment Assistance Services
2485
a
a
The incremental impacts on earnings for former claimants who participated in Job Creation Partnerships and active claimants who participated in Employment Assistance Services are not statistically significant at the 95% confidence level.
Table ii presents the number of years required for the  social benefits to exceed program cost. Social benefits exceeded investment  costs in a period ranging between the first year of program participation to  about 14 years after participation.
Table ii. Number of years for the  benefits to exceed program costs
Skills Development
Targeted Wage Subsidies
Job Creation Partnerships
Employment Assistance Services
Active claimants
5.1
4.3
6.5
5.2
Former claimants
5.5
0.8
14.1
n/a
Lessons learned about program design and delivery
Key informants interviews
Footnote
4
with service providers and  program managers as well as the documents reviewed and the questionnaires  filled by Alberta representatives identified:
Lessons  learned and best practices as well as features of program design and delivery  that work well
Challenges  related to program design and delivery
Some  external factors that influence program design and delivery
Skills Development
A key feature in the application process for Skills  Development is to ensure that prospective participants are choosing a training  that will meet labour market demand. As well, Alberta plans training investment  to target labour market trends. This may contribute to program effectiveness.  Other key features included:
Undertaking  a comprehensive assessment of the participants in order to assist them in  making informed choices and to commit to their training
Having  access to disability-related employment and financial supports
In terms of lessons learned and best practices, key  informants indicated the importance of:
Providing long-term  assistance and to have an interdisciplinary team of professionals that can  provide a continuum of services and supports to individuals facing multiple  barriers
Monitoring  participants during training and following up after the training
Coordination  among key labour market stakeholders and service providers
Offering  coordinated foundational learning programs that assess basic skills at the  outset of the program, address weaknesses and integrate basic skills  development into professional program would be beneficial
Providing  intensive case management for individuals facing multiple barriers to  employment
The main challenges related to Skills Development design and delivery included:
The level  and duration of the financial support being too low for individuals facing multiple  barriers to employment
Lack of  instrument to test literacy level
Identifying  learning disability too late in the process
Lack of  awareness around available support for those with physical and mental  disabilities
Skills Development – for Apprentices
Key informants identified the  following best practices and lessons learned about the program:
Having  close connections with the industry helps to understand where the government  can make better investments and offer training closer to the participant’s  home. For example, it has been possible to increase the training offered in  some locations based on employers input.
Providing  accommodations to individuals facing barriers to employment or to completing  training. For example, providing disability related supports or help to  individuals with learning barriers in order to help them complete their exams.
Existing  Canadian labour market literature showed that there is a fairly high  non-completion rate among apprentices; however it is not possible with  available data to generate a reliable estimation of the completion rate of Skills  Development – Apprentices participants  in Alberta. According to key informants, the drop-out from the apprenticeship  process may be due to external factors such as:
The  apprentice realises that he/she is not suited for the job
Employers  are not able to let the apprentice go on training
Targeted Wage Subsidies
Key informants identified best practices or the lessons  related to Targeted Wage Subsidies’ design and delivery. These included:
Having a  client-focused approach to the program application to ensure the participant is  ready, willing and able to pursue participation
Ensuring a  good match between employer and employee helps to guarantee participant  retention after the end of the subsidy
Ongoing  case management is key for proactively addressing barriers faced by  participants (for example, mental health issues, addictions and social  barriers)
Maintaining  a good relationship with employers and providing them support during the  subsidy is important
While evaluation results have demonstrated program  effectiveness, its use has been falling in recent years (from 261 new  interventions in 2003 to 2004 to 41 in 2013 to 2014). According to key  informants potential reasons to explain this decline may include:
Changes in  the labour market and the low unemployment rate affect the program
Mismatch  between employers needs and participants skills
Lack of  capacity among career employment consultants or service providers due to high  turnover and lack of resources
Employers  may not be inclined to use the program because of:
Time and  resource constraints on the part of the employers to apply, receive approval and  meet reporting requirements
A lack of  awareness from employers about the program
The stigma  associated with hiring someone with a subsidy
Challenges  related to program design and delivery included:
Some  career employment consultants cannot follow-up with participants as often as  needed because they lack capacity. In some situations, the caseload of career  employment consultants may involve approximately 300 individuals.
High staff  turnover results in loss of knowledge and expertise.
It can be  difficult to find participants and employers who meet the program guidelines.  Eligibility criteria are also seen as being too restrictive by key informants.  For example, the program has a limitation where only one employee can be  subsidised with one employer.
Employment Assistance Services
Key informants identified some  best practices and lessons learned related to the provision of Employment  Assistance Services:
It would  be beneficial to provide a one-stop-shop for participants instead of relying on  referrals made to other organizations
Long-term  interventions and follow-up are required for individuals facing multiple  barriers since those barriers are often inter-related and participants need a  long time to address them
Conducting  adequate and detailed assessments of participants’ needs to help determine  training needs
Job  maintenance services and job placements are helpful. Holding job fairs also  help to increase awareness about available services
Targeting  contracts for specialized services for participants with specific needs would  be beneficial
Having  adequate labour market information and having well trained staff is important
Having the  capacity to tailor services to community needs is an important consideration
It is  important for service providers to build relationships with employers,  specialized service providers and community organizations. This helps with  participant referrals and facilitates the integration of participants in the  local labour market.
Access to  EI Part I data is important
Challenges related to the  provisions of Employment Assistance Services included:
Program  guidelines are perceived as being rigid. This can restrict service provider’s  ability to address the needs of participants with multiple barriers. As well,  the focus on quicker return to employment as the sole  indicator of success does not adequately account for the extensive barriers  faced by these participants.
Program  awareness varies greatly depending on the various participant groups.
Having one  year contracts with service providers can limit their capacity to retain  qualified staff and to access stable funding.
Recommendations
Recommendations that emerge from the evaluation findings  presented in this report are as follows:
The study on the timing of Employment Assistance Services  participation showed that receiving assistance early after starting an EI claim  can lead to better labour market impacts. However, key informants reported a  lack of awareness about the program.
Recommendation 1:
Consideration should be given to providing Alberta with timely access to data  on new EI recipients for supporting targeting and increasing awareness.
Key informants reported that lack of essential skills, learning disabilities and literacy  issues may be barriers to accessing and completing training.
Recommendation 2:
Consideration should be given to remove barriers to accessing and completing  training such as literacy/essential skills training and learning disability  assessments. The measures would help individuals with multiple barriers to  prepare for vocational training and to reintegrate the labour market. The  measures should be reported separately from other Skills Development  interventions given their unique objectives.
Incremental impact results show that the Targeted Wage  Subsidies program is improving the earnings and employment of participants.  However, program use has declined over the years. According to key informants, the decline may be  related to factors such as a lack of awareness about the program, the  commitments required from employers in terms of time and resources as well as  the stigma associate with hiring someone with a subsidy.
Recommendation 3:
Depending on labour market priorities and budget allocation across the various  EBSMs, Alberta may wish to explore ways of removing barriers to employer  participation in Targeted Wage Subsidies.
Key informants interviewed in the evaluation confirmed the  necessity of having labour market information to support program delivery.  They, however, pointed to the potential difficulty of accessing labour market  information at the regional or local level.
Recommendation 4:
Consideration should be given to enhance the capacity of service providers to  access, when needed, relevant labour market information.
The evaluation was not able to produce a conclusive  assessment of Self-Employment effectiveness and efficiency since the data used  to assess impacts on earnings may not be the best source of information  available to reflect the financial wellbeing of the participants. Overall,  it is not clear whether participant’s success in improving their labour  market attachment through self-employment is more closely associated with their  business idea and their entrepreneurship skills than the assistance provided  under Self-Employment.
Recommendation 5:
Consideration should be given to examine in more detail the design and delivery  of Self-Employment and whether the performance indicators for this program are  appropriate.
Job Creation Partnerships was found to be particularly  effective at improving earnings and incidence of employment of active  claimants.  However, the evaluation has  not yet examined the design and delivery of the program’s two components:  Integrated Training and Immigration Bridging. Therefore, it is not clear what  factors contribute to program success.
Recommendation 6:
Consideration should be given to examine the design and delivery of the program  components (Integrated Training and Immigration Bridging) in order to better  understand how this program operates.
Overall, the LMDA evaluation was able to produce a sound  assessment of EBSM effectiveness and efficiency because the team had access to  rich data on EI claimants, EBSM participation data and Canada Revenue Agency  taxation files. While the available data allowed the production of robust evidence  on impacts and cost-benefits, some data gaps limited the evaluation’s ability  to assess how EBSMs operate. For example:
Having  access to complete data on whether participants are members of designated  groups including Indigenous peoples, persons with disabilities and recent  immigrants would be useful to inform policy development and program design.
Having  access to complete data on the cost of programming per participant would also  provide a refined assessment of how much participation cost for active  claimants as compared to former claimants.
The  evaluation was not able to provide a comprehensive description of the type of  training funded under Skills Development (for example, literacy, essential  skills, adult basic education and vocational training). As a result, it is  currently not possible to separate the effects of adult basic education from  those of vocational training although both types of training may lead to very  different labour market outcomes.
In  Alberta, the Integrated Training and Immigrant Bridging are separate programs  that are recorded as Job Creation Partnerships in the LMDA data. As a result,  it is currently not possible for ESDC to separate the effects of Integrated  Training from those of Immigrant Bridging although both programs may lead to  very different labour market outcomes for different target groups.
There are  various types of Employment Assistance Services provided under the LMDAs. These  services can be very different in nature and it is possible that some may be  more effective than others at helping participants to return to employment. For  example, having access to a computer for researching jobs on its own may yield  different impacts than receiving counselling and assistance to develop a  return-to-work action plan.
Recommendation 7:
Improvements in the data collection is recommended to address key program and  policy questions of interest to the federal and provincial/territorial  governments. Specifically:
Collect  data on whether participants are members of designated groups including  Indigenous peoples, persons with disabilities and recent immigrants
Collect  data on the type of training funded under Skills Development and the type of  assistance provided under Employment Assistance Services. Alberta, ESDC and  other P/Ts should work together to define common categories for both EBSMs.
Examine  the added value in reporting separately on participants in the Integrated  Training and Immigrant Bridging programs
Collect  detailed data on the cost of interventions
Management response
Introduction
The Government of Alberta would like to thank all those who  participated in the Cycle II Evaluation of the Canada-Alberta LMDA.  In particular, the Government of Alberta  acknowledges the contributions of key informants, ESDC and the work of the LMDA  Evaluation Steering Committee in conducting the assessment of EBSMs in Alberta,  funded under the LMDA.
Alberta Labour, on behalf of the Government of Alberta,  considered the evaluation findings in this report and provided the following  Management Response.
Alberta management response
The Bilateral Evaluation Report indicated that Alberta was  successful in meeting the objectives of the EBSMs in that Albertans were  benefiting from the programs and services provided by Alberta under this  agreement.  Alberta is committed to  continue to achieve strong results and look for ways to improve on the  employment and training programs it provides under the LMDA and is appreciative  of the new evidence and information that is available.  Information from the Bilateral Evaluation  Report will be helpful and considered as program and service changes occur.
Alberta is already addressing  some of the recommendations in the current labour market programming.
Alberta is  receiving data on new EI applicants as part of the Targeting, Referral and  Feedback Pilot program.
Ministry  of Community and Social Services has contracts for specialized assessments if  Learning Disability is identified as a barrier to accessing and completing  training.
Literacy  and essential skills training is also built in to several program designs (for  example, Integrated Training, a program offered under Job Creation Partnership)
In recent  years, 12 new Workplace Training contracts have started in Alberta. The new  contracts focus on the client priorities and have eliminated a lot of the  administrative work that previously existed for the employers and providers.  Early feedback on the new process from the employers and providers is very  positive.
Ministry  of Labour makes labour market information available on its website.  Since the period of evaluation, Alberta  labour market information has grown extensively.  Efforts are underway to connect service  providers with the latest labour market information.  For example, the Alberta Short Term  Employment Forecast prepared by Ministry of Labour is made available to the  public.  Regional  coordinators are also engaged more in recent times.
Alberta  recently met with ESDC to discuss the ongoing work on Service-based Mappings  between Mobius, the Enterprise Database, and IMAGIS.  As new Service Types are added to Mobius, the  mappings allow updating the downstream processes including (but not limited to)  reporting.  This will allow/improve  collection of data on types of trainings and services under broad LMDA  groupings.
Alberta notes that while the recommendations are  non-binding, some of the recommendations such as improved data collection;  understanding of program design and delivery for Self-Employment and Job  Creation Partnerships; and development of improved performance indicators for  Self-Employment may be better suited for addressing in the joint evaluation  work conducted by ESDC and provinces and territories in future evaluation  cycles and thus may not be specific to Alberta.
1.   Introduction
Employment  and Social Development Canada (ESDC) worked jointly with Alberta and 11 other  Provinces and Territories (P/Ts) to undertake the 2012 to 2017 second cycle for  the Labour Market Development Agreement (LMDA) evaluations. The evaluation work  consisted of conducting two to three studies per year on the Employment  Benefits and Support Measures (EBSMs) delivered under these agreements. The  studies aimed to generate evaluation evidence on the effectiveness, efficiency  and design/delivery of programs and services for Canada overall and for the 12  P/Ts that opted for a joint evaluation process with the Government of Canada.
This report presents a summary  of the findings from the studies conducted for Alberta. The report is organised  as follows:
Introduction  with an overview of the studies summarized in this report including their scope  and methodology, and contextual information on the LMDAs
Findings  section with a discussion around the rationale for investing in labour market  programming and summary of evaluation evidence
Conclusions and lessons learned
Recommendations  that emerge from the evaluation findings and areas for future investigation
1.1  Labour Market Development Agreement background
LMDAs are bilateral agreements between Canada and each P/T,  and were established under Part II of the 1996 Employment Insurance (EI) Act.  As part of these agreements, Canada transfers EI part II funding to P/Ts to  design and deliver programs and services to assist individuals to prepare for,  obtain and maintain employment.
The Canada-Alberta LMDA was signed on December 6, 1996. The  agreement transferred responsibility to Alberta for the design and delivery of  programs and services classified under two categories: 1) Employment Benefits  and 2) Support Measures.
Employment Benefits
Employment Benefits are offered to unemployed individuals  who 1) are actively on EI (in other words, active claimants); 2) ended their  benefit period within three years before participating (former claimants); or  3) established a claim for maternity or parental benefits within the past five  years and are returning to the labour force for the first time (former  claimants)
Footnote
5
.  Employment Benefits include the following  categories:
Skills Development (Work Foundations /  Occupational Training)
helps participants obtain employment skills by  giving them financial assistance that enables them to select, arrange and pay  for classroom training.
Targeted Wage Subsidies (Workplace Training)
help participants obtain on-the-job work  experience by providing employers with financial assistance to help with the  wages of participants.
Self-Employment
provides financial  assistance and business planning advice to EI-eligible participants to help  them start their own business. This financial assistance is intended to cover  personal living expenses and other expenses during the initial stages of the  business.
Job Creation Partnerships (Integrated Training  and Immigrant Bridging)
provide  participants with opportunities to gain work experience that will lead to ongoing  employment. Employment opportunities are provided by projects that contribute  to developing the community and the local economy.
Targeted Earnings Supplements
encourage unemployed persons to accept employment  by offering them financial incentives.
Support Measures
Support Measures are  available to all unemployed individuals including those not eligible to receive  EI and include:
Employment Assistance Services
such as individual counselling, action planning,  help with job search skills, job-finding clubs, job placement services, the  provision of Labour Market Information (LMI), and case management and  follow-up.
Labour Market Partnerships
provide funding to  help employers, employee and employer associations, and communities improve  their capacity to deal with human resource requirements and implement labour  force adjustments. These partnerships involve developing plans and strategies,  and implementing labour force adjustment measures.
Research and Innovation
supports activities that identify better ways  of helping people prepare for or keep employment and be productive participants  in the labour force. Funds are provided to eligible recipients to enable them  to carry out demonstration projects and research for this purpose.
Table 1 provides an overview of the share of funding  allocated to the five programs and services examined under the second cycle for  LMDA evaluation and the average cost per participant. It is noted that the  average cost per participant was calculated based on the 2002 to 2005 data from  the EI Monitoring and Assessment Reports for Alberta. The 2002 to 2005 period  corresponds to the cohort of participants selected for incremental impacts and  cost-benefit analysis in the LMDA evaluation.
Table 1. Share of LMDA funding and  average cost per participant
Program and service
Share of funding 2014 to 2015
Average cost per participant 2002 to 2005
Skills Development
69%
$5,081
Employment Assistance Services
22%
$252
Targeted Wage Subsidies
1%
$7,440
Self-Employment
1%
$7,038
Job Creation Partnerships
7%
$8,790
Total
100%
–
Sources: EI  Monitoring and Assessment Reports 2002 to 2003 to 2014 to 2015.
1.2  Methodology
This section presents key aspects  of the quantitative analyses carried out as part of the LMDA studies, while a  more detailed description of the methodology is provided in
Appendix  A
.
All  quantitative analyses were based on administrative data from the EI part I (EI  claim data) and part II (EBSM participation data collected by Alberta and  transferred to ESDC) linked to the T1 and T4 taxation files from the Canada  Revenue Agency. Incremental impact analyses and the cost-benefit analyses were  based on up to 100% of participants in the reference period selected.
Incremental impacts  analysis
Five  studies assessed program effectiveness by estimating incremental impacts from  EBSM participation on participants’ labour market experience (for  example,
earnings from employment/self-employment
,
incidence of employment
,
use of EI
or
Social Assistance
and
dependence  on income support
) after participation. The role of the incremental  impact analysis is to isolate the effects of participation from other factors  such as the economic cycle. In order to achieve this, the incremental impact analysis  compared the labour market experience of participants before and after their  participation with that of the non-participants (see the example of incremental  impact calculation in Figure 1).
The matching of participants and comparison group  members used up to 75 socio-demographic and labour market variables observed  over five years before participation. Two different comparison groups were used to measure impacts for active  and former EI claimants. For active claimants, the incremental impacts were  measured relative to a comparison group of active claimants who were eligible  to, but did not, participate in EBSMs during the reference period.
Former claimants  can be underemployed and unable to requalify for EI, out of the labour force  for various reasons or on social assistance. Based on previous evaluation  methodologies, on expert advice and given the difficulty in generating a  suitable comparison for former claimants using administrative data alone, the  comparison group for former claimants was created using individuals who  participated in Employment Assistance Services only during the reference  period. This is a conservative approach given the fact that participation in  Employment Assistance Services can lead to limited effects on labour  market outcomes. In other words, the  experience of former claimants who received Employment Benefits (Skills  Development, Targeted Wage Subsidies, Self-employment and Job Creation  Partnerships) was compared to the experience of former claimants who received  low intensity employment services (Employment Assistance Services only). Due to  this difference in measurement, incremental impacts estimated for active claimant  participants should not be directly compared to those of former claimant  participants
Footnote
6
.
Figure 1. Example of incremental impact calculation
Text description of Figure 1
presents an example of the approach used to estimate the incremental impacts on earnings.
Factors accounted for in the cost-benefit analysis
Program efficiency was assessed through a cost-benefit  analysis which compared the cost of participating in the program for the  participants and the cost of delivering the program for the government to the  benefits generated by the program. Overall, this analysis provided insights on  the extent to which the program is efficient for the society (in other words,  for both the participants and the government). The costs and benefits accounted  for in the calculations were as follows (see detailed definitions in
Appendix A
):
Program  cost: includes program and administration costs paid by the government.
Marginal  social costs of public funds: represent the loss incurred by society when  raising additional revenues such as taxes to fund government programs.
Employment  earnings: consist of incremental impacts on participants’ earnings during and  after participation. The calculation accounts for the participant’s forgone  earnings during participation (in other words, opportunity cost). Employment  earnings were also increased by 15% to account for fringe benefits such as the  employer-paid health, life insurance and pensions contributions.
Strengths and limitations of the studies
One of the key strengths of the studies is that all  quantitative analyses were based on administrative data rather than survey  responses. Compared to survey data, administrative data are not subject to recall  errors or response bias.
The propensity score models used to match participants and  non-participants for the incremental impact analyses are judged to be robust  because they were based on five years of pre-participation data and on a vast  array of variables including socio-demographic characteristics, location,  skills level related to last occupation and indicators of labour market  attachment. Sensitivity analysis and the use of alternative estimation methods  have further increased confidence in the incremental impact estimates. However,  one limitation with the propensity  score matching techniques is that no one can be fully sure the impacts were not  influenced by factors not captured in the data.
The cost-benefit analysis accounted for all quantifiable  costs and benefits that are directly attributable to the EBSMs and could be  estimated with the available administrative data. The analysis did not account  for non-quantifiable benefits such as improvements in participant’s wellbeing  or for the multiplier effect of increased spending on the economy.
It should be noted that it is not possible to produce an  analysis of incremental impacts from Skills Development – Apprenticeship  participation. Assessing program impacts for apprentices poses a methodological  challenge because apprentices are already employed and are expected to return  to their employment after completing their training. Therefore, the expected  labour market impacts cannot be examined using a similar approach as for  assessing impacts of other EBSMs, which are expected to help participants  return to employment. As well, the data available does not permit the  identification of a proper comparison group since apprentices alternate between  work and training and no other potential counterfactuals have similar  employment and training patterns. In this context, it is not possible to  produce a reliable assessment of program effectiveness.
When interpreting qualitative findings, readers should keep  in mind that those are based on the perception of a small number of key  informants who are directly involved in the design or delivery of the program.  Their perception may be representative of their own region or community but not  necessarily of the entire province. Since the number of key informants  interviewed in each study is small (ranging between 3 and 8), the number of  informants who reported a specific finding is not indicated in the report.  However, the report does note when there was a clear disagreement between key  informants.
1.3  Overview of the studies summarized in this  report
Findings  presented in this report were drawn from nine separate studies carried out in  Alberta. These studies examined issues related to program effectiveness,  efficiency, design/delivery and used a mix of qualitative and quantitative  methods. Each study examined evaluation issues in relation to active and former  EI claimants.
Table H1
in
Appendix H
presents an overview of these studies, including the type  of evidence generated, the methods used, the reference period and the length of  the post-program period over which program effects were observed.
2.   Evaluation findings
2.1  Rationale and labour  market context
LMDA investments align with provincial government priorities
Active labour market  programs aim to help unemployed or underemployed individuals find and maintain  employment. These programs are fairly similar across the Organization for  Economic Co-operation and Development countries and consist of skills training  in a classroom setting, work experience with employers (often subsidized) or in  the public/non-profit sector, return-to-employment assistance and self-employment  assistance.
In Alberta, the Ministries  of Labour, Community and Social Services (formerly Human Services), and  Advanced Education administer a range of active labour market programming  targeted at various groups of individuals including EI claimants and social  assistance recipients. Programs and services offered to active and former EI  claimants are mainly funded under the LMDA transfer.
At the time of writing this  report, Alberta was experiencing an economic downturn. In this context, the  Ministry of Labour Business Plan for 2016 to 2019 stressed the need to provide  occupation-related skills training, work experience and employment programs to  help Albertans to fully participate in the economy and get back to work. The  plan also stated the need to provide training and re-training to Albertans in  order to help addressing current labour and skills shortages.
Overall, impacts found in  the LMDA evaluation and discussed in this report demonstrated that LMDA funded  programs and services delivered in Alberta are generally helping participants  to improve their labour market experience after participation. As such,  evaluation evidence suggests that LMDA funded programming contributes to  achieve Alberta’s priorities and the following Ministry of Labour outcome:  Albertans have the skills required by Alberta’s labour market.
2.2  Skills Development
2.2.1 Program  description
Based on a document review and 5 key informant interviews  completed in summer 2015
In  Alberta, the Skills Development program is called Work Foundations /  Occupational Training. The program aims to 1) increase opportunities for  Albertans to make successful transitions from school to work, unemployment to  employment, and from one career path to another, and 2) increase the capacity  of Albertans to respond to changing skills, knowledge, and abilities required  by the economy.
The  program provides financial assistance to eligible learners to cover expenses  related to training including tuition, books, mandatory fees and supplies,  student association fees and monthly living allowance. Key informants also  indicated that the program may fund child care, transportation and medical  benefits (for example, prescription drugs, health care and emergency dental  services). The amount of the funding is determined based on the financial need  of the individuals and rates set by current legislation and program guidelines.
Table  2 below shows the proportion of expenditures and interventions by type of  training supported. More than half of the interventions delivered in 2013 to 2014  provided assistance to individuals pursuing adult basic education and essential  skills training as compared to 13% for vocational and occupational training.  However, 49% of expenditures are invested in vocational and occupational  training.
Table 2. Types of training supported 2013 to 2014
Types of training
Expenditures
Interventions
Proportion
Proportion
Adult basic education/essential skills
25%
51%
English/French as a second language
26%
36%
Vocational/occupational training, including college or    university
49%
13%
Total
100%
100%
Source: Information submitted by the  Ministry of Labour
2.2.2 Program  delivery
Based on a document review and 5 key informant interviews  completed in summer 2015
The  case management of participants is usually contracted to service providers. In  rural areas, the program is usually delivered by provincial staff while service  providers may be used in rare occasions.
A  prospective participant has to undergo the following steps in order to apply  for the program:
The  individual is assessed through a 15-minute Service Needs Determination. The  purpose is to gather information, identify issues and needs, and clarify  personal and environmental resources available.   The assessment helps the individuals to increase self-awareness;  understand his/her career issues; establish work, learning and/or life balance  goals; and provide a foundation for taking actions and establishing indicators  of ongoing progress.
If  training is identified as a possible intervention, the individual goes through  an Employability Assessment to address one or more of the following:  career/occupational decision-making, skill development and/or enhancement, work  search and/or maintenance supports.
The individual  has to fill a career investigation report which requires him or her to research  his/her occupational goals.
A  financial need assessment is completed in order to determine what additional  funding the individual may need on top of the EI benefits.
A Service  Plan is developed in order to describe and record the mutual agreement between  the Government of Alberta and the individual about the specific activities to  be undertaken to obtain employment. The Service Plan is required for the  provision of services and payments to the individual and service providers.
The  application process takes 2 to 3 weeks on average but may take around 4 to 6  weeks in the summer since it is the busiest time of the year.
2.2.3 Targeting  to labour market demand
Based on a document review and 5 key informant interviews  completed in summer 2015
Overall,  the application process aims to ensure that prospective participants are  choosing training that will meet labour market demand. In particular, they are  required to fill a career investigation report to examine the requirements for  the job, the projected demand, the salary and location of the job. They may  also have to meet with employers to talk about job prospects and to investigate  schools. Four of the key informants indicated that they may refuse to fund  someone who is choosing training that does not have good job prospects.
At  the program level, Alberta developed the Skills Investment Strategy to target  labour market trends such as a tight labour market and continued skill shortages.  As well, program funding is divided across regions which determine and target  the priority areas. Labour Market Information (LMI) is used to help determine  how to allocate funding to training providers in order to meet regional labour  market demand.
2.2.4 Profile of Skills Development participants
Socio-demographic characteristics
As shown in
Table B1
in
Appendix B
, the majority of active claimants who  participated in the program in 2002 to 2005 and 2006 to 2008 were female (52%  and 58% respectively) and between 25 and 44 years old (64% in each cohort). As  well, participants in both cohorts most frequently had secondary or  occupational training prior to participation (40% in each cohort). Active  claimants who participated in the program in 2002 to 2005 had slightly lower  employment earnings in the year before participation ($21,589) compared to  those who participated in 2006 to 2008 ($22,384).
Former claimants who participated in the program in 2002 to  2005 and 2006 to 2008 were mostly female (61% and 70% respectively) and between  25 and 44 years of age (66% each). Former claimants most frequently occupied  jobs requiring secondary or occupational training before participation (39% for  2002 to 2005 participants and 40% for 2006 to 2008 participants). Participants  in both cohorts had similar earnings in the year before participation ($9,357  and $9,445 respectively).
Barriers faced by participants
Based on a document review and 5 key informant interviews  completed in summer 2015
Key  informants were asked to identify the main barriers to employment or to  participation faced by participants. By order of importance, the most  frequently identified barriers were the following:
Financial constraints/hardship
Challenges  related to living in remote location (for example, lack of employment  opportunities on reserves, having to work in a remote location while the family  remains in the community, lack of training providers in certain area, lack of  transportation and low internet connection).
Learning disabilities
Lack of  essential skills and life management skills
Personal  issues (for example, addictions, family or health issues)
Lack of  ability to speak English as a second language
Immigrants  face difficulties navigating the provincial and federal training and employment  system
Difficulty of accessing  childcare
Not  knowing what career path they would like to pursue
2.2.5 Incremental impacts
Active claimants
As shown in
Table B2
in Appendix B, active claimants who  started their participation between 2002 and 2005 had incremental gains in  earnings and incidence of employment in each of the five years after  participation. As shown in Figure 2, earnings gains continuously increased over  time and ranged from $887 in the first year after participation to $5,680 in  the fifth year. Similarly, the increases in incidence of employment ranged  between 8.3 percentage points in the first year and 10.8 percentage points in the  fifth year.
Figure 2. Increased earnings of active and former Skills Development participants relative to non-participants
Footnote
7
Text description of Figure 2
Gains in Earnings
Active Claimants
Former Claimants
Year 1 Post-Program
887
1382
Year 2 Post-Program
2204
1536
Year 3 Post-Program
3400
1871
Year 4 Post-Program
4781
2114
Year 5 Post-Program
5680
2561
EI use generally increased after  participation while social assistance use generally decreased. All results for  dependence on income support were not statistically significant. The increase  in EI use may indicate the inability for some participants to maintain the  employment secured in the short-term.
The vast majority of the results  for 2006 to 2008 participants were not statistically significant. However, as  for the 2002 to 2005 cohort, these participants had an increase in earnings in  the third year after participation and increases in incidence of employment in  all three post-program years.
Results for sub-groups of active claimants  were as follows:
Youth  (under 30 years old) who participated between 2002 and 2005 improved their  earnings in the fourth and fifth years of the post-program period and incidence  of employment in all years after participation. Results for EI and social  assistance use and the level of dependence on income support were generally not  statistically significant.
Long-tenured  workers
who  participated in between 2007 and 2009 had a decrease in earnings in the first year  after participation and an increase in the third year. They increased their  incidence of employment in all three post-program years. They decreased their  dependence on income support in the second and third years after participation.  Results for other indicators were not statistically  significant.
Impacts were not produced for older workers as  the number of participants was too small.
Former claimants
The 2002 to 2005 cohort of former  claimants had incremental gains in earnings in all years after program  participation (see
Table B3
in Appendix B). As  shown in Figure 2, those gains grew over time from $1,382 in the first year  post-program to $2,561 in the fifth year. As well, they had increases in  incidence of employment ranging between 5.2 and 6.3 percentage points over the  five-year post-program period. Their use of social assistance decreased in all  years by annual averages ranging between $306 and $387 while their overall  dependence on income support decreased by averages ranging between 2.2 and 4.2  percentage points. Their use of EI generally increased after participation  indicating the inability for some participants to maintain the employment  secured in the short-term.
Former claimants who started  their participation in the 2006 to 2008 period had comparable increases in  earnings to the 2002 to 2005 participants in the second and third years  post-program. They had, however, larger increases in the incidence of employment  compared to the 2002 to 2005 participants. As well, their use of EI decreased  in the first year after participation and their use of social assistance  decreased in all years. These participants also had decreases in their  dependence on income support in all years after participation and the magnitude  of the reductions was larger than those observed for 2002 to 2005 participants.
For former claimants, it can also be argued that the  increase in EI use is an indication of increase labour market attachment (or at  least intermittent attachment) for this client group since they did experience  increases in employment earnings and incidence of employment, and a decrease in  the use of social assistance. As a reminder, former claimants are participants  for whom the EI benefit period ended up to three years pre-participation.
Youth who participated between 2002 and 2005 had increases  in earnings in most post-program period years and increases in incidence of  employment in all years. Their use of EI generally increased after  participation but their use of social assistance decreased. Overall, their  level of dependence on income support decreased in most post-program years.
Impacts for older workers and  long-tenured workers were not estimated as the number of participants was too  small.
2.2.6 Cost-benefit results
As shown in
Table B4
in Appendix B, for active claimants, the  benefits of the program for society were $4,640 higher than the costs six years  after participation. The benefits matched the costs 5.1 years after  participation. For former claimants, the benefits were $818 above the costs six  years after the end of participation. As such, the benefits matched the costs  5.5 years after participation.
2.2.7 Challenges and lessons learned about Skills Development  design and delivery
Based on a document review and 5 key informant interviews
Footnote
8
completed  in summer 2015
Key  informants identified a number of lessons learned in relation to the design and  delivery of the program:
It is  important to provide long-term assistance and to have an interdisciplinary team  of professionals that can provide a continuum of services and supports to  individuals facing multiple barriers.
Undertaking  a comprehensive assessment of the participants is important as it helps them to  make informed choices and to commit to their training.
Having  access to disability-related employment and financial supports is a best  practice. The financial assistance for medical care is  also helpful.
Monitoring  participants during training and following up after the training appears  beneficial.
Coordinating  with stakeholders is key and this can take the form of:
Holding  regular meetings with all the regional staff and with provincial stakeholders  to discuss provincial and regional concerns, best practices and solutions.
Involving  all labour market actors in the design of the program and delivery to ensure  that a manageable number of qualified individuals are trained.
Working  closely with training providers.
There is a  need to look at program enhancement to better support the participants (for  example, offering resiliency training; increasing accessibility to training  through more flexible modes of studies or; recognizing skills through  recognition of prior learning and the use of competence-based examination).
Offering  coordinated foundational learning programs that assess basic skills at the  outset of the program, address weaknesses and integrate basic skills  development into professional program would be beneficial.
There is a  need for more intensive case management of individuals facing multiple barriers  to employment.
Key informants also identified the following challenges in  relation to the design and delivery of the program (order according to the  number of key informants from the highest to the lowest):
The level  of financial support is too low for individuals facing multiple barriers to  employment. As well, the duration of the support can be an issue especially for  slow learners who need more than 30 months to complete training. Participants  cannot access the program for four years once they have received funding for 30  months.
There is  no instrument to test literacy level.
Finding  out too late during the process that the participant has a learning disability.
There is a  lack of awareness around available support for physical and mental  disabilities.
2.3  Skills  Development-Apprentices
2.3.1 Program  description
Based on a document review and 4 key informant interviews  completed in summer 2015
The Skills Development-Apprentices program is called  Apprenticeship Technical Training and is a component of the Occupational  Training program. The objective of the program is to assist apprentices in  achieving the goal of becoming a skilled tradesperson, and learn a trade  through a combination of on-the-job training and technical training.
Apprentices in Alberta complete the majority of their  learning (80 to 85%) during on-the-job paid employment. They are also required  to participate in technical training, which can range from six to eight weeks  per year.  Apprentices can receive their  EI benefits while in technical training.
The program is provided to apprentices who are EI eligible  to help them offset the apprenticeship cost. This is calculated as the  difference between the cost of providing the apprenticeship courses at publicly  funded training institutions and the tuition fees paid by EI eligible  apprentices. In addition, some apprentices qualify for supplemental income  support benefits while in training to cover expenses such as, books and  supplies, living expenses and additional living costs, such as a second  residence. The financial assistance is provided as a grant. The level of  support is determined based on demonstrated need and legislated Income Support  rate.
During the evaluation period, the Alberta Ministry of  Advanced Education was responsible for the apprenticeship training system while  the Ministry of Community and Social Services (formerly Human Services)  provided funding and benefits for eligible apprentices attending full-time  technical training. Since October 2015, registered apprentices seeking  financial assistance during technical training have to apply to Student Aid  Alberta of the Ministry of Advanced Education
Footnote
9
.
2.3.2 Profile of Skills Development-Apprentices participants
The vast majority of active claimants who started their  participation in 2003 to 2005 and 2013 to 2014 were male (94% and 95%  respectively) and below 34 years old (86% and 71% respectively) (see
Table C1
in
Appendix C
).  As well, 91% and 92% respectively of these participants had employment  requiring college or apprenticeship training in the last job they held before  participation. Active claimants who participated in 2003 to 2005 had lower  employment earnings in the year before participation ($28,554) compared to  those who participated in 2013 to 2014 ($39,761).
Eighty nine percent of former claimants who participated  from either 2003 to 2005 or 2013 to 2014 were male. Most of these participants  were below 35 years of age (82% for the 2003 to 2005 cohort and 77% for the  2013 to 2014 cohort). Former claimants had occupations requiring college or  apprenticeship training before participation but the proportion was lower for  2003 to 2005 participants (58%) compared to the 2013 to 2014 participants  (89%). As well, those who participated in 2003 to 2005 had lower employment  earnings before participation ($23,468) compared to the 2013 to 2014 cohort  ($38,470).
2.3.3 Labour market outcomes
Tables
C2
and
C3
in Appendix C presents the labour market  outcomes for active and former EI claimants who started participation during  the 2003 to 2005 period.
Active claimants
As shown in Figure  3, the earnings of active claimants who started the program between 2003 and  2005 grew from $15,190 to $71,012 between the fifth year pre-program and the  seventh year after the participation start year. At the same time, their  incidence of employment increased from 92% to 100% over the five pre-program  years and decreased from 100% to 94% over the participation start year and the  following seven years. Their incidence of EI use was generally higher in the  years that followed the start of participation when compared to the pre-program  period. It varied between 17% and 21% in the five pre-program years. Then, it  decreased from 99% in the program start year to 16% in the seventh year after  the program start year.
Figure 3. Average earnings for active claimant participants in Skills Development-Apprentices
Text description of Figure 3
Employment Earnings
5 yrs pre-program
15190
4 yrs pre-program
18590
3 yrs pre-program
22367
2 yrs pre-program
25974
1 yrs pre-program
31105
Program start year
30895
1 yrs post-program
39945
2 yrs post-program
47597
3 yrs post-program
55268
4 yrs post-program
62487
5 yrs post-program
64277
6 yrs post-program
66510
7 yrs post-program
71012
Former claimants
As shown in Figure  4, the employment earnings of former claimants increased from $15,804 in the  fifth year before participation to $58,193 in the seventh year following the  program start year. Their incidence of employment ranged between 95% and 99% in  the five years before participation and decreased from 99% to 90% over the  participation start year and the seven years after the participation start  year. The proportion of participants in receipt of EI increased from 24% to 49%  over the five years before participation and decreased from 47% to 27% over the  seven years after the participation start year.
Figure 4. Average earnings for former claimant participants in Skills Development-Apprentices
Text description of Figure 4
Employment Earnings
5 yrs pre-program
15804
4 yrs pre-program
19281
3 yrs pre-program
23059
2 yrs pre-program
25033
1 yrs pre-program
24416
Program start year
26920
1 yrs post-program
33744
2 yrs post-program
42781
3 yrs post-program
46336
4 yrs post-program
51764
5 yrs post-program
52234
6 yrs post-program
60034
7 yrs post-program
58193
2.3.4 Challenges and lessons learned about Skills Development-Apprentices  design and delivery
Based on a document review and 4 key informant interviews
Footnote
10
completed in summer 2015
Key informants identified some best practices about the  program including:
Having  close connections with the industry helps to understand where the government  can make better investments and offer training closer to the participant’s  home. For example, it has been possible to increase the training offered in  some locations based on employers input.
Providing  accommodations to individuals facing barriers to employment or to completing  training. For example, providing disability related supports or help to  individuals with learning barriers in order to help them complete their exams.
Key informants suggested the following improvements to Skills  Development-Apprentices or apprenticeship training in general:
More  financial support could be beneficial.
Getting  the apprentice to apply early for the financial support would be helpful as  sometimes, the participants receive the support after they started their  training.
Existing literature has shown that there is a fairly high  non-completion rate among apprentices in Canada (40-50%)
Footnote
11
. Furthermore, subject matter  literature revealed that despite the growth in apprenticeship registrations in  Canada, there has not been a corresponding increase in completions
Footnote
12
. While available data  do not provide reliable information on completion and non-completion rates for  participants, key informants interviewed in the evaluation identified reasons  that could lead apprentices to drop-out from the apprenticeship process. These  include:
The  apprentice realises that he/she is not suited for the job
The supply  of training is lower than the demand
Employers  are not able to let the apprentice go on training
Key informants were also  asked about challenges in relation to the design and delivery of Skills  Development-Apprentices or apprenticeship training in general. The only  challenge identified was that it can be hard to predict the right level of  supply and what are the needs in terms of training modules that are common to  different trades.
2.4  Targeted Wage Subsidies
2.4.1 Program  description
Based on a document review and 3 key informant interviews  completed in summer 2015
The Targeted Wage Subsidies  program is called Workplace Training in Alberta. The program provides  individual-focused training or work experience to enable participants to find  and maintain employment. Participating employers agree to train or provide work  experience for a predetermined period of time. Participants are expected to  engage and maintain employment with the same employer in most cases. In this  regard, key informants mentioned that most employers retain their participants  at the end of the subsidy. They attributed this to the successful matching of  participants and employers.
Participants  have two training options
Footnote
13
:
On-the-Job  training which occurs at the worksite of an employer and is based on an  employability assessment and service plan. An employer agrees to hire and train  an individual for a period of time. The individual becomes an employee from the  beginning of the placement. On-the-Job training provides up to $390 per week  based on the individual’s training plan. The maximum duration is 26 weeks but  may be extended to 30 weeks in some situations. The length of the subsidy is  determined on a case-by-case basis based on the needs of the individual and the  complexity of the On-the-Job training and/or work exposure requirement. The  program may also provide full wage reimbursement up to $12.00 per hour plus  mandatory payroll deductions to non-profit organizations to hire individuals  facing significant barriers to employment and who are not able to find an  employer. The subsidy is also provided up to 26 weeks.
Paid Work  Experience which is short-term paid work experience that helps Albertans gain  employment quickly and maintain it. Paid Work Experience is intended to support  individuals to perform specific work tasks, to become familiar with employer  worksite standards, safe work practices and to demonstrate their competencies  and skills. No training plan is required. The individual is expected to be  hired after the subsidy ends. Paid Work Experience supports the employer to a maximum amount
of $1,440. The  amount is based on 40 hours of work at $12.00 per hour for 3 weeks.
Funding  may be granted for supplemental training (for example, courses in computer  software training, office administration, accounting, English language  training, and workplace safety training) with up to a maximum of $1,500 per  individual. The supplemental training must be included in the individual’s  Training Plan based upon assessed needs and is not intended to replace training  that the employer has agreed to undertake as part of the On-the-Job training.  This does not include the normal technical training required for apprentices.
2.4.2 Program delivery
Based on a document review and 3 key informant interviews  completed in summer 2015
Targeted Wage Subsidies is  delivered by both government staff and service providers depending on whether  the delivery takes place in an urban or rural area.
As explained by key  informants, the application process is typically driven by the individuals and,  in general, employers do not have to apply to the program. However, there are  situations where employers contact delivery offices and seek assistance in  determining whether a potential hire is eligible under the program.
The application process  starts with a career employment consultant or service provider conducting an  employability assessment with the individual. Then, they work with the  individual to develop a service plan which would include Targeted Wage  Subsidies.
Factors considered when  deciding whether Targeted Wage Subsidies is a suitable program include barriers  to employment, work history, skill levels, needs of the individual and the  employer and job readiness.
Key informants explained that service providers give  assistance to the individual to help them find a potential employer; however  the level and means used vary across service providers or employment  consultants. Key informants also explained that they try to ensure a good match  between the individual and the employer to help with the retention and proper  hiring of the individual by the employer after the end of the subsidy.
Once the individual finds an employer, the next step of the  application process is to develop a contract with the employer. Each contract  is negotiated based on the needs of the individual.
Key informants explained that  from the moment the individual is deemed eligible for the program, the process  to become a participant may take between 3 and 8 weeks depending on the region  and the resources and staff available within the region.
2.4.3 Profile of Targeted Wage Subsidies participants
As indicated in
Table D1
in
Appendix D
, active claimants who started their  participation between 2002 and 2005 were evenly split between male and female  while those who participated in 2006 to 2008 included a majority of female (55%).  Sixty percent of the 2002 to 2005 participants were between 25 and 44 years of  age compared to 47% for the 2006 to 2008 participants.
Participants in the 2006 to 2008 period were older as 50% of  them were 45 years old and over compared to 25% for the 2002 to 2005  participants. Participants in both cohorts most frequently held jobs requiring  secondary or occupational training before participation (41% of the 2002 to 2005  participants and 49% of the 2006 to 2008 participants). Those who participated  in 2002 to 2005 had lower employment earnings ($22,254) in the year before  participation compared to active claimants who participated in 2006 to 2008  ($29,075).
Former claimants in both the 2002 to 2005 and 2006 to 2008  cohorts were mainly female (53% and 56%, respectively) and between 25 and 44  years of age (64% and 63%, respectively). Before participation, they most  frequently had occupations requiring secondary or occupational training (39%  and 36% respectively) followed by occupations requiring college or  apprenticeship training (31% and 27% respectively). Those who participated in  the 2002 to 2005 period had lower earnings in the year before participation  ($12,523) compared to $15,635 for the 2006 to 2008 participants.
2.4.4 Incremental  impacts
Detailed incremental impact results for active and former  claimants are presented in Tables
D2
and
D3
in Appendix D.
Active claimants
As shown in Figure 5, active claimants who participated  between 2002 and 2005 had incremental gains in earnings after participation but  the results were statistically significant only in the fourth ($3,654) and  fifth year ($4,827). Overall, they had a total gain of $12,700 over the  post-program period. Their incidence of employment also increased after  participation by annual averages ranging between 5.4 and 8.4 percentage points.
Figure 5. Increased earnings of active and former Targeted Wage Subsidies participants relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure 5
Gains in Earnings
Active Claimants
Former Claimants
Year 1 Post-Program
976
a
2114
Year 2 Post-Program
554
a
1855
Year 3 Post-Program
2690
a
2387
Year 4 Post-Program
3654
2057
a
Year 5 Post-Program
4827
2252
a
a
The incremental impact on earnings  for active claimant participants in the 1st, 2nd and 3rd year after the program  and Former claimant participants in the 4th and 5th year after the program are  not statistically significant at the 95% confidence level.
Most annual results pertaining to the use of EI benefits  were not statistically significant but, over the five year post-program period,  active claimants had a total increase of $1,281 in the amount of EI benefits  collected. Increase in EI use post-program is common for the program.  Participants build entitlements to EI when working and may re-apply if they are  unable to maintain the job occupied during or after the subsidy. Results for  social assistance use and dependence on income support were not statistically  significant.
Impacts were not produced for the  2006 to 2008 participants and for the other sub-groups as the number of  participants were too small.
Former claimants
As shown in Figure 5, former claimants who participated in  the 2002 to 2005 period had incremental gains in earnings in all years after  participation but only the results for the first three years were statistically  significant at the 95% confidence level or higher. Overall, their earnings  increased by $10,665 over the post-program period. Similarly, the incidence of  employment increased in all years after participation but only the results for  the first (5.5 percentage points), second (4.6 percentage points) and third  year (5 percentage points) were statistically significant.
These participants also had increases in EI benefit  collected after participation ranging between $278 and $659. As previously  indicated participants build entitlements to EI when working and may re-apply  if they are unable to maintain the job occupied during or after the subsidy. Their  use of social assistance decreased by annual averages ranging between $275 and  $397. Most results for dependence on income support were not statistically  significant.
For former claimants, it can also be argued that the  increase in EI use is an indication of increase labour market attachment for  this client group since they did experience increases in employment earnings and  incidence of employment, and a decrease in the use of social assistance. As a  reminder, former claimants are participants for whom the EI benefit period  ended up to three years pre-participation.
It was not possible to estimate impacts for 2006 to 2008  participants and for other sub-groups as the number of participants was too  small.
2.4.5 Cost-benefit  results
For active claimants, as  shown in
Table D4
, the benefits of the program  recovered the costs within 4.3 years after participation from the society  perspective. The total benefits exceeded the costs by $5,256 six years after  program end. Similarly, for former claimants, the benefits of the program  exceeded the costs during the first year of the participation period. The  benefits exceeded the costs by $10,578 six years after the end of  participation.
2.4.6 Challenges and  lessons learned about Targeted Wage Subsidies design and delivery
Based on a document review and 3 key informant interviews
Footnote
14
completed in summer 2015
Key  informants were asked about the best practices or the lessons they learned in  terms of design and delivery of the program. These included:
Having a  client-focused approach to the program application to ensure the participant is  ready, willing and able to pursue participation. This helps  the participant to succeed
Ensuring a  good match between employer and employee helps to guarantee participant retention  after the end of the subsidy
Service  providers would like to have more referrals from employment counsellors at  Alberta Works Centres
Having  employers register in a database which could be used to identify possible  employers in the future
Ongoing  case management is key for proactively addressing barriers faced by  participants (for example, mental health issues, addictions and social  barriers) rather than waiting until the employer views the individual as no  longer being a viable employee
Maintaining  a good relationship with employers and providing them support during the  subsidy is important
There is a  need to look at support or mentorship that could be offered to the individuals  after the subsidy
It would  be beneficial if the application process was online. It is currently primarily  paper based.
Despite being effective at helping participants to find and  maintain employment, there has been a steady decline in the number of new  interventions delivered per year. The number of new interventions decreased  from 261 in 2003 to 2004 to 41 in 2013 to 2014.
Key  informants identified the following reasons to explain the decline in the use  of the program:
Changes in  the labour market and the low unemployment rate affected the program.
Mismatch  between employers’ needs and participants’ skills. For example, a lot of  subsidised positions are entry-level or blue collar positions and this is not  where the demand is in some regions.
Lack of  capacity among career employment consultants or service providers due to high  turnover and lack of resources.
They  also identified the following reasons to explain why employers may not be  inclined to use the program:
Time and  resource constraints on the part of the employers to apply, receive approval and  meet reporting requirements
It can be  difficult to find employers and employees that have the perfect combination of  needs/barriers as prescribed in the program guidelines
There is a  lack of awareness about the program among employers
There is a  stigma associated with hiring someone with a subsidy
Other  challenges with the design and delivery of the program include:
Some  career employment consultants cannot follow-up with participants as often as  needed because they lack capacity. In some situations, the caseload of career  employment consultants may involve approximately 300 individuals.
High staff  turnover results in loss of knowledge and expertise.
It can be  difficult to find participants and employers who meet the program guidelines.  Eligibility criteria are also seen as being too restrictive by key informants.  For example, the program has a limitation where only one employee can be  subsidised with one employer.
2.5  Self-Employment
2.5.1 Program  description
Based on description submitted by Alberta
The intent of Self-Employment training is to facilitate  entry into self-employment by offering individuals formal instruction, business  plan development, one-to-one business counseling, coaching, guidance and  follow-up during business plan implementation. It is designed for unemployed  and marginally employed Albertans who have a viable business idea, personal  attributes necessary to be successful at self-employment, and who are in need  of self-employment training. The standard practice in Alberta is to provide a  viability assessment of the business proposal before accepting a participant  into the program.
The objectives of the program  are:
to assist  unemployed and marginally employed Albertans to create employment opportunities  for themselves, and
to create  additional employment opportunities in the community that might not otherwise  be available.
Priority is given to eligible individuals that own 51% of  their proposed business, which must not be considered as part of a franchise  company. Funding is provided only to cover training, and not to be used as  capital for business start-up or initial investment. Program duration is a  maximum of 26 weeks, but can be extended to 52 weeks for exceptional  circumstances. During  the formal instruction and business plan development activities, it is expected  that individuals will attend a minimum of 25 hours per week.
Training components and their approximate duration are as  follows:
Formal  instruction and business plan development (approximately 8-10 weeks)
Implementation  of business plans (approximately 14-16 weeks)
Ongoing  support for up to 180 days after completion of training. Business advisors,  consultants, financiers, and lawyers are brought on as specialized instructors.
2.5.2  Profile of Self-Employment participants
As shown in
Table E1
in
Appendix E
, active claimants who started their  participation between 2002 to 2005 were mainly male (55%) while those who  started in 2006 to 2008 were mainly female (52%). About one third (35%) of  participants in both cohorts were between 35 and 44 years of age while 32% of  the 2002 to 2005 participants and 36% of the 2006 to 2008 participants were 45  years of age or older. Participants in both cohorts most frequently had  occupations requiring college or apprenticeship training (38% and 37%  respectively) followed by secondary or occupational training (25% and 29%  respectively) prior to participation.   Both cohorts had similar earnings in the year before participation  ($31,358 and $31,370).
The majority of former claimants who participated in 2002 to  2005 and 2006 to 2008 were female (54% and 65% respectively) and between 25 and  44 years of age (64% and 74% respectively).   Former claimants who participated in the program between 2002 and 2005  most frequently had occupations requiring college or apprenticeship (32%)  followed by secondary or occupational training (30%) prior to participation. In  comparison, those who participated in the 2006 to 2008 period most frequently  had occupations requiring secondary or occupational training (37%) followed by  college or apprenticeship (29%). Both cohorts had similar levels of employment  earnings in the year before participation ($12,750 and $12,222).
2.5.3 Incremental impacts
Like other EBSMs, incremental impacts were estimated for  participants in the 2002 to 2005 and 2006 to 2008 periods. Results showed large  decreases in employment/self-employment earnings and decreases in the incidence  of employment. As well, compared to similar non-participants, Self-Employment  participants decreased their use of EI and social assistance and reduced their  dependence on government income support.
Detailed estimates are presented in Tables
E2
and
E3
in  Appendix E. However, they are not discussed in the report since they may not  provide an accurate depiction of the financial well-being of the participants  in the post-program period. Impacts were examined using individual earnings  reported in the T1 and T4 taxation files from Canada Revenue Agency, and  measured relative to active claimants who did not participate in the program  and may have been in any employment/unemployment situation following  participation (for example, unemployed, paid employee or self-employed).
According to a study from Statistics Canada, self-employed  individuals in Canada have a lower average annual income than paid employees  ($46,200 versus $52,400 in 2009), but the average net worth of their households  is 2.7 times greater than that of the paid employee households, which indicates  that some self-employed individuals may leave funds within their business for  reinvestment purposes
Footnote
15
. Overall, this suggests  that looking at individual earnings alone, without taking the net worth into  consideration, may not provide a fair assessment of how well participants are  doing financially after participation.
It is also noted that data from the Work Outcomes Reporting  Program survey conducted by Alberta between January 2013 and February 2016 also  showed that the mean wage per hour of participants was lower after  participation for those who used to work full time before entering the program  (n=161). It decreased from $27.30 before participation to $23.13 after  participation. At the same time, 53% of those who worked full time before  participation continued to work full time after participation.
There is a lack of understanding  around the role played by this program in helping future entrepreneurs to  implement viable business plans and to develop their entrepreneurship skills.  Overall, it is not clear whether participant’s success in improving  their labour market attachment through self-employment is more closely  associated with their business idea and their entrepreneurship skills than the  assistance provided under the program.
2.6  Job Creation  Partnerships
2.6.1 Program  description
Based on description submitted by Alberta
Job Creation Partnerships is a financial assistance program.  Its objective is to enable unemployed persons to obtain employment by providing  them with employment opportunities through which they can gain work experience  to improve their long-term employment prospects. In Alberta, Job Creation  Partnerships-similar programming is delivered through the Integrated Training  Program and its component program known as Immigrant Bridging.
Integrated Training is a  competency-based occupation-related training program intended to provide  unemployed or marginally employed adult Albertans with a unique blend of  employability and/or essential skills, applied academics and/or English as a  Second Language, occupation-related skills, and work experience placement(s).  The objectives of Integrated Training are to:
Enable  unemployed or marginally employed adult Albertans to secure and maintain  employment in an occupation that is in-demand;
Provide  training and occupation-related skills recognized by industry/employers; and,
Help  immigrants gain employment in their original occupation or a related  occupation.
Immigrant Bridging
programs are a sub-set of Integrated  Training that focus on training skilled immigrants  with prior education and/or experience in a specific occupation, so they can  bridge gaps in knowledge or skills in order to gain employment in that  occupation or a related occupation. Immigrant Bridging programs usually have a  language component.
The following training components are incorporated into all Integrated Training programs:
Occupation-related skills
One or  more work experience placement(s)
Employability and/or essential  skills
Where  necessary for the occupational destination, the following components are also  offered:
Academic  competencies relevant to the occupation/occupational outcome, and/or
Workplace  English as a Second Language.
The work experience placement is not a paid employment  opportunity (or a wage subsidy program). Instead the work experience placement  is intended to be an extension of the training program. Work experience competencies for each individual vary for  each work experience placement. The required competencies that  an individual will be expected to demonstrate as a result of each work  experience placement is decided by training providers after consultation with  each employer. Program duration is a maximum of 52 weeks.
Some of the program examples under Immigrant  Bridging are: Enhanced Language Training Program, Internationally  Educated Veterinary Bridging, Career Connections: an Introduction to Business,  and Business Communication for Professionals. Training Providers may offer some  basic English-language, computer, workplace safety, and job search training.  Program duration is a maximum 52 weeks.
2.6.2 Program  delivery
Based on description submitted by Alberta
Integrated Training programs are  delivered in a classroom setting or through synchronous e-learning. Integrated  Training is primarily provided at educational institutions or through 3rd party  contracts and is delivered through either contract or tuition based  procurement.
While it is recognized that the design and delivery of  Integrated Training will vary to meet the needs of the individuals and labour  market demand, it is strongly recommended that a minimum of 60% of the training  should occur in the classroom, or by synchronous e-learning and a maximum of  40% of the training should occur during one or more work experience placements.  If more than 40% of work experience is required for a specific individual  group, the training provider must  provide rationale for the length of the work experience. The delivery  mechanism of Immigrant Bridging is the same as  that of Integrated Training.
2.6.3 Profile of Job  Creation Partnerships participants
Active claimants who participated in 2002 to 2005 and 2006  to 2008 were mostly male (60% and 59%).   As shown in
Table F1
in
Appendix F
, sixty one percent of those who participated  in 2002 to 2005 and 59% of those who participated in the 2006 to 2008 period  were aged between 25 and 44 years old. Participants in both the 2002 to 2005  and 2006 to 2008 cohorts most frequently had occupations requiring secondary or  occupational training before participation (38% and 40%). Those who  participated in the 2002 to 2005 period had lower employment earnings in the  year before participation ($19,084 compared to $23,071).
A little more than half (52%) of former claimants who  started participation in 2002 to 2005 were male while 52% of those who started  participation in 2006 to 2008 were female. Sixty percent of those who started  participation in 2002 to 2005 and 58% of those who started participation in  2006 to 2008 were aged between 25 and 44 years old. Participants in both  cohorts most frequently had occupations requiring secondary school or  occupational training (38% and 41%) prior to participation.  Participants in the 2002 to 2005 period had  lower earnings in the year before participation ($8,712) compared to those in  the 2006 to 2008 period ($11,533).
2.6.4 Incremental impacts
Active claimants
As shown in
Table F2
in  Appendix F, active claimants who participated in 2002 to 2005 had incremental  gains in earnings in most post-program years. As shown in Figure 6, these gains  in earnings ranged between $2,429 and $4,720. They also had gains in incidence  of employment ranging between 8.4 and 12.6 percentage points. Their use of EI  increased starting the second post-program year by annual averages ranging  between $440 and $760. Results for social assistance use and the level of  dependence on income support were not statistically significant. The increase  in EI use reflects the inability for some participants to maintain the  employment secured in the short-term after participation.
Figure 6. Increased earnings of active and former Job Creation Partnerships participants relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure 6
Gains in Earnings
Active Claimants
Former Claimants
Year 1 Post-Program
2429
1159
Year 2 Post-Program
2126*
727*
Year 3 Post-Program
3584
1064*
Year 4 Post-Program
4424
872*
Year 5 Post-Program
4720
1009*
a
The incremental impact on earnings  for Former participants in the 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th year after the program and  Active participants in the 2nd year after the program are not statistically  significant at the 95% confidence level.
Active claimants who participated in 2006 to 2008 had gains  in incidence of employment in the first two years after participation. They had  increases in EI use in the second and third year. Results for other indicators  were not statistically significant at the 95% level or above.
Former claimants
As shown in
Table F3
in  Appendix F, results for former claimants who participated in the 2002 to 2005  period were often not statistically significant. However, results showed  increases in incidence of employment ranging between 3.8 and 5.9 percentage  points in all years after participation and an increase of $1,159 in earnings  in the first year after participation (see Figure 6). While all annual impacts  for EI use were not statistically significant, a total increase of $700 was  found over the five-year post-program period. As indicated above, the increase  in EI use reflects the inability for some participants to maintain the  employment secured in the short-term after participation.
Similarly, most results for former claimants who participated  in the 2006 to 2008 period were also mostly statistically non-significant. Like  the 2002 to 2005 participants, they also increased their incidence of  employment and EI use after participation.
2.6.5 Cost-benefit results
The benefits of the program were $1,440 less than the costs  six years after participation from the society perspective. As shown in
Table F4
in Appendix F, the benefits would need to  be maintained over 6.5 years after the end of participation to match the  costs.  For former claimants, six years  after program end, the benefits of the program were $5,094 less than the costs.  The benefits would need to persist over 14.1 years after the end of  participation to match the costs.
Overall, when interpreting cost-benefit results for Job  Creation Partnerships, it should also be acknowledged that program funding  helps to develop the community and the local economy and none of those benefits  were accounted for in the calculations as they are difficult to quantify.
2.7  Employment Assistance  Services
2.7.1 Program  description and delivery
Based on a document review and 8 key informant interviews  completed in summer 2013
Employment Assistance Services assist individuals to prepare  for, obtain and maintain employment. Services are accessible to all unemployed  persons seeking employment-related supports.
The delivery model is based on three essential components:
Information Services
includes the provision of labour market,  occupational, training and educational information which helps participants  choose training or a learning path, to find and keep a job and to plan or  change careers. These services can be accessed through a variety of ways such  as visiting Alberta Works Centres, calling the Career Information Hotline,  accessing the Alberta Learning Information Service website and by attending  events.
Needs Determination Services
assist individuals by providing advice,  guidance and access to services that help people make successful labour market  transitions. This service includes a needs determination assessment, career  advising, workshops, exposure courses, financial and non-financial supports and  job placements.
Employability Services
includes employability assessments to help  individuals increase their self-awareness, career counselling and service  management, which is similar to individualized case management support.
In Alberta, Employment Assistance Services are predominantly  delivered through service providers but can also be delivered through provincial  government offices.
Key informants  confirmed that they are using LMI products to support the delivery of the program.  In particular, LMI products produced by Alberta provide information to staff,  service providers, immigrants, professional associations, educators, employers,  participants and the general public. However, managers interviewed mentioned  that there is room to improve the way LMI is used. Service providers also  raised concerns about the unavailability of information about recent EI  claimants.
Alberta is  devoting efforts to incorporate LMI with broad statistics at the local level.  However, it is difficult to access LMI available at the local level. The  province is committed to producing more and more tailored reports based on  individual needs.
2.7.2 Profile of Employment Assistance services participants
Socio-demographic characteristics
The socio-demographic profile was produced for individuals  who only received Employment Assistance Services without participating in other  Employment Benefits.
As shown in
Table G1
in
Appendix G
, active claimants who started their participation  in 2002 to 2005 were mainly male (54%) while those who started in 2006 to 2008  were almost evenly distributed between male and female. Thirty (30%) and 28% of  participants in both cohorts were aged between 35 and 44 years old while 30%  and 35% of participants in both cohorts were aged 45 and older. Active  claimants who participated in the program most frequently had occupations  requiring secondary or occupational training before participation (37% in each  cohort). They also had similar employment earnings in the year before participation  ($24,638 and $24,321).
Fifty-three percent of former claimants who started in the  2002 to 2005 period were male while 53% of those who started in the 2006 to 2008  period were female. Sixty one percent of the 2002 to 2005 participants and 59%  of the 2006 to 2008 participants were aged between 25 and 44 years of age.  Participants in both cohorts most frequently had occupations requiring  secondary or occupational training prior to participation (37% each). Those who  participated in 2002 to 2005 had lower earnings in the year before  participation ($12,863) compared to the 2006 to 2008 participants ($15,229).
Labour market barriers faced by Employment Assistance Services participants
Based on a document review and 8 key informant interviews  completed in summer 2013
According to key informants, the main  labour market barriers experienced by participants in Alberta are:
Lack of  adequate skills, poor problem solving skills and non-transferable skills
Skills  mismatches, especially for those moving to Alberta from other  provinces/territories
Low educational attainment
Lack of affordable housing
Lack of child care spaces
Addiction issues
Mental health issues
Low  self-esteem and self-confidence/motivation issues
Lack of adequate marketing  skills
Type of  work available is different: a lot of work is project based (with a start and  end date), which is different than working continuously at the same job
Immigrants  face issues with recognition of their foreign credentials and language barriers
Long  tenured workers face skills mismatches and often have non-transferable skills
2.7.3 Incremental impacts
As shown in
Table G2
in  Appendix G, active claimants who participated during the 2002 to 2005 period  had increases in incidence of employment ranging between 1.5 and 3 percentage  points in all years after participation (see Figure 7). However, their results  for earnings were mostly not statistically significant. Their use of EI  benefits decreased in the first three years after participation by averages  ranging between $109 and $417 while their use of social assistance benefits  increased in all post-program years by averages ranging between $43 and $150.  Impacts on dependence on income support were mixed.
Figure 7. Incidence of employment for active claimant participants in Employment Assistance Services
Text description of Figure 7
Percentage Points
Year 1 Post-Program
3
Year 2 Post-Program
2.3
Year 3 Post-Program
2.2
Year 4 Post-Program
1.5
Year 5 Post-Program
2
The 2006 to 2008 participants also had increases in  incidence of employment in the first two years after participation. Their use  of EI also decreased after participation. However, these participants  experienced decreases in earnings in all three post-program years. They also  increased their use of social assistance and their level of dependence on  income support over most years after participation.
The results varied based on the sub-groups examined:
Youth  (under 30 years old) who participated between 2002 and 2005 had gains in  incidence of employment and decreases in EI use. However, the earnings impacts  were generally not statistically significant. Their use of social assistance  generally increased after participation as well as their dependence on income  support.
Older  workers (55 years old and over) who participated in 2002 to 2005 increased  their earnings and incidence of employment in each of the five post  participation years. Their use of EI decreased in the first two years  post-program while results for other years and most impacts on dependence on  income support were not statistically significant at the 95% level or above.
Long-tenured  workers
who  participated in 2007 to 2009 improved their incidence of employment and  decreased their EI use after participation but increased their use of social  assistance benefits. Results for earnings and dependence on income support were  not statistically significant.
Earlier participation in Employment Assistance Services  improves participants’ labour market outcomes
The study on the effects related to the timing of  participation showed that incremental impacts on earnings and employment were  larger for individuals who received Employment Assistance Services early during  their EI claim compared to individuals who never participated and to those who  remained on EI a longer time before participating in the program (see Figure 8  below and
Table G3
in Appendix G).  Specifically, individuals  who started their participation within four weeks after the start of their EI  benefit period had a total increase of $16,164 in their earnings over five  years post-program. They also had increases in their incidence of employment  ranging between 1.3 to 2.2 percentage points per year in the first three years  after participation.
Participants  who started between 5 and 8 weeks and those who started between 9 and 12 weeks  after the start of their EI claim had increases in their earnings totalling  $12,418 and $11,609 respectively over the post-program period. The increases in  earnings for participants who started between 5 and 8 weeks were accompanied  gains in incidence of employment of 2.1 and 2.2 percentage points in the first  two post-program years. Participants who started between 9 and 12 weeks had  statistically non-significant impacts on incidence of employment.
The  participants who started their participation during the second and third  quarters of their EI claim generally had lower gains in earnings (total of  $5,399 and $8,342 respectively) and gains in incidence of employment of 1.4 and  1.6 percentage points in the first and second year after participation.  Participants who started in the fourth quarter had statistically  non-significant impacts on earnings.
Figure 8. Cumulative incremental impacts on earnings related to the timing of participation in Employment Assistance Services
Text description of Figure 8
Cumulative Gains in Earnings
1-4 weeks
16164
5-8 weeks
12418
9-12 weeks
11609
2nd quarter
5399
3rd quarter
8342
4th quarter
2469
a
a
The cumulative incremental impact on  earnings for participants in the 4th quarter is not statistically significant.
As  well, the study looked at the difference between the number of EI weeks unused  by participants and the number of EI weeks unused by their comparison groups in  order to determine the effect of the timing of participation on the return to  employment. Those who received assistance within the first eight weeks of their  claim returned to employment more quickly than the comparison group.  Specifically, those who started within 4 weeks returned to employment 4.1 weeks  earlier than the comparison group while those who started between the 5th and  8th week returned to employment 1 week earlier.
Among all participants in the 2002 to 2005 period, 13,319  received assistance within the first 4 weeks of establishing an EI claim and  4,714 received assistance in weeks 5 to 8. With an average weekly EI benefits  of $327 during this period, the 13,319 participants did not use $17,856,783 in  EI benefits (13,319 * $327 * 4.1 weeks). As well, the 4,714 participants did  not use $1,541,478 in EI benefits (4,714 * $327 * 1 week). The average cost of  Employment Assistance Services interventions in the 2002 to 2005 period was  $252. This represents a cost of $4,544,316 [(13,319 + 4,714) * $252] for a net  saving of $14,853,945.
2.7.4 Cost-benefit  results
Six years after the end of participation, the benefits of  the program from the society perspective exceeded the cost by $944 (as shown in
Table G5
in Appendix G). It took 5.2 years  after the end of participation for the benefits to recover the costs.
2.7.5  Challenges and lessons learned about Employment Assistance Services design and  delivery
Based on a document review and 8 key informant interviews
Footnote
16
completed in summer 2013
Key informants identified best practices and lessons learned  related to program design and delivery:
It would  be beneficial to provide a one-stop-shop for participants instead of relying on  referrals made to other organizations
Long-term  interventions and follow-up are required for individuals facing multiple  barriers since those barriers are often inter-related and participants need a  long time to address them
Conducting  adequate and detailed assessments of participants’ needs to help determine  training needs
Job maintenance services are  essential
Job  placements are helpful. Holding job fairs also help to increase awareness about  available services
Having  more flexibility within program guidelines would allow to try new approaches  such as innovation in services to participants
Targeting  contracts for specialized services for participants with specific needs would  be beneficial
Having  adequate LMI and having well trained staff is important
Having the  capacity to tailor services to community needs is an important consideration
Participants  often require assistance in order to stabilize their life in terms of housing,  child care, personal management skills, etc.
It would  be useful if a system was developed to facilitate the tracking of participant  progression. It is important to have progressive success indicators and not  simply focus on the employment outcome alone.
It is  important for service providers to build relationships with employers, specialized  service providers and community organizations. This helps with participant  referrals and facilitates the integration of participants in the local labour  market.
Access to  EI Part I data is important
Key informants identified a number of challenges with  respect to the design and delivery of the program:
Program  guidelines are perceived as being rigid. This can restrict service providers’  ability to address the needs of participants with multiple barriers. It is not  possible to “fit” participants with multiple barriers into a prescribed  program.
Focusing  on quicker return to employment outcomes as the sole indicator of success does  not adequately account for the extensive barriers faced by these participants.
The  awareness about the program varies greatly depending on the various participant  groups (for example, new immigrants face challenges around language) and  participants are often coming to the service providers through word of mouth.
Some  service providers face rigid criteria about what type of career material they  can display.
Having one  year contracts with service providers creates challenges for some. For example,  it can limit their capacity to retain qualified staff and to access stable  funding. Staff turnover causes loss of corporate memory about programs and  services and their delivery.
3. Comparison of key findings by program type
This section provides an overview of the key findings from the  incremental impact analysis for Skills Development, Targeted Wage Subsidies,  Job Creation Partnerships and Employment Assistance Services for both active  and former EI claimant participants who started participation in the 2002 to 2005  period.
Program participants have  a higher probability of being employed than comparison group members
As shown in Figure 9, active EI claimants who participated in  Skills Development, Targeted Wage Subsidies, Job Creation Partnerships and  Employment Assistance Services had higher probability of being employed (in  other words, increased their incidence of employment) compared to similar  non-participants. As well, former EI claimants who participated in Skills  Development, Targeted Wage Subsidies and Job Creation Partnerships had higher  probability of being employed compared to former EI claimants who received low  intensity interventions under Employment Assistance Services.
It is noted that Employment Assistance Services are relatively  modest activities such as counselling, job search assistance and case  management. By themselves, they are not expected to lead to substantial effects  on labour market outcomes.  However, as  demonstrated in the report, providing Employment Assistance Services earlier  during the EI claim (first 8 weeks) generates significantly greater returns  (see Figure 8 in sub-section 2.7.3).
Figure 9. Change in probability of being employed in participants relative to non-participants
Footnote
17
Text description of Figure 9
Percentage Points
Active Claimants
Former Claimants
Skills Development
9.6
5.8
Targeted Wage Subsidies
7.3
3.9
Job Creation Partnership
10.8
5.2
Employment Assistance Services
2.2
Increased earnings for participants compared  to comparison group members
As shown in Figure 10, active EI claimants who participated in  Skills Development, Targeted Wage Subsidies and Job Creation Partnerships  increased their employment earnings compared to similar non-participants. As  well, former EI claimants who participated in Skills Development, Targeted Wage  Subsidies and Job Creation Partnerships increased their employment earnings  compared to former EI claimants who received Employment Assistance Services  exclusively.
As already noted, Employment Assistance Services are relatively  modest activities and, by themselves, are not expected to lead to substantial  effects on labour market outcomes.  In  other words, the program aims to support the return to work of unemployed  participants and not necessarily to secure a better paying job than  pre-participation. However, as demonstrated in the report, providing Employment  Assistance Services earlier during the EI claim (first 8 weeks) generates  significantly greater returns.
Figure 10. Increased cumulative earnings of participants relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure 10
Cumulative Gains in    Earnings
Active Claimants
Former Claimants
Skills Development
16952
9464
Targeted Wage Subsidies
12700
10665
Job Creation Partnership
17283
4832
a
Employment Assistance Services
2485
a
a
The incremental impact on earnings for former claimants who participated  in Job Creation Partnership and active claimants who participated in Employment  Assistance Services are not statistically significant at the 95% confidence  level.
The use of EI is  increased for participants compared to the comparison group. For active  claimants, this may reflect the inability for some participants to maintain the  employment secured in the short-term following participation. In the case of  former claimants who participated in Skills Development and Targeted Wage  Subsidies, it can be argued that this reflects an increase in labour market  attachment since the incremental impacts on employment earnings and incidence  of employment are positive, and given the decrease in the use of social  assistance. As well, the social benefits of participation exceeded costs of  investments for most interventions over time.
As shown in Figure  11, active EI claimants who participated in Skills Development, Targeted Wage  Subsidy and Job Creation Partnerships increased their use of EI compared to  similar non-participants. It is not surprizing to observe an increase in EI use  for claimants who participated in Targeted Wage Subsidies since participants  build entitlement to EI while working. Active EI claimants who participated in  Employment Assistance Services decreased their use of EI compared to similar  non-participants.
For former  claimants, it can also be argued that the increase in EI use is an indication  of increase labour market attachment for this client group since they did  experience increases in employment earnings and incidence of employment, and a  decrease in the use of social assistance. As a reminder, former claimants are  participants for whom the EI benefit period ended up to three years  pre-participation.
Figure 11. Change in the cumulative use of Employment Insurance relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure 11
Cumulative Use of EI    Benefits
Active Claimants
Former Claimants
Skills Development
467
541
Targeted Wage Subsidies
1281
a
2164
Job Creation Partnership
2605
700
Employment Assistance Services
-618
a
The incremental impact on earnings for active claimants who participated  in Targeted Wage Subsidy is not statistically significant at the 95% confidence  level.
As shown in Figure  12, program participants decreased their use of social assistance benefits with  the exception of active participants in Employment Assistance Services. As  previously stated, the relatively modest activities provided under Employment  Assistance Services are not expected to lead to substantial effects on  participants’ labour market outcomes.
Figure 12. Change in cumulative use of social assistance relative to non-participants
Text description of Figure 12
Cumulative Use of    Social Assistance Benefits
Active Claimants
Former Claimants
Skills Development
-414
-1743
Targeted Wage Subsidies
260
a
-1714
Job Creation Partnership
-501
a
-858
a
Employment Assistance Services
435
a
The incremental impacts on social assistance use for Targeted Wage  Subsidies and Job Creation Partnerships participants are not statistically  significant at the 5% level.
Social benefits  of participation exceeded costs of investments for most interventions.
As shown in Table  3, social benefits to participation exceeded investment costs in a period  ranging between the first year of program participation to about 14 years after  participation.
Table 3. Number of years for the benefits to exceed program  costs
Skills Development
Targeted Wage Subsidies
Job Creation Partnerships
Employment Assistance Services
Active claimants
5.1
4.3
6.5
5.2
Former claimants
5.5
0.8
14.1
n/a
Overall,  incremental impacts demonstrate that LMDA programs and services are improving  the labour market attachment of participants in Alberta. As well, social  benefits of participation exceeded the cost of investments for most  interventions over time. Finally, providing Employment Assistance Services  interventions earlier during an EI claim (first eight weeks) produced larger  impacts on earnings and employment and facilitated earlier return to work. This  demonstrates the importance of targeting early participation of EI active  claimants.
4.   Conclusions
Evaluation  evidence presented and discussed in this report demonstrated that programs and  services designed and delivered by Alberta under the LMDA are generally helping  participants to improve their labour market experience after participation. As  such, evaluation evidence suggests that LMDA funded programming contributes to  achieve Alberta’s priorities and the following Ministry of Labour outcome:  Albertans have the skills required by Alberta’s labour market.
Overall,  incremental impacts demonstrate that programs and services are improving the  labour market attachment of participants. As well, social benefits of  participation exceeded the cost of investments for most interventions over  time. Finally, providing Employment Assistance Services earlier during an EI  claim (first eight weeks) produced larger impacts on earnings and employment  and facilitated earlier return to work. This demonstrates the importance of  targeting early participation of EI active claimants.
Key informants interviews with service providers and program  managers as well as the documents reviewed and the questionnaires filled by  Alberta representatives revealed some lessons learned and specific challenges  about program design and delivery.
Footnote
18
Skills Development
A key feature in the application process for Skills  Development is to ensure that prospective participants are choosing a training  that will meet labour market demand. As well, Alberta plans training investment  to target labour market trends. This may contribute to program effectiveness.  Other key features included:
Undertaking  a comprehensive assessment of the participants in order to assist them in  making informed choices and to commit to their training.
Having  access to disability-related employment and financial supports.
In terms of lessons learned and best practices, key  informants indicated the importance of:
Providing  long-term assistance and to have an interdisciplinary team of professionals  that can provide a continuum of services and supports to individuals facing  multiple barriers.
Monitoring  participants during training and following up after the training.
Coordination  among key labour market stakeholders and service providers.
Offering  coordinated foundational learning programs that assess basic skills at the  outset of the program, address weaknesses and integrate basic skills  development into professional program would be beneficial.
Providing  intensive case management for individuals facing multiple barriers to  employment.
The main challenges related to Skills Development design and delivery included:
The level  and duration of the financial support being too low for individuals facing  multiple barriers to employment
Lack of  instrument to test literacy level
Identifying  learning disability too late in the process
Lack of  awareness around available support for those with physical and mental  disabilities
Skills Development – Apprentices
Key informants identified the  following best practices and lessons learned about the program:
Having close connections with the industry helps  to understand where the government can make better investments and offer training  closer to the participant’s home. For example, it has been possible to increase  the training offered in some locations based on employers input.
Providing accommodations to individuals facing  barriers to employment or to completing training. For example, providing  disability related supports or help to individuals with learning barriers in  order to help them complete their exams.
Existing Canadian labour market literature  showed that there is a fairly high non-completion rate among apprentices;  however it is not possible with available data to generate a reliable  estimation of the completion rate of Skills  Development – Apprentices participants in Alberta. According to key  informants, the drop-out from the apprenticeship process may be due to external  factors such as:
The  apprentice realises that he/she is not suited for the job
Employers  are not able to let the apprentice go on training
Targeted Wage Subsidies
Key informants identified best practices or the lessons  related to Targeted Wage Subsidies’ design and delivery. These included:
Having a  client-focused approach to the program application to ensure the participant is  ready, willing and able to pursue participation.
Ensuring a  good match between employer and employee helps to guarantee participant  retention after the end of the subsidy.
Ongoing  case management is key for proactively addressing barriers faced by participants  (for example, mental health issues, addictions and social barriers).
Maintaining  a good relationship with employers and providing them support during the  subsidy is important.
While evaluation results have demonstrated program  effectiveness, its use has been falling in recent years (from 261 new  interventions in 2003 to 2004 to 41 in 2013 to 2014). According to key  informants potential reasons to explain this decline may include:
Changes in  the labour market and the low unemployment rate affect the program
Mismatch  between employers needs and participants skills
Lack of  capacity among career employment consultants or service providers due to high  turnover and lack of resources
Employers  may not be inclined to use the program because of:
Time and  resource constraints on the part of the employers to apply, receive approval  and meet reporting requirements.
A lack of  awareness from employers about the program.
The stigma  associated with hiring someone with a subsidy.
Challenges  related to program design and delivery included:
Some  career employment consultants cannot follow-up with participants as often as  needed because they lack capacity. In some situations, the caseload of career  employment consultants may involve approximately 300 individuals.
High staff  turnover results in loss of knowledge and expertise.
It can be  difficult to find participants and employers who meet the program guidelines.  Eligibility criteria are also seen as being too restrictive by key informants.  For example, the program has a limitation where only one employee can be  subsidised with one employer.
Employment Assistance Services
Key informants identified some  best practices and lessons learned related to the provision of Employment  Assistance Services:
It would  be beneficial to provide a one-stop-shop for participants instead of relying on  referrals made to other organizations.
Long-term  interventions and follow-up are required for individuals facing multiple  barriers since those barriers are often inter-related and participants need a  long time to address them.
Conducting  adequate and detailed assessments of participants’ needs to help determine  training needs.
Job  maintenance services and job placements are helpful. Holding job fairs also  help to increase awareness about available services.
Targeting  contracts for specialized services for participants with specific needs would  be beneficial.
Having  adequate labour market information and having well trained staff is important.
Having the  capacity to tailor services to community needs is an important consideration.
It is  important for service providers to build relationships with employers,  specialized service providers and community organizations. This helps with  participant referrals and facilitates the integration of participants in the  local labour market.
Access to  EI Part I data is important.
Challenges related to the  provisions of Employment Assistance Services included:
Program  guidelines are perceived as being rigid. This can restrict service provider’s  ability to address the needs of participants with multiple barriers. As well,  the focus on quicker return to employment as the sole  indicator of success does not adequately account for the extensive barriers  faced by these participants.
Program  awareness varies greatly depending on the various participant groups.
Having one  year contracts with service providers can limit their capacity to retain  qualified staff and to access stable funding.
5.  Recommendations
Recommendations that emerged from the evaluation findings  presented in this report are as follows:
The study on the timing of Employment Assistance Services  participation showed that receiving assistance early after starting an EI claim  can lead to better labour market impacts. However, key informants reported a  lack of awareness about the program.
Recommendation 1:
Consideration should be given to providing Alberta with timely access to data  on new EI recipients for supporting targeting and increasing awareness.
Key informants reported that lack of essential skills, learning disabilities and literacy  issues are barriers to accessing and completing training.
Recommendation 2:
Consideration should be given to remove barriers to accessing and completing  training such as literacy/essential skills training and learning disability  assessments. The measures would help individuals with multiple barriers to  prepare for vocational training and to reintegrate the labour market. The  measures should be reported separately from other Skills Development  interventions given their unique objectives.
Incremental impact results show that Targeted Wage Subsidies  is improving the earnings and employment of participants. However, its use has  been falling over the years.  According to key informants, the decline may be related to factors such  as a lack of awareness about the program, the commitments required from  employers in terms of time and resources as well as the stigma associate with  hiring someone with a subsidy.
Recommendation 3:
Depending on labour market priorities and budget allocation across the various  EBSMs, Alberta may wish to explore ways of removing barriers to employer  participation in Targeted Wage Subsidies.
Key informants interviewed in the evaluation confirmed the  necessity of having labour market information to support program delivery.  They, however, pointed to the potential difficulty of accessing labour market  information at the regional or local level.
Recommendation 4:
Consideration should be given to enhance the capacity of service providers to  access, when needed, relevant labour market information.
The evaluation was not able to produce a conclusive  assessment of Self-Employment effectiveness and efficiency since the data used  to assess impacts on earnings may not be the best source of information  available to reflect the financial wellbeing of the participants. Overall,  it is not clear whether participant’s success in improving their labour  market attachment through self-employment is more closely associated with their  business idea and their entrepreneurship skills than the assistance provided  under Self-Employment.
Recommendation 5:
Consideration should be given to examine in more detail the design and delivery  of Self-Employment and whether the performance indicators for this program are  appropriate.
Job Creation Partnerships was found to be particularly  effective at improving earnings and incidence of employment of active  claimants.  However, the evaluation has  not yet examined the design and delivery of the program’s two components:  Integrated Training and Immigration Bridging. Therefore, it is not clear what  factors contribute to program success.
Recommendation 6:
Consideration should be given to examine the design and delivery of the program  components (Integrated Training and Immigration Bridging) in order to better  understand how this program operates.
Overall, the LMDA evaluation was able to produce a sound assessment  of EBSM effectiveness and efficiency because the team had access to rich data  on EI claimants, EBSM participation data and Canada Revenue Agency taxation  files. While the available data allowed the production of robust evidence on  impacts and cost-benefits, some data gaps limited the evaluation’s ability to  assess how EBSMs operate. For example:
Having  access to complete data on whether participants are members of designated  groups including Indigenous peoples, persons with disabilities and recent immigrants  would be useful to inform policy development and program design.
Having  access to complete data on the cost of programming per participant would also  provide a refined assessment of how much participation cost for active  claimants as compared to former claimants.
The  evaluation was not able to provide a comprehensive description of the type of  training funded under Skills Development (for example, literacy, essential  skills, adult basic education and vocational training). As a result, it is  currently not possible to separate the effects of adult basic education from  those of vocational training although both types of training may lead to very  different labour market outcomes.
In  Alberta, the Integrated Training and Immigrant Bridging are separate programs  that are recorded as Job Creation Partnerships in the LMDA data. As a result,  it is currently not possible to separate the effects of Integrated Training  from those of Immigrant Bridging although both programs may lead to very  different labour market outcomes for different target groups.
There are  various types of Employment Assistance Services provided under the LMDAs. These  services can be very different in nature and it possible that some may be more  effective than others at helping participants to return to employment. For  example, having access to a computer for researching jobs on its own may yield  different impacts than receiving counselling and assistance to develop a  return-to-work action plan.
Recommendation 7:
Improvements  in the data collection is recommended to address key program and policy  questions of interest to the federal and provincial/territorial governments.  Specifically:
Collect  data on whether participants are members of designated groups including  Indigenous peoples, persons with disabilities and recent immigrants.
Collect  data on the type of training funded under Skills Development and the type of  assistance provided under Employment Assistance Services. Alberta, ESDC and  other P/Ts should work together to define common categories for both programs.
Examine  the added value in reporting separately on participants in the Integrated  Training and Immigrant Bridging programs.
Collect  detailed data on the cost of interventions.
References
Alberta Ministry of Labour.  Business Plan 2016-19 Labour. Ministry of Labour. March 17, 2016.
Alberta Human Services.
Alberta Works  Policy Manual
. Accessed February 29, 2016
Alberta Human Services. Transitioning  Supports for Apprenticeship-related Programs from Human Services to Innovation  and Advanced Education. July 22, 2015.
Questions and answers
Accessed September 23, 2016
Canada Employment Insurance  Commission. Employment Insurance Monitoring and Assessment Reports. 2003 to  2004 to 2013 to 2014.
Coe, Patrick. “Apprenticeship programme requirements and  apprenticeship completion rates in Canada.” Journal of Vocational Education and  Training. 2013. 65(4): 575 to 605.
Employment and Social  Development Canada. Study Apprenticeship Technical Training Component of the  Occupational Training Program in Alberta: Technical Report. Evaluation  Directorate. June 16, 2016
Employment and Social  Development Canada. Cost-Benefit Analysis of Employment Benefits and Support  Measures in Alberta: Technical Report. Evaluation Directorate. May 30, 2016
Employment and Social  Development Canada. Study of Work Foundations / Occupational Training in  Alberta: Technical Report. Evaluation Directorate. April 18, 2016
Employment and Social  Development Canada. Analysis of Employment Benefits and Support Measures (EBSM)  Profile, Outcomes and Incremental Impacts for the EI Claimant Category:  “Long-Tenured Workers” in Alberta: Technical Report. Evaluation Directorate.  March 9, 2016
Employment and Social  Development Canada. Study on Workplace Training in Alberta. Evaluation  Directorate. March 16, 2016.
Employment and Social Development  Canada. Analysis of Employment Benefits and Support Measures (EBSM) Profile,  Outcomes and Incremental Impacts for 2006 to 2008 Participants in Alberta:  Technical Report. Evaluation Directorate. February 2, 2015
Employment and Social  Development Canada. Analysis of Employment Benefits and Support Measures (EBSM)  Profile, Outcomes and Medium-Term Incremental Impacts for 2002 to 2005  Participants in Alberta: Technical Report. Evaluation Directorate. May, 2014
Employment and Social  Development Canada. Study on Employment Assistance Services: Technical Report  for Alberta. Evaluation Directorate. September 22, 2014
Employment and Social  Development Canada. Effects of the Timing of Participation in Employment  Assistance Services in Alberta: Technical Report. Evaluation Directorate.  December 15, 2014
LaRochelle-Côté, Sébastien and  Sharanjit Uppal, "The Financial Well-Being of the Self-Employed,"  Perspectives on Labour and Income, vol. 23, no. 4, Winter 2011
Red Seal. Apprenticeship Completion, Certification and Outcomes.  Ottawa: Red Seal, 2014.
Alberta Human Services.  Transitioning Supports for Apprenticeship-related Programs from Human Services  to Innovation and Advanced Education, July 22, 2015.
Alberta Human Services.
Transitioning  Supports for Apprenticeship-related Programs from Human Services to Innovation  and Advanced Education
, July 22, 2015. (Accessed September 23, 2016)
Work Outcomes Reporting Program  Survey 2013 to 2016. Summary of Results Submitted by Alberta Ministry of Labour  on August 11, 2016.
Acronyms
EBSM          Employment Benefits and Support  Measures
EI                  Employment Insurance
ESDC          Employment and Social Development  Canada
LMDA          Labour Market Development Agreements
LMI               Labour Market Information
P/T               Provinces and Territories
Appendix A -  Methodology
Qualitative  data
Qualitative data reported in the Skills Development (SD),  Skills Development-Apprentices (SD-A), Targeted Wage Subsidy (TWS) and  Employment Assistance Services (EAS) studies were collected from key informant  interviews with managers and service providers and a document/ literature  review. As well, questionnaires were completed by provincial/ territorial  government representatives for the SD, SD-A and TWS studies. Table A1 provides  the number of key informants interviewed.
Key informant interviews for the EAS study were conducted in  2013 while those for the SD, SD-A and TWS studies were conducted in 2015.
Table  A1. Number of key informants interviewed
Number of key informant Interviews
Studies
SD
SD-A
TWS
EAS
Managers
5
4
3
4
Service providers
Quantitative methods
All quantitative analyses were conducted using linked  administrative data from EI Part I (EI claim), EI Part II (EBSM participation  data) and T1 and T4 taxation files on up to 100% of participants in Alberta.
Incremental impacts
The incremental impact analysis compared the labour market  experience of participants before and after their participation with that of a  comparison group. The goal was to determine the direct effect of program  participation on key labour market indicators (see
Figure 1
in the introduction section).
For active claimants, incremental impacts were measured  relative to a comparison group of active claimants who could have participated  in the EBSMs but did not. Former  claimants can be underemployed and unable to requalify for EI; out of the  labour force for various reasons; or, on social assistance. Based on previous  evaluation methodologies, on expert advice and given the difficulty in  generating a suitable comparison for former claimants using administrative data  alone, the comparison group for former claimants was created using individuals  who participated in EAS only during the reference period. This is a  conservative approach given the fact that participation in Employment  Assistance Services can lead to limited effects on labour market  outcomes.
Participants and non-participants were matched based on a  wide array of variables including age, sex, location, skill level required by  the last occupation held prior to participation, reason for separation from  employment, industry in which they were previously employed as well as  employment earnings and use of EI and social assistance for each of the five  years before participation.
All analyses were conducted using a unit of analysis called  the Action Plan Equivalent, which combines all EBSMs given to an individual  within no more than six months of each other. For reporting purposes,  incremental impacts were attributed to the longest intervention of the Action  Plan Equivalent when SD, TWS, Job Creation Partnerships (JCP) or  Self-Employment (SE) was the longest intervention. Impacts for EAS were  calculated for Action Plan Equivalent that contained only EAS with no  Employment Benefits. These were referred to as EAS-only.
The incremental impact estimates were produced using  non-experimental methods, namely propensity score matching, using the Kernel  Matching method, along with Difference-in-Differences method to estimate  program impacts. Alternative matching techniques (Nearest Neighbour and Inverse  Propensity Weighting) were also used for validation purposes.
Incremental impacts were measured for the following  indicators:
Employment/self-employment earnings represent the total earnings an individual had from paid employment  and/or self-employment.  (This  information is available by calendar year and is obtained from T1 and T4 tax  return records.)
Incidence of employment/self-employment represents the incidence of having earnings from employment and/or  self-employment.
Amount of  EI benefits received represent the average amount of EI benefits received.
Weeks in receipt of EI benefits represent the average number of weeks during which EI benefits were  received.
Social Assistance benefits represent  the average amount of social assistance benefits received. (This information is  available by calendar year and is obtained from T1 tax return records.)
Dependence  on income support represents the ratio of participant’s income that came from  EI and social assistance benefits (in other words, EI benefits + social  assistance benefits / (EI benefits + social assistance benefits + earnings from  employment/self/employment)).
Incremental impacts were estimated for different cohorts of participants:
All active  and all former claimants as well as youth (under 30 years old) and older  workers (55 years old and over) who started their EBSM participation between  April 1, 2002 and March 31, 2005.
All active  and all former claimants who stated their EBSM participation between January 1,  2006 and March 31, 2008.
Active and  former claimants who were long-tenured workers and who started their EBSM  participation between January 1, 2007 and December 31, 2009. Long-tenured workers covered in this study are individuals who have established  an EI regular or fishing benefit claimants and who had paid at least 30% of the  annual maximum employee EI premiums in seven of the ten years preceding their  EI claim and who had collected 35 or fewer weeks of EI regular or fishing  benefits in the five years preceding their claim. This definition is similar to  the EI claimant category “long-tenured workers” introduced under Connecting  Canadians with Available Jobs.
Cost-benefit analysis
The cost-benefit analysis  compared how much it cost for individuals to participate in the programs and  how much it costs the government to deliver those programs with the benefits  both the participants and the government drew from those programs. The analysis  was carried out from the society perspective which combines the costs and the  benefits for both the participants and the government.
Costs and benefits included in the calculations were as  follows:
Program costs included the administration cost and the  direct cost of the EBSMs. The cost for each EBSM was calculated at the Action  Plan Equivalent level. The costs were determined based on the average  composition of the Action Plan Equivalent.
The Marginal Social Cost of Public Funds represented the loss incurred by society when  raising additional revenues such as taxes to fund government spending. The value was estimated as 20% of the program cost, sales taxes, income taxes,  impacts on EI and impacts on social assistance paid or collected by the  government.
Employment earnings consisted of incremental impacts on  participants’ earnings during and after participation. The calculation accounts  for the participant’s forgone earnings during participation (in other words,  opportunity cost). These are based on incremental impacts for the 2002 to 2005  participants.
Fringe benefits included benefits such as employer-paid health  and life insurance as well as pension contributions. The rate used to calculate  the fringe benefits was 15% of the incremental impact on earnings.
The program effects on EI and social assistance  use, and the sale and income tax revenues were not included in the calculations  since these costs and benefits cancel each other out from the social  perspective by definition. For example, while EI and social assistance are  benefits received by participants, they represent a cost for the government.  However, as indicated above, these effects are accounted for in the calculation  of the Marginal Social Cost of Public Funds.
When producing the results, to bring all costs and benefits  to a common base and to account for inflation and interest on  foregone government investment, the estimates for the second year of participation  and up to the sixth year post-program were discounted by 5% per year.  As well, when the benefits were still lower  than the costs six years after program end, the payback period was calculated  by assuming that the average benefit or cost measured over the fifth and six  year post-program would persist over time (discounted at a 5% annual rate).
Strengths and limitations from the studies
Overall, the number of key informants interviewed was  relatively small in some studies.  The  key informants’ responses were representative of their own experience and their  own region but it is unclear if they were fully representative of the entire  province and territory.
The matching process led to the creation of comparison  groups closely matched to the LMDA participants in terms of their background  characteristics. Results obtained with Kernel Matching were validated with the  use of two other techniques (Inverse Propensity Weighting and Nearest  Neighbour), increasing the level of confidence in the results. However, readers  should be aware that incremental impacts may be affected by factors not  captured by the matching process. For example, the
motivation to seek  employment was not directly measured except to the extent it was captured in  prior income and labour market attachment patterns.
Readers should also keep in mind that it is not possible to  compare the results obtained for each claimant type since the results for  active claimants represent the effects of the EBSMs relative to  non-participation while the results for former claimants represents the  Employment Benefits relative to a limited treatment (EAS only).
“Long-tenured workers” are defined  as individuals who meet the criteria of the EI claimant category “long-tenured  workers” introduced under Connecting Canadians with Available Jobs. These  individuals are defined as EI regular or fishing benefit claimants who had paid  at least 30% of the annual maximum employee EI premiums in seven of the ten  years preceding their EI claim and who had collected 35 or fewer weeks of EI  regular or fishing benefits in the five years preceding their claim. This  definition differs from the definition used in the literature as it does not  consider the number of years the worker remained employed with the same  employer.
The cost-benefit analysis was limited in the sense that it  only took into account the quantifiable benefits and costs that were directly  linked to EBSM delivery and participation and that could be estimated using  available administrative data and the EI Monitoring and Assessment Report. The  analysis did not capture “intangible”, non-pecuniary and indirect benefits. It  did not consider the multiplier effect that improving participant’s income may  have on the economy and did not account for the effect of EI Part II investment  on sustaining a service delivery infrastructure and creating jobs among the  governmental program service providers.   As well, this analysis did not consider the displacement effect where  participants may take away jobs that would otherwise be filled by other  unemployed individuals. Finally, this analysis did not consider the possible  effect of EBSMs on increasing skill prices.
Appendix B - Detailed results Skills Development
Table B1. Socio-demographic and labour market  characteristics of Skills Development participants
Active claimants
Former claimants
2002 to 2005
2006 to 2008
2002 to 2005
2006 to 2008
Number of observations
6,833
2,356
3,189
1,568
Gender
Male
48%
42%
39%
30%
Female
52%
58%
61%
70%
Age
Under 25
14%
15%
15%
18%
25 to 34
32%
31%
38%
40%
35 to 44
32%
33%
28%
26%
45 and over
22%
22%
19%
15%
Marital status
Married or common-law
43%
43%
36%
36%
Widow/ divorced or separated
17%
16%
18%
17%
Single
38%
39%
43%
44%
Missing data / Unknown
2%
2%
3%
3%
Skills level    related to National Occupation Code associated with the last EI claim opened    before SD participation
1
Managerial
4%
6%
4%
4%
University
4%
3%
4%
2%
College or apprenticeship training
26%
25%
24%
21%
Secondary or occupational training
40%
40%
39%
40%
On-the-job training
26%
25%
29%
32%
Key    Labour Market Indicators in the year preceding the start of participation
Earnings
2
$21,589
$22,384
3
$9,357
$9,445
3
Proportion employed
97%
99%
81%
83%
Proportion on Employment Insurance
35%
36%
64%
63%
Proportion on Social Assistance
6%
7%
17%
22%
Proportions may not add up to 100% due to rounding
1
Skill level    corresponds to the type and/or amount of training or education typically    required to work in the last occupation participants had before opening the    last EI claim they had before participating in EBSMs:
-Managerial: Management occupations
-University: Occupations usually requiring    university education (that is, University degree at the bachelor's, master's    or doctorate level)
-College or apprenticeship training: Occupations usually requiring    college or vocational education or apprenticeship training such as 2 to 3    years of post-secondary education at a community college, institute of    technology or CEGEP or 2 to 5    years of apprenticeship training or    3 to 4 years of secondary school and more than 2 years of on-the-job    training, specialized training courses or specific work experience and/or    occupations with supervisory responsibilities and occupations with    significant health and safety responsibilities, such as firefighters, police    officers and registered nursing assistants.
-Secondary or occupational training: Occupations usually requiring    secondary school and/or occupation-specific training such as one to four    years of secondary school education or    up to 2 years of on-the-job training specialized training courses or    specific work experience.
-On-the-job training: On-the-job training is usually provided for    occupations (that is, short work demonstration or on-the-job training or no formal educational    requirements).
2
Average earnings for all individuals included in the study.    The average was calculated including participants who reported $0 earnings    during that year.
3
Earnings for    2006 to 2008 participants have been adjusted by the Consumer Price    Index published by Statistics Canada, using 2002 as the base year.
Significance  level *** 1%;   ** 5%; * 10%
SA: Social  Assistance
Table  B2. Incremental impacts for Skills Development –  active claimants
Indicators
In-program period
Post-program period
Total in- and post-program
Program start year
Additional year
1st year
2nd year
3rd year
4th year
5th year
Total post
All active claimants
2002 to 2005 participants (n=6,883)
Employment earnings ($)
-5,209***
-3,297***
887***
2,204***
3,400***
4,781***
5,680***
16,952***
8,445***
Incidence of employment
(percentage points)
-0.1
4.6***
8.3***
9.7***
9.2***
10.2***
10.8***
n/a
n/a
EI benefits ($)
1,540***
-3
-186***
123*
181***
115
234***
467***
2,004***
EI weeks (weeks)
5.6***
-0.1
-0.5**
0.5**
0.7***
0.5***
0.9***
2.2***
7.7***
SA benefits ($)
60**
136***
31
-83**
-83**
-125***
-154***
-414***
-218
Dependence on income support (percentage points)
16.6***
3.7***
-0.3
0.1
0.6
-0.6
0.4
n/a
n/a
2006 to 2008 participants (n=2,356)
Employment earnings ($)
-6,176***
-4,896***
-$121
1,044
2,359**
-
-
3,324
-7,708**
Incidence of employment
(percentage points)
2.0*
3.3**
9.3***
10.0***
10.6***
-
-
n/a
n/a
EI benefits ($)
1,718***
-482***
-277*
137
42
-
-
-98
1,138**
EI weeks (weeks)
4.9***
-1.8***
-1.0**
0.2
0.0
-
-
-0.7
2.3
SA benefits ($)
-147***
94*
93
29
-101*
-
-
22
-31
Dependence on income support (percentage points)
14.7***
1.7
-2.4**
0.5
0.5
-
-
n/a
n/a
Sub-groups of active claimants
Youth (below 30 years old) – 2002 to 2005 participants    (n=2,022)
Employment earnings ($)
-4,798***
-2,890***
617
1,020
1,605*
2,514***
2,800***
8,556**
868
Incidence of employment
(percentage points)
-1
5.2***
7.2***
7.7***
5.9***
6.5***
7.2***
n/a
n/a
EI benefits ($)
1,185***
-230***
-114
170*
215**
46
153
470
1,425***
EI weeks (weeks)
4.4***
-1.0***
-0.4
0.5
0.6*
0.2
0.5*
1.4
4.8***
SA benefits ($)
-14
89**
-13
-64**
-95*
-93
-31
-296
-222
Dependence on income support (percentage points)
12.9***
-1.1
0.3
0.6
1.0
0.3
1.4*
12
n/a
“Long-Tenured workers”- 2007 to 2009 participants    (n=832)
Employment earnings ($)
-8,836***
-8,831***
-2,951***
1,136
3,460***
-
-
1,645
-16,022***
Incidence of employment
(percentage points)
-6.5***
-7.7***
3.6***
5.5***
5.2***
-
-
n/a
n/a
EI benefits ($)
3,013***
1,875***
78
-182
-127
-
-
-231
4,656***
EI weeks (weeks)
7.1***
4.1***
0.3
-0.4
-0.3
-
-
-0.4
10.8***
SA benefits ($)
72**
151***
113**
92
62
-
-
267*
489***
Dependence on income support (percentage points)
16.7***
11.1***
-0.2
-2.1**
-2.0**
-
-
n/a
n/a
Significance  level *** 1%;   ** 5%; * 10%
SA: Social  Assistance
Table B3. Incremental impacts for Skills  Development – former claimants
Indicators
In-program period
Post-program period
Total in- and post-program
Program start     year
Additional year
1st year
2nd year
3rd year
4th year
5th year
Total post
All former claimants
2002 to 2005 Participants (n=3,189)
Employment earnings ($)
-2,978***
-1,509***
1,382***
1,536***
1,871***
2,114***
2,561***
9,464***
4,978**
Incidence of employment
(percentage points)
-9.8***
2.9***
5.2***
5.6***
5.9***
6.1***
6.3***
n/a
n/a
EI benefits ($)
373***
-63
40
186***
100*
137**
78
541***
851***
EI weeks (weeks)
1.3***
-0.4**
0.1
0.7***
0.3
0.4*
0.2
1.6**
2.6***
SA benefits ($)
-502***
-491***
-322***
-306***
-356***
-387***
-371***
-1,743***
-2,736***
Dependence on    income support (percentage points)
5.3***
-5.0***
-4.2***
-2.2***
-3.9***
-3.5***
-4.0***
n/a
n/a
2006 to 2008    Participants (n=1,568)
Employment earnings ($)
-4,830***
-4,514***
66
1,987***
2,130***
-
-
4,136***
-5,219**
Incidence of employment
(percentage points)
-9.1***
-3.7***
7.2***
9.1***
8.7***
-
-
n/a
n/a
EI benefits ($)
524***
-190***
-318***
162
136
-
-
-20
314
EI weeks (weeks)
1.7***
-0.6**
-1.1***
0.3
0.2
-
-
-0.6
0.6
SA benefits ($)
-470***
-875***
-618***
-524***
-523***
-
-
-1,666***
-3,016***
Dependence on    income support (percentage points)
7.7***
-5.4***
-7.5***
-5.7***
-5.2***
-
-
n/a
n/a
Sub-groups of former claimants
Youth (below 30 years old) – 2002 to 2005 participants    (n=1,115)
Employment earnings ($)
-2,947***
-1,079***
2,328***
1,200**
816
1,106
1,780**
7,229**
3,203
Incidence of employment
(percentage points)
-8.7***
3.9***
5.6***
4.1***
5.1***
5.8***
6.6***
n/a
n/a
EI benefits ($)
407***
-92
62
390***
233**
78
138
901***
1,216***
EI weeks (weeks)
1.6***
-0.5*
0.1
1.4***
0.7**
0.2
0.3
2.7**
3.9***
SA benefits ($)
-484***
-534***
-350***
-304***
-207***
-362***
-251***
-1,475***
-2,493***
Dependence on    income support (percentage points)
7.2***
-5.6***
-4.2***
-0.2
-1.2
-3.3***
-3.1***
n/a
n/a
Significance  level *** 1%;   ** 5%; * 10%
SA: Social  Assistance
Table B4. Cost-benefit results from the  social perspective for Skills Development
Total costs and benefits over participation (1    to 2 years) and 6 years post-program
Active claimants
(n=6,883)
Former claimants
(n=3,189)
Program cost
-$5,081
-$4,182
Marginal social costs of public funds
-$1,056
-$454
Employment earnings (including participant’s forgone earnings)
$9,372
$4,742
Fringe benefit
$1,406
$711
Net present value
(By how much do the benefits exceed the costs    6 years after participation?)
$4,640
$818
Cost-benefit ratio
(How much does it cost in EI part II funds to    achieve $1 in benefit 6 years after participation?)
$0.50
$0.80
Payback period
(How many years after participation would it    take for the benefits to recover the costs?)
5.1 years after participation
5.5 years after participation
Appendix C - Detailed results Skills Development-Apprentices
Table C1. Socio-demographic and labour  market characteristics of Skills Development-Apprentices participants
Active claimants
Former claimants
2003 to 2005
2013 to 2014
2003 to 2005
2013 to 2014
Number of observations
7,555
915
160
146
Gender
Male
94%
95%
89%
89%
Female
6%
5%
10%
10%
Age
Under 25
49%
14%
36%
19%
25 to 34
37%
57%
46%
58%
35 to 44
11%
21%
14%
18%
45 and over
3%
8%
5%
5%
Skills level    related to National Occupation Code associated with the last EI claim opened    before Skills Development-Apprentices participation
1
Managerial
0%
0%
1%
1%
University
0%
0%
1%
0%
College or apprenticeship training
91%
92%
58%
89%
Secondary or occupational training
5%
2%
16%
3%
On-the-job training
4%
4%
24%
7%
Key    Labour Market Indicators in the year preceding the start of participation
Earnings
2
$28,554
$39,761
3
$23,468
$38,470
3
Proportion employed
100%
100%
98%
98%
Proportion on Employment Insurance
15%
34%
48%
44%
Proportion on Social Assistance
1%
1%
4%
0%
Proportions may not add up to 100% due to rounding
1
Skill level    corresponds to the type and/or amount of training or education typically    required to work in the last occupation participants had before opening the    last EI claim they had before participating in EBSMs. A detailed definition    is provided in
Table B1
.
2
Average earnings for all individuals included in the study.    The average was calculated including participants who reported $0 earnings    during that year.
3
Earnings for 2013 to 2014    participants have been adjusted according to the Consumer Price Index (CPI),    published by Statistics Canada, to the 2002 base year.
Table C2. Labour market outcomes for active claimants who  started Skills Development-Apprentices in 2003 to 2005
Average outcomes
Pre-program period
After the program start year
5 year pre
4 year pre
3 year pre
2 year pre
1 year pre
Program start year
1 year
2 year
3 year
4year
5 year
6 year
7 year
Earnings including $0
$15,190
$18,590
$22,367
$25,974
$31,105
$30,895
$39,945
$47,597
$55,268
$62,487
$64,277
$66,510
$71,012
Earnings excluding $0
1
$16,518
$19,365
$23,019
$26,393
$31,179
$30,958
$40,351
$48,455
$56,810
$65,169
$67,628
$70,661
$75,507
Proportion employed
92%
96%
97%
98%
100%
100%
99%
98%
97%
96%
95%
94%
94%
Proportion on EI
18%
20%
21%
19%
17%
99%
63%
54%
39%
23%
21%
20%
16%
EI benefits
$666
$722
$750
$712
$625
$3,177
$2,190
$2,005
$1,526
$968
$1,059
$1,058
$930
Number of weeks on EI
2.32
2.38
2.37
2.14
1.79
9.18
5.94
5.1
3.73
2.34
2.63
2.51
2.15
Proportion on SA
3%
2%
2%
2%
1%
0%
1%
1%
1%
1%
1%
1%
1%
SA benefits
$94
$85
$74
$58
$27
$9
$16
$17
$20
$27
$39
$43
$49
Dependence on income support
5%
5%
4%
3%
2%
11%
7%
5%
4%
3%
3%
3%
3%
Proportion self employed
8%
9%
10%
10%
11%
15%
17%
18%
18%
19%
20%
17%
17%
N= 5,970. Data exclude individuals with  no Canada Revenue Agency data for the 5 years before participation.
1
Earnings outcomes excluding individuals who reported no earnings  in a given year.
SA: Social Assistance
Table C3. Labour  market outcomes for former claimants who started Skills Development-Apprentices  in 2003 to 2005
Average outcomes
Pre-program period
After the program start year
5 year pre
4 year pre
3 year pre
2 year pre
1 year pre
Program start year
1 year
2 year
3 year
4year
5 year
6 year
7 year
Earnings including $0
$15,804
$19,281
$23,059
$25,033
$24,416
$26,920
$33,744
$42,781
$46,336
$51,764
$52,234
$60,904
$58,193
Earnings excluding $0
1
$16,642
$20,138
$23,388
$25,759
$24,947
$27,310
$34,985
$44,711
$48,794
$56,617
$58,180
$65,360
$63,898
Proportion employed
95%
96%
99%
97%
98%
99%
97%
96%
95%
91%
90%
93%
91%
Proportion on EI
24%
26%
38%
48%
49%
42%
47%
42%
32%
29%
31%
36%
27%
EI benefits
$752
$1,015
$1,378
$1,665
$2,430
$1,361
$1,570
$1,332
$1,261
$1,279
$2,219
$2,139
$1,780
Number of weeks on EI
2.78
3.5
4.85
5.4
7.29
4.05
4.66
4.02
3.32
3.04
5.2
4.92
3.57
Proportion on SA
10%
6%
5%
2%
5%
6%
2%
2%
3%
4%
4%
5%
4%
SA benefits
$337
$219
$153
$85
$185
$181
$94
$40
$130
$121
$256
$261
$344
Dependence on income support
8%
8%
9%
8%
13%
8%
6%
5%
4%
5%
8%
8%
9%
Proportion self employed
9%
15%
16%
15%
18%
22%
19%
24%
25%
21%
23%
19%
24%
N= 143 Data exclude individuals with no  Canada Revenue Agency data for the 5 years before participation
1
Earnings outcomes excluding individuals who reported no earnings  in a given year.
SA: Social  Assistance
Appendix D - Detailed results Targeted Wage Subsidies
Table D1. Socio-demographic and labour  market characteristics of Targeted Wage Subsidies participants
Active claimants
Former claimants
2002 to 2005
2006 to 2008
2002 to 2005
2006 to 2008
Number of observations
315
176
553
202
Gender
Male
50%
44%
47%
44%
Female
50%
55%
53%
56%
Age
Under 25
14%
3%
17%
8%
25 to 34
31%
20%
37%
38%
35 to 44
29%
27%
27%
25%
45 and over
25%
50%
18%
29%
Marital status
Married or common-law
44%
59%
41%
46%
Widow/ divorced or separated
17%
14%
15%
10%
Single
38%
24%
41%
41%
Missing data / Unknown
2%
4%
3%
3%
Skills level    related to National Occupation Code associated with  the last EI claim opened before Targeted    Wage Subsidies participation
1
Managerial
8%
14%
3%
8%
University
6%
1%
6%
8%
College or apprenticeship training
26%
22%
31%
27%
Secondary or occupational training
41%
49%
39%
36%
On-the-job training
18%
15%
21%
21%
Key    Labour Market Indicators in the year preceding the start of participation
Earnings
2
$22,254
$29,075
3
$12,523
$15,635
3
Proportion Employed
97%
99%
87%
86%
Proportion on Employment Insurance
38%
19%
55%
58%
Proportion on Social Assistance
6%
3%
12%
10%
Proportions may not add up to 100% due to rounding
1
Skill level    corresponds to the type and/or amount of training or education typically    required to work in the last occupation participants had before opening the    last EI claim they had before participating in EBSMs. A detailed definition    is provided in
Table B1
.
2
Average earnings for all individuals included in the study.    The average was calculated including participants who reported $0 earnings    during that year.
3
Earnings for    2006 to 2008 participants have been adjusted by the Consumer Price    Index published by Statistics Canada, using 2002 as the base year.
Table D2. Incremental impacts for Targeted  Wage Subsidies – active claimants
Indicators
In-program period
Post-program period
Total     in- and post-program
Program start year
Additional year
1st year
2nd year
3rd year
4th year
5th year
Total post
Active claimants
2002 to 2005 Participants    (n=315)
Employment    earnings ($)
-1,304*
1,745*
976
554
2,690
3,654**
4,827***
12,700**
13,141*
Incidence    of employment
(percentage    points)
5.1***
9.6***
8.4***
7.4***
5.4***
8.0***
7.4***
n/a
n/a
EI benefits    ($)
-444**
-468**
40
376*
235
131
499**
1,281**
369
EI weeks    (weeks)
-0.5
-1.2*
1.0*
1.6***
1.5***
0.8
1.9***
6.8***
5.2**
SA benefits ($)
-5
32
21
60
72
84
24
260
287
Dependence on income    support (percentage points)
-2.3
-6.9***
0.0
1.5
1.4
0.6
2.2
n/a
n/a
Significance  level *** 1%;   ** 5%; * 10%
SA: Social  Assistance
Table D3. Incremental impacts for Targeted  Wage Subsidies – former claimants
Indicators
In-program period
Post-program period
Total     in- and post-program
Program start year
Additional year
1st year
2nd year
3rd year
4th year
5th year
Total post
Former claimants
2002 to 2005 Participants (n=553)
Employment    earnings ($)
1,850***
3,812***
2,114***
1,855**
2,387**
2,057*
2,252*
10,665***
16,326***
Incidence    of employment
(percentage    points)
9.0***
10.7***
5.5***
4.6***
5.0***
1.0
3.5*
n/a
n/a
EI    benefits ($)
112
467***
659***
510***
494***
278**
223
2,164***
2,743***
EI weeks    (weeks)
0.4
2.1***
2.2***
1.6***
1.3***
0.7*
0.3
6.1***
8.5***
SA benefits ($)
-406***
-556***
-397***
-320***
-337***
-386***
-275**
-1,714***
-2,677***
Dependence on income    support (percentage points)
-6.7***
-2.9***
-0.5
-0.9
-1.7
-2.8**
-2.7**
n/a
n/a
Significance  level *** 1%;   ** 5%; * 10%
SA: Social  Assistance
Table D4. Cost-benefit results from the social perspective  for Targeted Wage Subsidies
Total costs and benefits over participation (1    to 2 years) and 6 years post-program
Active claimants
(n=315)
Former claimants
(n=553)
Program cost
-$7,440
-$6,912
Marginal social costs of public funds
-$1,404
-$905
Employment earnings (including participant’s forgone earnings)
$12,260
$15,995
Fringe benefit
$1,839
$2,399
Net present value
(By how much do the benefits exceed the costs    6 years after participation?)
$5,256
$10,578
Cost-benefit ratio
(How much does it cost in EI part II funds to    achieve $1 in benefit 6 years after participation?)
$0.60
$0.40
Payback period
(How many years after participation would it    take for the benefits to recover the costs?)
4.3 years after participation
0.8 years after participation
Appendix  E - Detailed results Self-Employment
Table E1. Socio-demographic and labour  market characteristics of Self-Employment participants
Active claimants
Former claimants
2002 to 2005
2006 to 2008
2002 to 2005
2006 to 2008
Number of observations
1,390
658
404
194
Gender
Male
55%
48%
46%
35%
Female
45%
52%
54%
65%
Age
Under 25
3%
3%
5%
3%
25 to 34
30%
26%
31%
38%
35 to 44
35%
35%
33%
36%
45 and over
32%
36%
31%
24%
Marital status
Married or common-law
56%
51%
50%
51%
Widow/ divorced or separated
16%
15%
22%
13%
Single
25%
28%
25%
29%
Missing data / Unknown
3%
6%
3%
7%
Skills level    related to National Occupation Code associated with  the last EI claim opened before    Self-Employment participation
1
Managerial
13%
14%
8%
7%
University
15%
13%
16%
15%
College or apprenticeship training
38%
37%
32%
29%
Secondary or occupational training
25%
29%
30%
37%
On-the-job training
9%
7%
14%
12%
Key    Labour Market Indicators in the year preceding the start of participation
Earnings
2
$31,358
$31,370
3
$12,750
$12,222
3
Proportion Employed
98%
100%
78%
85%
Proportion on Employment Insurance
34%
35%
63%
58%
Proportion on Social Assistance
2%
3%
12%
10%
Proportions may not add up to 100% due to rounding
1
Skill level    corresponds to the type and/or amount of training or education typically    required to work in the last occupation participants had before opening the    last EI claim they had before participating in EBSMs. A detailed definition    is provided in
Table B1
.
2
Average earnings for all individuals included in the study.    The average was calculated including participants who reported $0 earnings    during that year.
3
Earnings for    2006 to 2008 participants have been adjusted by the Consumer Price    Index published by Statistics Canada, using 2002 as the base year.
Table E2. Incremental impacts for  Self-Employment – active claimants
Indicators
In-program period
Post-program period
Total     in- and post-program
Program start year
Additional year
1st year
2nd year
3rd year
4th year
5th year
Total post
Active claimants
2002 to 2005    Participants (n=1,390)
Employment earnings ($)
-9,470***
-13,904***
-10,951***
-10,353***
-10,365***
-9,647***
-8,865***
-50,181***
-73,555***
Incidence of employment
(percentage points)
-7.9***
-21.5*
-15.4***
-12.8***
-11.3***
-10.0***
-9.0***
n/a
n/a
EI benefits ($)
2,766***
-159***
-723***
-446***
-259***
-298***
-224***
-1,950***
657**
EI weeks (weeks)
7.6***
-1.2***
-1.8***
-1.0***
-0.2
-0.2
0.1
-3.1***
3.4***
SA benefits ($)
19
20
-13
-21
-61**
-76**
-93***
-263**
-224
Dependence on income support    (percentage points)
21.5***
11.7***
-2.7***
-2.1***
-0.8
-1.7***
-1.5**
n/a
n/a
2006 to 2008 Participants (n=658)
Employment earnings ($)
-10,558***
-15,267***
-13,493***
-12,430***
-13,046***
-
-
-38,970***
-64,794***
Incidence of employment
(percentage points)
-6.1***
-19.4***
-14.7***
-14.4***
-13.9***
-
-
n/a
n/a
EI benefits ($)
2,457***
-614***
-971***
-658***
-308*
-
-
-1,938***
-94
EI weeks (weeks)
5.8***
-1.9***
-2.4***
-1.6***
-0.8*
-
-
-4.9***
-1.0
SA benefits ($)
13
10
-31
-69
-117*
-
-
-217
-195
Dependence on income support    (percentage points)
18.0***
6.2***
-3.3***
-2.0*
-0.3
-
-
n/a
n/a
Sub-groups    of active claimants
“Long-Tenured workers”-    2007 to 2009 participants (n=337)
Employment earnings ($)
-10,627***
-17,427***
-14,851***
-14,529***
-12,146***
-
-
-41,525***
-69,579***
Incidence of employment
(percentage points)
-5.3***
-22.4***
-15.5***
-14.7***
-8.4***
-
-
n/a
n/a
EI benefits ($)
2,821***
-118
-963***
-604***
-406**
-
-
-1,973***
729
EI weeks (weeks)
6.4***
-0.6
-2.4***
-1.3**
-0.9**
-
-
-4.6***
1.2
SA benefits ($)
32
11
-19
-66
-99**
-
-
-184**
-141
Dependence on income support    (percentage points)
16.9***
13.1***
-6.0***
-3.0**
-4.0***
-
-
n/a
n/a
Significance  level *** 1%;   ** 5%; * 10%
SA: Social  Assistance
Table E3. Incremental impacts for  Self-Employment – former claimants
Indicators
In-program period
Post-program period
Total in- and post-program
Program start year
Additional year
1st year
2nd year
3rd year
4th     year
5th     year
Total     post
Former claimants
2002 to 2005 Participants (n=403)
Employment earnings ($)
-6,188***
-9,423***
-7,815***
-6,515***
-7,510***
-5,655***
-5,694***
-33,189***
-48,801***
Incidence of employment
(percentage points)
-18.7***
-18.3***
-14.4***
-10.9***
-7.9***
-5.1**
-4.2*
n/a
n/a
EI benefits ($)
727***
-394***
-387***
-63
62
0
-185
-573
-241
EI weeks (weeks)
2.7***
-1.6***
-1.4***
-0.5
-0.1
-0.6
-0.8
-3.4*
-2.2
SA benefits ($)
-439***
-349***
-253***
-261***
-243**
-264**
-178
-1,200**
-1,988***
Dependence on income support    (percentage points)
7.4***
-5.5***
-5.1***
-3.8***
-0.8
-2.6*
-2.5
n/a
n/a
Significance  level *** 1%;   ** 5%; * 10%
SA: Social  Assistance
Appendix F - Detailed results Job Creation Partnerships
Table F1. Socio-demographic and labour  market characteristics of Job Creation Partnerships participants
Active claimants
Former claimants
2002 to 2005
2006 to 2008
2002 to 2005
2006 to 2008
Number of observations
624
521
1,035
396
Gender
Male
60%
59%
52%
48%
Female
40%
41%
48%
52%
Age
Under 25
12%
10%
13%
11%
25 to 34
28%
28%
29%
29%
35 to 44
33%
31%
31%
29%
45 and over
27%
30%
27%
31%
Marital status
Married or common-law
45%
43%
29%
35%
Widow/ divorced or separated
15%
14%
20%
21%
Single
37%
39%
47%
40%
Missing data / Unknown
2%
4%
3%
4%
Skills level    related to National Occupation Code associated with  the last EI claim opened before Job    Creation Partnerships participation
1
Managerial
4%
3%
4%
4%
University
3%
3%
4%
2%
College or apprenticeship training
23%
26%
22%
23%
Secondary or occupational training
38%
40%
38%
41%
On-the-job training
32%
27%
33%
30%
Key    Labour Market Indicators in the year preceding the start of participation
Earnings
2
$19,084
$23,071
3
$8,712
$11,533
3
Proportion Employed
97%
99%
81%
86%
Proportion on Employment Insurance
41%
34%
61%
52%
Proportion on Social Assistance
10%
6%
28%
21%
Proportions may not add up to 100% due to rounding
1
Skill level    corresponds to the type and/or amount of training or education typically    required to work in the last occupation participants had before opening the    last EI claim they had before participating in EBSMs. A detailed definition    is provided in
Table B1
.
2
Average earnings for all individuals included in the study.    The average was calculated including participants who reported $0 earnings    during that year.
3
Earnings for    2006 to 2008 participants have been adjusted by the Consumer Price    Index published by Statistics Canada, using 2002 as the base year.
Table F2. Incremental impacts for Job  Creation Partnerships – active claimants
Indicators
In-program     period
Post-program     period
Total     in- and post-program
Program     start year
Additional     year
1st year
2nd year
3rd year
4th year
5th year
Total     post
Active claimants
2002 to 2005    Participants (n=624)
Employment    earnings ($)
-6,017***
-1,958**
2,429**
2,126
3,584**
4,424***
4,720**
17,283**
9,308
Incidence    of employment
(percentage    points)
n/a
n/a
10.5***
8.4***
12.6***
10.5***
12.1***
n/a
n/a
EI    benefits ($)
1,533***
-348**
165
440***
685***
760***
556***
2,605***
3,790***
EI weeks    (weeks)
6.0***
-1.1**
0.7***
1.5***
2.0***
2.4***
1.9***
8.5***
13.5***
SA benefits ($)
252***
113
-46
-109
-162
-173
-11
-501
-137
Dependence on income    support (percentage points)
16.9***
-1.0
-0.5
-0.8
-0.3
1.2
1.8
n/a
n/a
2006 to 2008    Participants (n=521)
Employment    earnings ($)
-6,460***
9
144
-950
-1,144
-
-
-1,950
-8,402**
Incidence    of employment
(percentage    points)
n/a
n/a
7.0***
9.8***
3.7
-
-
n/a
n/a
EI    benefits ($)
2,046***
-438**
314
616***
503**
-
-
1,433***
3,040***
EI weeks    (weeks)
6.1***
-1.3**
0.9
1.6***
1.4**
-
-
4.0***
8.8***
SA benefits ($)
-11
46
48
57
14
-
-
119
154
Dependence on income    support (percentage points)
12.3***
-3.7**
1.6
0.7
2.7
-
-
n/a
n/a
Significance  level *** 1%;   ** 5%; * 10%
SA: Social  Assistance
Table F3. Incremental impacts for Job Creation  Partnerships – former claimants
Indicators
In-program     period
Post-program     period
Total     in- and post-program
Program     start year
Additional     year
1st year
2nd year
3rd year
4th year
5th year
Total     post
Former claimants
2002 to 2005    Participants (n=1,035)
Employment earnings ($)
-2,413***
265
1,159**
727
1,064
872
1,009
4,832
2,683
Incidence of employment
(percentage points)
n/a
n/a
5.6***
3.8***
5.0***
5.9***
5.8***
n/a
n/a
EI benefits ($)
187**
-87
111
163*
167
105
155
700**
801**
EI weeks (weeks)
0.4
-0.6**
0.1
0.3
0.3
0.2
0.2
1.0
0.9
SA benefits ($)
260***
146
-158*
-243**
-232**
-198*
-26
-858*
-452
Dependence on income support    (percentage points)
5.6***
-0.5
-2.6**
-2.0*
-1.9*
-1.7
-1.1
n/a
n/a
2006 to 2008 Participants (n=396)
Employment earnings ($)
-2,732***
1,041
1,240
454
1,727
-
-
3,431
1,747
Incidence of employment
(percentage points)
n/a
n/a
8.9***
6.1**
6.9***
-
-
n/a
n/a
EI benefits ($)
146
-1
256
655***
83
-
-
994**
1,139**
EI weeks (weeks)
0.8*
0.3
1.3**
2.0***
0.3
-
-
3.6***
4.7***
SA benefits ($)
-113
-290
-327
-97
-92
-
-
-516
-917
Dependence on income support    (percentage points)
1.3
-4.6***
-2.4
1.7
0.4
-
-
n/a
n/a
Significance  level *** 1%;   ** 5%; * 10%
SA: Social  Assistance
Table F4. Cost-benefit results from the  social perspective for Job Creation Partnerships
Total costs and benefits over participation (1    to 2 years) and 6 years post-program
Active claimants
(n=624)
Former claimants
(n=1,035)
Program cost
-$8,790
-$6,636
Marginal social costs of public funds
-$2,272
-$1,270
Employment earnings (including participant’s forgone earnings)
$8,367
$2,445
Fringe benefit
$1,255
$367
Net present value
(By how much do the benefits exceed the costs    within 6 years after participation?)
-$1,440
-$5,094
Cost-benefit ratio
(How much does it cost in EI part II funds to    achieve $1 in benefit 6 years after participation?)
$1.20
$4.30
Payback period
(How many years after participation would it    take for the benefits to recover the costs?)
6.5 years after participation
14.1 years after participation
Appendix  G - Detailed results Employment Assistance Services only
Table G1. Socio-demographic and labour market  characteristics of Employment Assistance Services participants
Active claimants
Former claimants
2002 to 2005
2006 to 2008
2002 to 2005
2006 to 2008
Number of     observations
38,577
20,997
34,518
26,557
Gender
Male
54%
49%
53%
47%
Female
46%
51%
47%
53%
Age
Under 25
11%
11%
13%
11%
25 to 34
28%
25%
31%
31%
35 to 44
30%
28%
30%
28%
45 and over
30%
35%
25%
30%
Marital status
Married or common-law
41%
36%
31%
27%
Widow/ divorced or separated
17%
18%
19%
20%
Single
39%
41%
46%
46%
Missing data / Unknown
3%
5%
5%
7%
Skills level related to National Occupation Code associated    with  the last EI claim opened before    Employment Assistance Services participation1
Managerial
6%
6%
4%
4%
University
7%
5%
5%
4%
College or apprenticeship    training
29%
29%
26%
27%
Secondary or occupational training
37%
37%
37%
37%
On-the-job training
21%
23%
29%
28%
Key Labour    Market Indicators in the year preceding the start of participation
Earnings2
$24,638
$24,3213
$12,863
$15,2293
Proportion Employed
97%
99%
85%
89%
Proportion on Employment Insurance
37%
33%
52%
48%
Proportion on Social Assistance
7%
10%
21%
20%
Proportions    may not add up to 100% due to rounding
1
Skill level corresponds to the type and/or amount of training or    education typically required to work in the last occupation participants had    before opening the last EI claim they had before participating in EBSMs. A    detailed definition is provided in
Table B1
.
2
Average earnings for all    individuals included in the study. The average was calculated including    participants who reported $0 earnings during that year.
3
Earnings for 2006 to 2008    participants have been adjusted by the Consumer Price Index published by    Statistics Canada, using 2002 as the base year.
Table G2. Incremental impacts for Employment Assistance  Services
Indicators
In-program     period
Post-program     period
Total     in- and post-program
1st year
2nd year
3rd year
4th year
5th year
Total     post
Active claimants
2002 to 2005    Participants (n=23,119 or a random sample of 60% of participants)
Employment    earnings ($)
-1,831***
-189
431
554*
627
1,062***
2,485*
654
Incidence    of employment
(percentage    points)
1.1***
3.0***
2.3***
2.2***
1.5***
2.0***
n/a
n/a
EI    benefits ($)
70
-417***
-124***
-109**
7
25
-618***
-548***
EI weeks    (weeks)
0.2
-1.3***
-0.3**
-0.3**
0.0
0.1
-1.8***
-1.6***
SA benefits ($)
141***
150***
84***
63***
43**
95***
435***
576***
Dependence on income    support (percentage points)
1.6***
-1.9***
0.2
0.2
0.6*
0.8**
n/a
n/a
2006 to 2008    Participants (n=20,997)
Employment    earnings ($)
-2,040***
-969***
-627**
-602**
-
-
-2,198***
-4,238***
Incidence    of employment
(percentage    points)
1.3***
1.7***
1.6***
0.8*
-
-
n/a
n/a
EI    benefits ($)
-110**
-530***
-253***
-164***
-
-
-946***
-1,056***
EI weeks    (weeks)
-0.2
-1.5***
-0.6***
-0.4***
-
-
-2.5***
-2.7***
SA benefits ($)
242***
494***
472***
368***
-
-
1,334***
1,576***
Dependence on income    support (percentage points)
1.6***
0.3
2.6***
2.7***
-
-
n/a
n/a
Sub-groups    of active claimants
Youth (below 30 years old) – 2002 to 2005 participants (n=9,591)
Employment    earnings ($)
-1,347***
-481*
-493
-161
267
85
-784
-2,131
Incidence    of employment
(percentage    points)
0.6*
3.2***
3.5***
3.7***
3.6***
2.4***
n/a
n/a
EI    benefits ($)
-135***
-483***
-8
-67
105**
121**
-332**
-468***
EI weeks    (weeks)
-0.4*
-1.6***
0.1
-0.2
0.3**
0.4**
-1**
-1.4**
SA benefits ($)
151***
190***
107***
54**
14
70***
435***
585***
Dependence on income    support (percentage points)
0.3
-2.7***
1.6***
0.7*
0.8**
1.5***
n/a
n/a
Older workers (55 years old and over) – 2002 to 2005    participants (n=3,035)
Employment    earnings ($)
-1,465***
1,330***
2,549***
3,183***
3,749***
4,283***
15,094***
13,629***
Incidence    of employment
(percentage    points)
2.4***
8.1***
8.5***
7.8***
9***
9.6***
n/a
n/a
EI    benefits ($)
186*
-298***
-211**
-5
119
147
-248
-62
EI weeks    (weeks)
0.7*
-0.8**
-0.5
0.1
0.3
0.4
-0.6
0.1
SA benefits ($)
26
68**
54*
56
66*
82**
325**
351**
Dependence on income    support (percentage points)
0.8
-3.7***
-1.6*
-1.6*
-1.9*
-2.6**
n/a
n/a
“Long-Tenured workers”- 2007 to 2009 participants (n=9,429)
Employment    earnings ($)
-2,671***
-375
504
793*
-
-
921
-1,749
Incidence    of employment
(percentage    points)
0.3
2.3***
1.2**
1.2**
-
-
n/a
n/a
EI    benefits ($)
391***
-411***
-423***
-251***
-
-
-1,086***
-695***
EI weeks    (weeks)
0.8***
-1.1***
-1.0***
-0.6***
-
-
-2.7***
-1.9***
SA benefits ($)
234***
335***
257***
204***
-
-
796***
1,030***
Dependence on income    support (percentage points)
3.1***
-0.6
0.1
0.3
-
-
n/a
n/a
Significance  level *** 1%;   ** 5%; * 10%
SA: Social  Assistance
Table G3. Incremental impacts related to the  timing of participation in Employment Assistance Services
Cohorts
(start of EAS-only after start of an EI claim)
n=
In-program
Post-program period
Total impact
post-program
Total impact in- and    post- program
1 year
2 years
3 years
4 years
5 years
Employment earnings ($)
1 to 4 weeks
13,319
152
1,024***
2,729***
3,561***
4,366***
4,484***
16,164***
16,316***
5 to 8 weeks
4,714
-1,487***
815***
2,222***
2,732***
3,412***
3,238***
12,418***
10,931***
9 to 12 weeks
3,721
-2,754***
288
1,871***
2,729***
3,443***
3,279***
11,609***
8,855***
2nd quarter
6,549
-4,522***
-311
562*
1,466***
1,703***
1,979***
5,399***
877
3rd quarter
3,236
-6,536***
663*
1,154***
1,805***
2,277***
2,442***
8,342***
1,806
4th quarter
2,151
-5,586***
825*
-194
87
899
852
2,469
-3,117
Incidence of employment (percentage points)
1 to 4 weeks
13,319
2.6***
2.2***
1.8***
1.3***
0.7
-0.4
n/a
n/a
5 to 8 weeks
4,714
2.1***
2.1***
2.2***
1.1*
0.2
-0.6
n/a
n/a
9 to 12 weeks
3,721
0.7
1.0*
1.0
0.8
0.0
-0.8
n/a
n/a
2nd quarter
6,549
-1.4***
0.9*
0.2
0.3
-0.5
-0.7
n/a
n/a
3rd quarter
3,236
-3.9***
1.4**
1.6**
1.4*
-0.3
-0.3
n/a
n/a
4th quarter
2,151
-6.3***
1.6***
0.9
0.9
1.1
0.4
n/a
n/a
EI Benefits ($)
1 to 4 weeks
13,319
-20
-64*
-154***
-93***
6
52
-253**
-274**
5 to 8 weeks
4,714
943***
-229***
-138***
-65
17
85*
-330**
613***
9 to 12 weeks
3,721
1,251***
-489***
-244***
-134***
-48
123**
-791***
459**
2nd quarter
6,549
1,669***
-807***
-255***
-123***
-30
50
-1,164***
504***
3rd quarter
3,236
1,803***
-1,646***
-185***
-93
-12
81
-1,855***
-51
4th quarter
2,151
639***
-2,040***
-229***
-249***
-133
-55
-2,706***
-2,067***
* Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;    *** significant at 1%
Table G4. Incremental time of return to  employment for Employment Assistance Services participants based on timing of  participation
Cohorts
(start of EAS-only after start of an EI claim)
1 to 4 weeks
5 to 8 weeks
9 to 12 week
2nd quarter
3rd quarter
4th quarter
(N=13,319)
(N=4,714)
(N=3,721)
(N=6,549)
(N=3,236)
(N=2,151)
Time of Return to Employment (in    weeks)
4.1***
1.0***
-0.4**
-1.7***
-1.4***
-0.1
* Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Table G5. Cost-benefit results from the  social perspective for Employment Assistance Services
Total costs and benefits    over participation (1 to 2 years) and 6 years post-program
Active claimants
(n=23,119)
Program cost
-$252
Marginal social costs of public funds
-$183
Employment earnings (including participant’s forgone earnings)
$1,200
Fringe benefit
$180
Net present value
(By how much do the benefits exceed the costs    within 6 years after participation?)
$944
Cost-benefit ratio
(How much does it cost in EI part II funds to    achieve $1 in benefit 6 years after participation?)
$0.20
Payback period
(How many years after participation would it    take for the benefits to recover the costs?)
5.2 years after participation
Appendix H. List of nine studies included in  the synthesis report
Table H1. Overview of studies  included in this summary report
Study
Evidence included in this summary    report
Methods
Reference period
Observation period
Analysis of EBSM Profile, Outcomes and    Medium-Term Incremental Impacts    for 2002 to 2005 Participants in Alberta (Completed in 2014)
- Incremental    impacts for participants including youth and older workers
- Profile and    socio-demographic characteristics of participants
-    Non-experimental method using propensity score matching in combination with    Difference-in-Differences
- Statistical profiling
2002 to 2005    participants
7 years between    2002 and 2011
(that is, 2 years    in program and 5 years post-program)
Effects of the Timing of Participation in Employment    Assistance Services in Alberta (Completed in 2014)
- Incremental    impacts
- Non-experimental    method using propensity score matching in combination with    Difference-in-Differences
- Statistical    profiling
Cost-Benefit Analysis of Employment Benefits and Support    Measures (Completed in 2016)
- Cost-benefit    analysis
- Non-experimental    method using propensity score matching in combination with    Difference-in-Differences
- Cost analysis
8 years between    2002 and 2013
(that is, 2 years    in-program and 6 years post-program)
Analysis    of EBSMs Profile, Outcomes and    Incremental Impacts for 2006 to 2008 Participants in Alberta (Completed in    2015)
- Incremental    impacts
- Profile and    socio-demographic characteristics of participants
-    Non-experimental method using propensity score matching in combination with    Difference-in-Differences
- Statistical    profiling
2006 to 2008    participants
5 years between    2006 and 2012
(that is, 2 years    in-program and 3 years post-program)
Analysis of EBSMs Profile, Outcomes, and Incremental    Impacts for EI Claimants Category “Long-Tenured Workers” in Alberta    (Completed in 2016)
- Incremental    impacts
- Statistical    profile of socio-demographic characteristics
- Propensity    score matching and Difference-in-Differences
- Statistical    profiling
2007 to 2009    participants
5 years between    2007 and 2013
(that is, 2 years    in-program and 3 years post-program)
Study on Employment Assistance Services (Completed in 2014)
- Program design    and delivery
- Challenges and    lessons learned
- 8 key    informants interviews
- Literature and    document review
Design and    delivery at the time of the data collection (that is., 2013)
Study on Workplace Training in
Alberta (Completed in 2016)
- Program design    and delivery
- Challenges and    lessons learned
- 3 key    informants interviews
- Literature and    document review
-Questionnaire    filled by Alberta officials s
Design and    delivery at the time of the data collection (that is, 2015)
Study on Study on Work Foundations / Occupational Training    in Alberta (Completed in 2016)
- Program design    and delivery
- Challenges and    lessons learned
- 5 key    informants interviews
- Literature and    document review
- Questionnaire    filled by Alberta officials
Study of Apprenticeship Technical Training Component of the    Occupational Training Program
in Alberta (Completed in 2016)
- Program design    and delivery
- Challenges and    lessons learned
- 4 key    informants interviews
- Literature and    document review
- Questionnaire    filled by Alberta officials
Footnotes
Footnote 1
Long-tenured  workers covered in the evaluation are individuals who had long-term attachment  to the labour market but not necessarily a long tenure with the same employer.
Return to footnote
1
referrer
Footnote 2
The estimates of  Figure i represent an arithmetic average of the annual incidence of employment  estimates reported in the annexes.
Return to footnote
2
referrer
Footnote 3
The  incremental impacts on earnings are exclusively derived from Canada Revenue  Agency’s income tax records.
Return to footnote
3
referrer
Footnote 4
When  interpreting qualitative findings, readers should keep in mind that those are  based on the perception of a small number of key informants (ranging between 3  and 8) who are directly involved in the design or delivery of the program.  Their perception may be representative of their own region or community but not  necessarily of the entire province. Since the number of key informants  interviewed in each study is small, the number of informants who reported a  specific finding is not indicated in the report.
Return to footnote
4
referrer
Footnote 5
Former  claimants who received maternity or parental benefits were not covered by the  evaluation given the difficulty in finding a suitable comparison group.
Return to footnote
5
referrer
Footnote 6
Full  details about the incremental impact methodology can be found in the following  report
:
Stream 1 study for 2013-2014:  national level analysis of EBSM incremental impacts. Methodology Report, Evaluation  Directorate, ESDC. September 16, 2013.
Return to footnote
6
referrer
Footnote 7
Incremental impacts  on earnings are estimated relative to pre-participation levels and to the  comparison group. They are estimated using current dollars.
Return to footnote
7
referrer
Footnote 8
When  interpreting qualitative findings, readers should keep in mind that those are  based on the perception of a small number of key informants (ranging between 3  and 8) who are directly involved in the design or delivery of the program.  Their perception may be representative of their own region or community but not  necessarily of the entire province. Since the number of key informants  interviewed in each study is small, the number of informants who reported a specific  finding is not indicated in the report.
Return to footnote
8
referrer
Footnote 9
Alberta Community and  Social Services (formerly Human Services). Transitioning Supports for  Apprenticeship-related Programs from Human Services to Innovation and Advanced  Education. July 22, 2015.
Questions  and answers
Accessed September 23, 2016
Return to footnote
9
referrer
Footnote 10
When  interpreting qualitative findings, readers should keep in mind that those are  based on the perception of a small number of key informants (ranging between 3  and 8) who are directly involved in the design or delivery of the program.  Their perception may be representative of their own region or community but not  necessarily of the entire province. Since the number of key informants  interviewed in each study is small, the number of informants who reported a  specific finding is not indicated in the report.
Return to footnote
10
referrer
Footnote 11
Red  Seal. 2014. Apprenticeship Completion, Certification and Outcomes. Ottawa: Red  Seal.
Return to footnote
11
referrer
Footnote 12
Patrick  Coe. 2013. “Apprenticeship programme requirements and apprenticeship completion  rates in Canada.” Journal of Vocational Education and Training. 65(4): 575−605.
Return to footnote
12
referrer
Footnote 13
Employment  & Training Programs and Services
Accessed February 29, 2016
Return to footnote
13
referrer
Footnote 14
When  interpreting qualitative findings, readers should keep in mind that those are  based on the perception of a small number of key informants (ranging between 3  and 8) who are directly involved in the design or delivery of the program.  Their perception may be representative of their own region or community but not  necessarily of the entire province. Since the number of key informants  interviewed in each study is small, the number of informants who reported a  specific finding is not indicated in the report.
Return to footnote
14
referrer
Footnote 15
Sébastien  LaRochelle-Côté and Sharanjit Uppal, "The Financial Well-Being of the  Self-Employed,"
Perspectives on  Labour and Income
, vol. 23, no. 4, Winter 2011.
Return to footnote
15
referrer
Footnote 16
When  interpreting qualitative findings, readers should keep in mind that those are  based on the perception of a small number of key informants (ranging between 3  and 8) who are directly involved in the design or delivery of the program.  Their perception may be representative of their own region or community but not  necessarily of the entire province. Since the number of key informants  interviewed in each study is small, the number of informants who reported a  specific finding is not indicated in the report.
Return to footnote
16
referrer
Footnote 17
The estimates of  Figure 9 represent an arithmetic average of the annual incidence of employment  estimates reported in the annexes.
Return to footnote
17
referrer
Footnote 18
When  interpreting qualitative findings, readers should keep in mind that those are  based on the perception of a small number of key informants who are directly  involved in the design or delivery of the program. Their perception may be  representative of their own region or community but not necessarily of the entire  province. Since the number of key informants interviewed in each study is small  (ranging between 3 and 8), the number of informants who reported a specific  finding is not indicated in the report.
Return to footnote
18
referrer
Report a problem or mistake on this page
Please select all that apply:
A link, button or video is not working
It has a spelling mistake
Information is missing
Information is outdated or wrong
Login error when trying to access an account
I can't find what I'm looking for
Other issue not in this list
Submit
Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries,
contact us
.
Date modified:
2022-04-14