Evaluation of the Work-Sharing Program
Official title:
Evaluation of the Work-Sharing Program, March 21, 2016
Alternate formats
Download PDF version (810 KB)
Large print, braille,
MP3
(audio), e-text and
DAISY
formats are available on demand by
ordering online
or calling 1 800 O-Canada (1-800-622-6232). If you use a teletypewriter (
TTY
), call 1-800-926-9105.
Table of contents
List of tables
Executive summary
Management response
Introduction
1.1 Overview
1.2 Background
1.3 Objective
1.4 Eligibility
1.5 Delivery
1.6 Temporary measures
Key findings
2.1 Continued needs for the program
2.2 Alignment with government priorities
2.3 Alignment with federal roles and responsibilities
2.4 Achievement of expected outcomes
2.5 Impacts
2.6 Services delivery
2.7 Demonstration of efficiency and economy
Conclusions
3.1 Conclusions
3.2 Recommendations
Appendix I - Lines evidence
Appendix II - Evaluation matrix
Footnotes
List of tables
Table 1 - Changes in Work-Sharing Programs in selected countries during the  2008-2009 recession
Table 2 - Participation and  benefits paid to Work-Sharing participants
Table 3 - Average work  reductions, weekly benefits, and duration of Work-Sharing claims
Table 4 - Distribution of  Work-Sharing claim durations, by fiscal year in which the claim started
Table 5 - Estimated layoffs  averted and postponed by the Work-Sharing Program
Table 6 - Layoff within 6  months of the Work-Sharing Agreement termination, by the year the claim started
Executive summary
Program objective
Work-Sharing is an adjustment program designed to help  employers and workers avoid layoffs when there is a temporary reduction in the  normal level of business activity that is beyond the control of the employer.  Layoffs are avoided by offering Employment Insurance Part I income support to  workers willing to work a temporarily reduced work week while their company  recovers. The goal is for all participating employees to return to normal  working hours by the end of the term of the Work-Sharing agreement.
The program helps employers retain skilled employees and  avoid the costs of recruiting and training new employees when business returns  to normal levels. It also helps employees maintain their skills and jobs while  supplementing their wages with EI benefits for the days they are not working.  While the Work-Sharing program primarily responds to temporary economic  recessions, the program also has special measures which can be used to assist  employers affected by a disaster or state of emergency.
In response to the high level of uncertainty faced by many  businesses during the 2008-2009 recession which was both rapid and steep, the  Work-Sharing program introduced a number of temporary changes to help firms  remain viable during the agreement period. The current evaluation places  particular emphasis on the assessment of recent program changes, both temporary  and permanent, implemented in response to the economic recession
Footnote
1
.
Evaluation key findings
Overall,  the evaluation found that the changes introduced during the 2008-2009 recession  were effective as they allowed a large number of employers to avoid unnecessary  layoffs when faced with a temporary downturn in business that was beyond their  control, thereby meeting the objective of the program. That said, the changes  did not prevent structural adjustments that may occur during and after a  recession (i.e., affecting the likelihood of a firm completely shutting down or  workers being laid off after the termination of a Work-Sharing agreement).
Program  participation is highly counter cyclical. That is, the number of Work-Sharing  claims increase during economic recessions and decline during periods of  recovery and economic growth. During the last recession, participation and  program expenditures went from a low of just over 10,000 claims and $11 million  to a high of about 139,000 claims and $235 million. While, at peak participation,  Work-Sharing as a share of total employment accounted for 0.83% of total  employment, it is important to note that the program offered a form of job  stability and financial security to a large number of employees which can have  a multiplier effect on communities.
Averted layoffs
Many participating employers attributed Work-Sharing with helping their  company avoid temporary layoffs and returning to normal levels of  production.  However, obtaining a precise  estimate of layoffs averted can be challenging and the best estimates typically  involve a number of assumptions based on observed work reductions. The  evaluation found that a large percentage of layoffs were averted. This  evaluation estimates that a layoff has been averted when it has remained  averted for at least 6 months following the agreement termination.
On average between the years 2000-01 and 2010-11, 60% of layoffs averted  during the agreement, remained averted for at least 6 months, resulting in an  estimated net effect of 11,189 and 24,385 layoffs averted during the years  2008-09 and 2009-10 respectively.  This  was an improvement over the estimated 49% of layoffs averted for 6 months  during the 1990-91 to 2001-02 period, as documented by the 2004 Work-Sharing  evaluation
The  temporary measures which extended the maximum agreement length during the  2008-2009 recession, were found to have no influence on the likelihood of  workers being laid off in the six months following the expiry of the  Work-Sharing agreement. Rather, the layoff rates followed a counter cyclical  pattern regardless of the whether or not agreement extensions were  available
The likelihood of a firm completely shutting  down after the termination of an agreement was found to be very low for firms  with over 5 employees on Work-Sharing, and virtually nil for firms with over 25  employees on Work-Sharing
More  than 75% of employers said that the costs of lay-offs in terms of subsequent  recruiting and training would have been very substantial and that avoiding this  was the principal benefit of applying to the program
Other key findings
The  evaluation did not find any evidence to suggest that the program’s  take-up, in terms of volume of participants, increased beyond what could be  expected from its typical counter cyclicality. However, the average agreement  size increased during the recent recession, both in terms of employees claiming  Work-Sharing per employer, and in terms of the average claim duration
It was  found that Work-Sharing has positive impacts on communities and employees.  Work-Sharing supports communities by averting a number of layoffs and allowing  employees to retain their jobs, maintain non-salary benefits, reduce their  stress and increase their economic security
Due to  the relatively small scale of the program when compared to the size of the  total labour force, the ability of the program to act as an automatic  stabilizer during a recession is limited
Service  delivery and policy implementation varied between regions but overall,  employers were satisfied with the services provided by the program
The  program was successful in responding to the large increase in the number of  applications and enquiries. On the employee (recipient) side, however, some  raised the issue of delays in the delivery of initial benefits, as well as to  their own lack of knowledge regarding program benefits, criteria and the  associated implications of their participation
Prior to  the 2008-2009 recession, there were limited resources directed towards creating  awareness of the Work-Sharing program.   Increased media attention received courtesy of references in the Budget  2009, raised the program’s profile to both the public and employers alike
Larger  companies who had the resources and business expertise to develop comprehensive  plans were better able to anticipate the recovery process in their plans.  Comparatively, smaller firms or those whose issues were related to overall  economic conditions and unforeseen circumstances had more difficulty in  predicting full recovery
Employers used the additional weeks of benefits  to apply for longer agreements during the recession. The evaluation also found  evidence that a portion of claimants were laid off after the termination of  their agreements, and that the longer agreement lengths did not have any impact  at reducing the rate of these layoffs
Recommendations
Based on the key findings, the evaluation makes the  following nine recommendations:
explore  ways to improve the speed of the delivery of benefits to employees
explore  ways to improve reporting processes for smaller companies
examine  the multiple signing authorities and how the process can be streamlined
ensure  greater consistency in program delivery across the country
improve  the efficiency of program delivery by learning from the region’s best  practices
draw upon lessons learned from the  implementation of temporary measures during the 2008-2009 economic recession to  assess whether similar measures should be considered during future recessions  (e.g. examine the continued relevance of the recovery plan or alternate ways to  further streamline the application for employers)
increase  outreach activities to employers. Ensure that potential beneficiaries of the  program are aware of it
increase  outreach activities to employees. Provide greater clarity on the programs  benefits, criteria and all the associated implications to their  participation
review  the application process and explore how the program might be more widely used  by the non-manufacturing sectors
Management response
Introduction
The  Skills and Employment Branch (SEB) and Program Operations Branch (POB) would  like to thank those who participated in conducting the evaluation of the  Work-Sharing program. In particular, SEB and POB acknowledge the contributions  of all key informants who participated in interviews during the course of this  evaluation, including employees, employers, and program officers. Additionally,  SEB and POB extend sincere appreciation to departmental colleagues from various  operational and policy units who contributed to the development of the  Management Response.
Work-Sharing  is an adjustment program designed to help employers and workers avoid layoffs  when there is a temporary reduction in the normal level of business activity  that is beyond the control of the employer. Layoffs are avoided by offering  Employment Insurance (EI) Part I income support to workers willing to work a  reduced work week while their company recovers. The goal is for all  participating employees to return to normal working hours by the end of the  term of the Work-Sharing agreement. The program helps employers retain skilled  employees and avoid the costs of recruiting and training new employees when  business recovers. It also helps employees maintain their skills and jobs while  supplementing their wages with EI benefits for the days they are not working.  While the Work-Sharing program has largely responded to temporary economic  recessions, the program can also be used to assist employers affected by a  disaster or state of emergency.
Recognizing  the high level of uncertainty faced by businesses caused by the 2008-2009  economic recession, the Government of Canada put in place a stimulus package  among the G-7 countries—the Economic Action Plan. With regards to Work-Sharing,  temporary policy measures were implemented quickly in Budgets 2009, 2010, and  2011 and Fiscal Update 2011 to help businesses remain viable during the  recession.
Significant  increases in both the number of Work-Sharing enquiries and applications  required scaling up of regional expertise from a service delivery, policy and  processing perspective. Resources were mobilized quickly and effectively to  ensure a timely response. In that context, the temporary measures were  critical, giving the economy time to rebound and offering financial security to  a large number of employers, employees and communities.  Permanent policy adjustments were  subsequently made in 2011 to make the program more flexible and efficient.
SEB  and POB agree with the evaluation findings, and propose the following  Management Response, in collaboration with Processing and Payment Services  Branch (PPSB) and the Citizen Service Branch (CSB).
Key evaluation findings
Overall,  the findings of the Work-Sharing evaluation are positive and demonstrate that  there is a continued need for the program, particularly during times of  economic downturn.  The evaluation found  that the program is achieving its expected outcomes and contributing to both  monetary (e.g. financial security) and non-monetary benefits for employers,  employees and communities (e.g. positive impacts to employee morale,  improvements in employee/firm relations).   Moreover, both employees and employers are reportedly satisfied with the  service provided by the program with employers being especially positive about  the degree of government support they received.
Most  importantly, the evaluation found that the program was particularly effective  during the economic downturn. The evaluation found that overwhelmingly firms  which participated in Work-Sharing were unlikely to completely shut-down after  the termination of their Work-Sharing agreement. This suggests that the program  is not delaying closure of failing businesses, but rather supporting companies  who are facing work-shortages due to temporary business downturns.  Interestingly, by this measure the program effectiveness actually increased  when the program was scaled up in the downturn. Furthermore, evidence from the  evaluation’s review of program files confirms that 74% of the 226 approved  agreement files reviewed returned to normal levels of business by the end of  the agreement. These findings are important because they demonstrate that the  program is working as it should – helping employers avoid unnecessary lay-offs  when they are experiencing a temporary downturn in business that is beyond  their control.
The evaluation also found that:
layoffs  averted were estimated at 11,189 in 2008-09 and 24,385 in 2009-10
program  participation continues to be counter cyclical and largely used by the  manufacturing industry
average  claim duration increased during the recent recession, as employers used the  temporary measures allowing for longer maximum agreement length
there  are opportunities to enhance program/service delivery models, streamline the  application/approval process, and increase outreach activities to increase  program participation in sectors that have made limited use of the program  (i.e. Service Industry, retail, real estate, professional companies, financial  industry and not-for-profit sector)
Recommendations and follow-up actions
The  Work-Sharing Evaluation outlined two areas (i.e. Program Delivery and Program  Participation) for follow-up action.
Program delivery
Follow-up action 1:
Improve on the speed of the delivery model, especially regarding the delivery  of initial benefits to employees.
The  program area agrees that the timely delivery of benefits is an important factor  in providing efficient and responsive service delivery.  As noted, given  the large increases in both the number of Work-Sharing enquiries and  applications received during the economic downturn, the department rapidly  mobilized expertise from a service delivery, policy, and processing perspective  to ensure a timely response.
In  efforts to further enhance the service delivery model, processing of  Work-Sharing claims was automated in 2009. In addition an Inventory Reduction  Strategy was recently implemented to bring outstanding work to sustainable  levels of EI claims by October 2016. Further to the Inventory Reduction  Strategy, the Department is developing a more agile funding model to ensure the  necessary mechanisms are in place to respond to increased EI claim volumes and  meet the needs of Canadians.
PPSB  conducted a study of benefit processing times for the program to determine  areas for improvement in order to ensure the speed of pay targets were met.  This study indicated that 87% were paid within 28 days, 9% had a delay  attributable to the employer or employee and 3% had a delay attributable to  Service Canada.
In  addition, the Department has reminded the Insurance Payment Operations Centres  (IPOCs) of the need to process the utilization reports within the speed of  service targets. The Department will monitor this on an ongoing basis.
Further,  the results of this study will be shared with departmental stakeholders in  order for them to ensure that communications with employers and employees  regarding their WS agreements/benefits reiterate the message that all  documentation must be provided in a timely manner for payments to be issued  within the prescribed timelines.
Follow-up action 2:
Improve reporting processes for smaller companies.
It  is recognized that smaller companies do not always have the capacity, tools  and/or resources required to participate in the electronic reporting system.  The Department has recently posted new electronic Utilization Reports that use  60-70% less disk space and may reduce challenges for companies with less robust  systems. Although the data gateway system facilitates timely and efficient  reporting for employers, it is not the only reporting option available and  employers are not obligated to use it. At their discretion, employers may elect  to submit paper-based reports via mail or through regional service sites. The  reporting mechanisms chosen by the employer must respect applicable privacy and  security protocols pertaining to information management. Program officers will  continue to work with employers to identify their preferred approach.
Follow-up action 3:
Examine the multiple signing authorities and how the process can be  streamlined.
The  program area agrees that it is important to continually assess program delivery  processes to identify potential opportunities for enhancement.  In this regard, while multiple signing  authorities may present challenges in facilitating timely approval of  agreements, the program area has taken steps to ensure that all applications  are processed as expeditiously as possible.
As  per program guidelines WS agreements over $600,000 as well as special measures  or policy changes currently require approval of the Canadian Employment  Insurance Commission (CEIC). However, this does not prove to be time consuming  as applications, upon submission to National Headquarters, only require eight  processing days which is within the service delivery standard.
Furthermore,  it is important to note that in 2014 only 1.3% of WS agreements were over  $600,000 and therefore processed by NHQ.
Follow-up action 4:
Ensure greater consistency in program delivery across the country.
The  program area agrees that it is important for regional staff to have timely  access to policy advice and necessary program tools in order to promote  consistency in program delivery across the country.
In  this regard, a policy guide and various operational directives were formulated  by the program area and disseminated to key stakeholders to promote  standardization. The program area will undertake a complete assessment and  update of internal and external documents and tools (e.g.  Work-Sharing Operational Directives,  Applicant Guide, Qs and As, and CSGC Desk Aid), in consultation with regional  business expertise advisors. This update will ensure greater consistency  and cohesiveness in program delivery across the country.
In  addition, the program area has developed an online, national Work-Sharing  Training package available through the Online Learning Campus (OLC), which  contains five modules aimed at providing program officers with a comprehensive  overview of the program. Moving forward, the program area will update the  online training package to include a sixth module on the use of the Common  System for Grants and Contributions (CSGC) in the delivery of the Work-Sharing  program.
The  program area will also continue to collaborate with the regions to equip staff  with the necessary tools and guidelines to operationalize the program (i.e.  Online Training Modules, Operational Directives, regional conference calls).
Furthermore,  the program area will evaluate its current Channel Management Strategy for both  the 1-800/1-866 call lines and the Service Canada Internet site, to ensure that  the department is providing consistent, seamless, responsive and accessible  multi-channel service to both employers and employees inquiring about the  Work-Sharing program. The program area will continue to ensure that  employers/employees across the country have access to up-to-date information  through a variety of channels that better meet their needs.
Follow-up action 5:
Improve the efficiency of program delivery by learning from the region’s best  practices.
The  program area acknowledges that some variations in service delivery models  across the country are to be expected given differences in regional labour  markets and operational structures. However, the Department recently  centralized program service delivery within the regions to promote greater  information sharing and consistency in program delivery.
Moreover,  as part of its ongoing management practices, the program area takes stock of  program delivery issues/opportunities across jurisdictions and aims to  facilitate information sharing between NHQ and the regions in a variety of ways  throughout the year (e.g. monthly conference calls, site visits). Moving  forward, the program area will continue to identify best practices in program  delivery from both a Canadian and/or international perspective and will share  this information among regional partners to help inform potential program/policy  enhancements. Furthermore, the program area has undertaken process mapping in  each of the regions in order to validate current processes, identify best  practices and areas for improvement, and ensure greater standardization of  business practices. Best practices will be disseminated to each of the regions  in order to optimize operational efficiencies. Linkages between other  departmental programs are also being considered to better consolidate  intelligence on labour market demand.
Follow-up action 6:
Draw  upon lessons learned from the implementation of temporary measures during the  2008-2009 economic downturn to assess whether similar measures should be  considered during future downturns (e.g. examine the continued relevance of the  recovery plan or alternate ways to further streamline the application for  employers).
The  program area regularly monitors and assesses the economic environment,  including labour market conditions across the country to determine the  appropriate policy response in the event of an economic downturn. During the  2008-2010 economic downturn, resources were mobilized quickly and effectively  under the Economic Action Plan (EAP) to ensure a timely response to assist  employers facing layoff situations.
As  recovery took hold, the Department undertook a comprehensive review of  Work-Sharing in summer-fall of 2010 to prepare for the EAP exit. Key  insights/lessons learned from the review, consistent with the findings of the  evaluation, indicated that:
employers  were strongly supportive and appreciative of the program
temporary  measures were an appropriate response
opportunities  for administrative adjustments and simplified applications should be  considered
distinguishing  between temporary and permanent shock/predicting recovery is challenging; and
increasing  awareness of program is important so that more sectors can use the program
As  a result of lessons learned from EAP, a new Work-Sharing program policy was adopted by the Canada Employment  Insurance Commission as of April 3, 2011. Permanent changes included a modified  Recovery Plan and new utilization rules providing for a minimum 10% work  reduction, allowing more flexibility for participating employers to adjust to  work fluctuations during the Work-Sharing period.
Given  the positive findings of the evaluation, the program area agrees that a similar  program response would be considered in the future, should there be another  shock to the economy which could include elimination of the recovery plan and  potentially longer agreement durations and extensions without the cooling-off  period. These are all  elements that, when implemented, contribute to the success of the program. In addition, all program  partners (i.e. POB, SEB, PPSB and CSB) are reviewing procedures and roles and  responsibilities to ensure departmental readiness of various scenarios, should  they occur.
Program participation
Follow-up action 7:
Increase outreach activities to employers. Ensure that all potential  beneficiaries of the program are aware of it.
and
Follow-up action 8:
Increase outreach activities to employees. Provide greater clarity on the  programs benefits, criteria and all the associated implications to their participation.
The  program area agrees that increasing outreach activities to employers and  employees is a valuable option to help increase awareness of the program.  Departmental service delivery personnel are well equipped to provide detailed  program information to both employers and employees through existing service  delivery channels. The Department also maintains detailed information about the  Work-Sharing program on its website and works to reinforce with regional staff the  importance of promoting the program when appropriate.
To  that end, the program area will continue to work with the regional staff as  well as provincial/territorial governments where appropriate, to inform a  variety of sectors about the program. For example, discussions have begun with the  Province of Alberta on potential ways to support communications to employers  about the availability of the Work-Sharing program as well as in the  development of recovery plans, with a particular focus on the required labour  market information.
Given  the recent downturn in the oil and gas sector, the Department targeted outreach  to promote the program to representatives in this sector. The E.I. Commissioner  for Employers has played a key role in identifying further opportunities for  outreach activities (e.g. employer consultations/information sessions,  electronic bulletins to employer groups).
CSB  will continue to organize mobile outreach presentations to employers and  employees when warranted and explore potential opportunities to include  Work-Sharing presentations in other employment related sessions. Mobile  Outreach Service offers information services related to Work-Sharing in the  form of two decks (one for employees, and one for employers), and provides an  information pamphlet to employees which describes the procedure for applying  for related EI benefits.
The  program area will also work with key internal stakeholders to review existing  Work-Sharing information products for workers to determine if any adjustments  will be required. Currently, the Department is undertaking a renewal of the  Mobile Outreach Service Delivery Strategy to ensure efficient and effective  services that support clients in order to increase their access to programs and  services and encouraging their usage of digital self-service. Through this  renewal effort, CSB will continue exploring means of strengthening the impact  and reach of outreach activities related to work-sharing.
Follow-up action 9:
Review the application process so that the program might be more widely used by  the non-manufacturing sectors.
Historically,  the manufacturing industry has accounted for the largest proportion of all WS  agreements and small/medium-sized firms are most likely to participate in  Work-Sharing. Employers in Ontario and Quebec represent the largest share of  users.
The  program area reviews the application process periodically to ensure continued  relevancy for employers from a broad range of industries and sectors. To help  inform future policy options for consideration, the program area will encourage  the sharing of best practices amongst regions particularly with regards to the  application process and efforts to support program usage by a variety of  sectors.
The  program area will also continue to explore what other countries do to reach  more non-traditional sectors (i.e. sectors outside of manufacturing), and will  focus on outreach activities to various sectors/industries when appropriate.  The program area will use regional and sectoral labour market information to  inform outreach activities in order to ensure alignment with labour market  trends.
1. Introduction
1.1 Overview
The 2004 Work-Sharing  evaluation found the program worked as intended. The goal of the current 2015  evaluation is to place particular emphasis on the evaluation of recent program  changes, both temporary and permanent, introduced in response to the recent  economic recession. A detailed description of the nine lines of evidence is  provided in Appendix I and a matrix linking the lines of evidence to the  evaluation questions is presented in Appendix II. The next section provides a  description of the program. Section 3 presents the key findings, and section 4  concludes.
1.2 Background
The Work-Sharing  program came into existence under Bill C-27 in 1977, which permitted the use of  Unemployment Insurance (UI) funds for a number of “developmental uses.” In the  fall of 1977, the program was implemented on a pilot basis.  An evaluation of this pilot program found it  to be significantly more expensive for the UI Account than the layoff alternative,  and the program was discontinued.
In 1981, however,  due to a severe economic recession, the federal government reintroduced the  Work-Sharing program with some rule changes to remedy the high cost problems  found in the pilot phase evaluation. These rule changes made Work-Sharing  benefits equivalent to regular UI benefits, and limits were imposed on the  Work-Sharing agreement duration. The program was made permanent in 1985. It has  been a component of the UI and then the EI program ever since, with little  fundamental change in its design or rules until 2009.
1.3 Objective
Work-Sharing is an adjustment program  designed to help employers and workers avoid layoffs when there is a temporary  reduction in the normal level of business activity that is beyond the control  of the employer. Layoffs are avoided by offering Employment Insurance Part I  income support to workers willing to work a reduced work week while their  company recovers. The goal is for all participating employees to return to  normal working hours by the end of the term of the Work-Sharing agreement. The  program helps employers retain skilled employees and avoid the costs of  recruiting and training new employees when business returns to normal levels.  It also helps employees maintain their skills and jobs while supplementing  their wages with EI benefits for the days they are not working. While the  Work-Sharing program has largely responded to temporary economic recessions,  the program has also been used on numerous occasions to assist employers  affected by a disaster or state of emergency.
To illustrate how  the program works, consider a firm with 100 identical workers, and is  considering a temporary layoff of 20 of these workers.  If the 20 workers were laid off, they would  collect regular EI benefits during their unemployment at a rate of 55% of their  insurable earnings.  Work-Sharing allows  all 100 of the firm’s employees to share the costs of the downturn. Rather than  laying off the 20 workers, the firm could reduce the work week by 20% (e.g.  work a four-day week) for all 100 workers. All of the workers would collect  Work-Sharing benefits for 1 day per week (at the same rate of 55% of their  insurable earnings).
1.4 Eligibility
In order for  employers to qualify for the Work-Sharing program, they must satisfy the basic  eligibility criteria:
the firm must have been in business in Canada  for at least two years
there must be a minimum of two employees in the  work unit
Footnote
2
the shortage of work must be beyond the control  of the employer
the shortage of work must not be due to seasonal  factors
the employer must have the consent of the  employees’ union, or if there is no union, of all the employees in the work  unit
The employer must  submit a recovery plan which demonstrates how the business will return to  normal levels upon completion of the agreement.   Work-sharing agreements must include a reduction in work activity  consisting of between 10 and 60% of the employees’ regular work schedule (i.e.,  one-half to three days a week). The minimum expected reduction was previously  20%, but Budget 2011 permanently reduced it to 10%. Work-Sharing agreements are  signed for a minimum of 6 consecutive weeks up to 26 weeks. Employers may  subsequently request an extension of up to 12 weeks, resulting in an overall  maximum agreement duration of 38 weeks. Employers are subject to a  “cooling-off” period (i.e. number of weeks equal to the duration of the  previous agreement) before entering into a new agreement with the same group of  employees.
For an individual  employee to be qualified for benefits under the Work-Sharing program, he/she  must be qualified to receive regular EI benefits. Unlike with regular EI,  participants are not required to serve a two-week waiting period prior to  drawing benefits. However, if workers are laid off subsequent to the  Work-Sharing program, they are fully entitled to regular EI benefits.  In such cases, the employees must then serve  the two-week waiting period before collecting EI benefits. The amount of time  that they are entitled to EI benefits is not affected by their prior use of the  Work-Sharing program.
1.5 Delivery
The application  process begins with the employer completing a Work-Sharing application. The  application can be submitted to a regional, district, or local Service Canada  Center.  Service Canada staff can help  employers in completing their applications to ensure that the eligibility  criteria to participate in the Work-Sharing program are met. Service Canada  officers review the application and produce a Recommendation Report as to  whether the application should be accepted or rejected. If the Recommendation  Report is favorable, it can be approved by the local office, regional office,  or National Headquarters, all depending on the dollar value of the agreement.  Specifically, agreements over $600,000 require approval from the Canadian  Employment Commission (CEIC).
Once approved, a  legal document, or “Work-Sharing Agreement”, is developed by Service Canada.  The document becomes legally binding once it has been signed by the authorized  employer representative, employee representatives and Service Canada  representatives.
After a Work-Sharing  agreement has been activated, Service Canada staff will ensure that the  agreements are being carried out in compliance with regulations. When  necessary, this will involve on-site visits to ensure that regulations and  agreements are being complied with. The extent and nature of this monitoring  activity varies depending upon the circumstances involved, and may be limited  by available resources and staff workloads.
The Work-Sharing  agreement details the terms and conditions for participation in the program,  such as the duration of the agreement and the workers who will participate as  the ‘unit’. Both the size and composition of the Work-Sharing unit, as well as  the duration of the agreement may be amended by the employer by completing the  appropriate Work-Sharing documentation.
Extension of a  Work-Sharing Agreement can occur but it is not automatic. All requests for an  extension must be submitted by the employer at least 30 days prior to the end  date of their Work-Sharing agreement, and subsequently assessed and approved by  Service Canada. The request for an extension must provide reasons why recovery  was not achieved and must demonstrate a continued reduction in business  activity that would result in the layoff of one or more employees. The employer  must provide an updated recovery plan outlining the progress to date, with a  list of activities that will take place during the extension period that will  lead to normal working hours by the end of the agreement.
Upon completion of  the Work-Sharing agreement, the Program Officer completes a close-out report  summarizing the key outcomes.
1.6 Temporary measures
Recognizing the level of  uncertainty employers and workers faced during the 2008-2009 recession, the  Government introduced temporary changes to the Work-Sharing program to mitigate  the effects of the recession on workers and employers.
Specifically, Budget 2009  introduced temporary measures which included extending the duration of  agreements by 14 weeks to a maximum of 52 weeks, increasing access to the  program through greater flexibility in the qualifying criteria and streamlining  processes for employers.  This included  eliminating the requirement for employers to outline specific steps, including  time lines and benchmarks, which would be taken during the life of the  agreement to increase business and alleviate the work shortage. Rather, the  focus for the employer was to provide steps they would take to remain viable  during the timeframe of the agreement in order that recovery would be achieved  as the economy strengthened, and employers were permitted to enter into new  Work-Sharing agreements involving the same group of employees immediately after  the end of a preceding Work-Sharing agreement instead of having to wait for a  “cooling-off” period equal to the total length of time the previous  Work-Sharing agreement was in place before re-applying.  Budget 2009 temporary changes were in effect  from February 1, 2009, to April 3, 2010.
In recognition of continuing  economic uncertainty, Budget 2010 extended the temporary measures introduced in  Budget 2009 by allowing employers with existing or recently terminated  agreements to extend their Work-Sharing agreements up to an additional 26  weeks, to a maximum duration of 78 weeks. Previously, firms would have had to  wait for the length of time of their original agreement before entering into a  new one. The greater flexibility in qualifying criteria also remained in place  for new Work-Sharing agreements.  The  Budget 2010 temporary changes were in effect until April 2, 2011.
To assist employers who  continued to face challenges, Budget 2011 announced an additional extension of  up to 16 weeks to employers with active or recently terminated Work-Sharing  agreements. This temporary measure ended on October 29, 2011. In addition to  these temporary measures, Budget 2011 introduced new permanent policy  adjustments to make Work-Sharing more flexible and efficient to employers.  Changes included a simplified recovery plan  that no longer required employer’s business history, a detailed comparison of  the company’s sales and production costs over the past two years, specific  information on the cause of the work shortage specific to the business and the  economic recession, and a description of any measures taken by the employer  before applying for the program to remain viable during the recession. Also,  where a significant community impact is relevant, greater consideration of  local labour market conditions is given in the assessment of the application.
Other permanent  policy changes included more flexible utilization rules, such as reducing the  minimum expected work reduction criteria from 20% to 10%, technical amendments  to program administration, and special measures for streamline approval  processes when responding to disasters and states of emergency.
Reflecting slower  than anticipated global growth during the first half of 2011, the November 2011  Economic and Fiscal Update announced an additional temporary extension of 16  weeks for employers in active, recently terminated or new agreements who still  needed support.  This temporary measure  ended on October 27, 2012.
There were also changes to the dollar  value of agreements and their associated level of approval. National  Headquarter is responsible for reviewing applications or extensions for  Canadian Employment Commission (CEIC) approval when they are estimated to  exceed the following amounts, depending on submission dates:
over $600,000, before February 1, 2009
over $900,000, February 1, 2009 to April 2,  2011
over $600,000, as of April 3, 2011
Regional offices are responsible for approval of  applications or extensions when they are estimated to exceed $300,000 ($450,000  between March 3, 2009 and April 2nd 2011) but are below the amounts  specified above. Otherwise, local offices are responsible for full  administration, including approval of agreements below $300,000. Directors at  Service Canada Centers have approval authority up to $300,000, and managers at  Local Offices have approval authority up to $150,000.
2. Key findings
2.1 Continued need for the program
2.1.1 Need for the Work-Sharing Program
The  Work-Sharing Program is generally seen as responding to employers’ and  employees’ needs. Surveyed Work-Sharing employee representatives indicated that  the program enables firms to adapt to economic recessions or sector based  fluctuations, and this in turn, enables them to retain their employees.
Similarly,  most firm representatives interviewed believed there is a need for the program,  saying that regular layoffs would have occurred in the absence of the program.  They explained that work reductions caused by business downturns from the  recession triggers a need for the program. They also identified sector specific  factors reducing demand, and supply-side shifts temporarily interrupting the  availability of inputs, as creating a demand for the program. They also  explained that work reductions leading to the loss of skilled employees was  their primary reason for applying.
Case file information reviewed supports employer statements that the  Work-Sharing program is used for periods of cyclical slowdowns in  business.  Economic recession was the  most frequently cited reason for applying to the program. Twenty percent of  applicants indicated a decline in business activity of 10-19%, and 67%  indicated a decline of 20% or more, highlighting the impact the recession had  on their business activity.
From the program delivery aspect, program officers acknowledge that the  program is responsive to employer’s needs, working to reduce and avoid  potential layoffs and assist companies in retaining skilled workers who would  be costly to replace.
Review of  international policies shows that work-sharing programs are often  grouped in the broad category of Short-term Compensation (STC) programs. STC programs are present in Germany,  Austria, Belgium, France, Japan, the Republic of Korea, the Netherlands, Czech  Republic, Hungary, Switzerland, and the United States as part of their state  run UI program.
Internationally,  the rationale for a work-sharing program is to reduce the number of lay-offs,  thus reducing the number of workers who may become unemployed when firms face  temporary downturns. When facing a decline in normal level of business  activity, firms may more likely lay off workers if they are eligible to receive  unemployment insurance benefits rather than engage in other workplace practices  such as adjusting their employees’ working schedules.  Work-sharing help mitigate the risk of  lay-offs and helps employers retain workers by leveraging benefits under the EI  program.
Policy  comparisons between the aforementioned countries reveal many similarities, but  also many differences. To highlight just a few, in Canada, work  reductions must be beyond the control of the employer. But in France, there are  other circumstances where their program can be used. Circumstances include firms having difficulties  finding adequate supplies in energy or other raw material, and firms preforming  a transformation or restructuring of the enterprise. Furthermore, in France,  and many other countries, direct subsidies are provided to employers who adopt  Work-Sharing policies.
Some countries also offer flexibility in the way hours of  work can be reduced. Reductions in working hours need not be uniform across the  participating unit, and the way hours of work are reduced can vary: workers can  work fewer days during each week, fewer hours per day, or they can rotate weeks  of lay-off.
STC payments in the United States reduce workers’  entitlement to UI benefits dollar-for dollar if they are subsequently laid off,  and employers from whose employees’ receipt of benefits exceed premiums paid  are charged higher premiums for the use of the STC program, which differs from  Canada’s Work-Sharing program. The literature review referenced in Appendix I  provides greater detail on the international comparison of Canada’s  Work-Sharing policies.
2.1.2 Need for Work-Sharing  adjustments during the 2008-2009 recession
The Work-Sharing program is designed  to temporarily help employees and employers adjust to economic recessions. If  the economy slows down for an extended period of time, then most firm  representatives agreed that in this context, the longer benefit periods made  sense.  From an employee standpoint,  all respondents considered that the program modifications in response to the  2008-2009 recession were a good idea and the majority felt these changes helped  keep people employed.
Program officers interviewed  acknowledged that without the easing of the requirements and the extended  length of support, many companies would not have survived. This would have  caused a greater strain on EI benefits and further reduced any future potential  for jobs and local economic growth.  From the international  evidence, most countries similarly made changes to their Work-sharing programs  in response to the financial crisis. For many, similar to Canada, this included  extending the maximum duration of the benefits and easing the admission  requirements. Table 1 summarizes the changes for selected countries during the  2008-2009 recession.
Table 1: Changes in  Work-Sharing Programs in selected countries during the 2008-2009 recession
Countries
Relaxed admission requirements
Extension of benefit period
Increased replacement rate
Increased subsidies to employers
Austria
yes
yes
no
no
Belgium
no
yes
yes
no
Canada
no
yes
no
no
France
no
yes
yes
no
Germany
yes
yes
no
yes
Japan
yes
no
no
yes
Republic of Korea
yes
no
no
yes
Netherlands
no
no
no
yes
Switzerland
no
yes
no
yes
Sources
Footnote
3
Vroman and Brusentsev (2009)  and European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions  (2009).
2.2 Alignment with government priorities
Temporary  changes to the Work-Sharing program were first introduced in 2009.  In the 2009 Budget Plan
Footnote
4
, the Government’s objective was  “strengthening benefits for Canadian workers (…) so more Canadians can continue  working.”  This was accomplished by  extending the maximum length of time workers can receive benefits and by  temporarily increasing access to the program through greater flexibility in the  qualifying criteria and streamlining the process for employers. In doing so,  the program kept more Canadians actively participating in the labour market.
Budgets  2009, 2010 and 2011 were created to support Canadians affected by the recent  short-term economic recession. In a similar regard, the Work-Sharing program is  designed to assist employees and employers temporarily, by providing them  short-term assistance while the economy recovers. The temporary changes to the  Work-Sharing program and the awareness the program received from the Budget  Plans allowed for more Canadians to receive assistance during the difficult  economic times.
2.3 Alignment with federal  roles and responsibilities
The Government of Canada is responsible for Part I of the  Employment Insurance (EI) Act. The provision of EI benefits under Part I of the  EI Act support ESDC’s Strategic Outcome of: A skilled, adaptable  and inclusive labour force and an efficient labour market.
Part I of the EI program provides temporary financial  assistance to workers who have lost their job through no fault of their own  while they look for work or upgrade their skills. Work-Sharing provides income  support in the form of employment insurance benefits to eligible workers who  work a temporarily reduced work-week while their employer recovers. The goal is  for all the participating employees to return to normal working hours by the  end of the term of the Work-Sharing agreement. During economic recovery, the  Work-Sharing program creates an efficient labour market transition, as the  program allows companies to retain their skilled employees so that they can  quickly ramp up production when business levels return to normal.
2.4 Achievement of expected outcomes
2.4.1 Participation in the Work-Sharing program
The Work-Sharing program is  highly counter cyclical. Program participation is high when economic growth is  low, and as shown in Figure 1, when unemployment rises, so does the number of  Work-Sharing claims.
Figure 1 Number of Work-Sharing claims and change in  unemployment
Textual description of figure 1
- Number of Work-Sharing claims and change in  unemployment
From fiscal year 2000 to  2013, figure 1 displays from the left axis, the number of Work-Sharing claims  displayed as a histogram, and from the right axis, the percentage change in  unemployment over time.
The figure shows the counter  cyclicality of program usage. The number of Work-Sharing claims increased in  years when there was an increase in the percentage change in unemployment, and  similarly decreased in years when there was a decrease in the percentage change  in unemployment.
The number of claims peaked  in 2009-10 with close to 140,000 claims, at the same time, the percentage  change in unemployment was over 25%. In contrast, since 2012–13, the number of  claims each year has been below 20,000, and the percentage change in unemployment  has been below 5%.
The counter cyclical use of Work-Sharing can also be seen in  Table 2 which presents program participation and expenditures by fiscal  year.  Participation and  expenditures peaked in   2009-10  following the economic recession when new Work-Sharing claims were at a high of  about 139,000 and expenditures amounted to $235 million (2007-08 dollars).
Footnote
5
Alternatively, participation and expenditures were lowest in mid-2000s, with  little more than 10,000 new claims and $11 million in expenditures (2007- 08  dollars).
Table 2: Participation and benefits paid to  Work-Sharing participants
Fiscal year
New Work-Sharing claims
Employment ('000)
Work-Sharing claims % of employment
Work-Sharing benefits paid (Nominal dollars)
Work-Sharing benefits paid (2007-2008 dollars)
2000-01
17,270
14,819
0.12
$17,603,128
$20,152,408
2001-02
47,835
14,985
0.32
$50,199,252
$56,387,812
2002–03
16,791
15,426
0.11
$14,759,298
$16,165,715
2003–04
31,248
15,723
0.20
$24,955,856
$26,870,370
2004–05
11,932
15,971
0.07
$10,812,629
$11,438,909
2005–06
11,368
16,188
0.07
$11,183,319
$11,556,000
2006–07
10,452
16,513
0.06
$11,534,991
$11,716,599
2007–08
14,735
16,896
0.09
$20,535,544
$20,458,824
2008-09
77,220
17,038
0.45
$173,185,968
$169,085,632
2009-10
138,935
16,828
0.83
$243,384,608
$235,438,560
2010-11
22,743
17,121
0.13
$29,117,222
$27,737,292
2011–12
25,539
17,344
0.15
$31,723,844
$29,476,278
2012–13
15,479
17,579
0.09
$20,720,738
$8,962,012
Table 2 also shows Work-Sharing take up as a  percentage of employment.  Work-Sharing  participation has been consistently low, never accounting for more than one  percent of employment.  But its trend  still conveys the programs counter cyclicality.   Work-Sharing claims as a percentage of employment reached a maximum of  0.83% in fiscal year 2009-10, and participation was lowest in 2006-07,  accounting for 0.06% of employment.
Similarly, Figure 2 provides the annual number of  Records of Employment (ROEs) issued for the purpose of Work-Sharing during the  period of 1989 to 2011.  Again, program  participation was highly counter-cyclical.   Work-Sharing ROEs peaked during the recessions of 1990-1991 and  2009-2010, and, to a much lesser degree, in 2001.  Between those periods, annual participation  was consistently low.
Figure 2: Annual number of Work-Sharing records of  employment (ROEs)
Textual description of figure 2
- Annual number of Work-Sharing records of  employment (ROEs)
From fiscal year 1989 to  2012, figure 2 displays from the left axis, the annual number of Work-Sharing  Records of Employment represented as a solid line, and from the right axis the  number of monthly unique employer’s represented as a dotted line.
Over time, the number of  Work-Sharing Records of employment follows a similar pattern to the number of  monthly unique employers, both peaking during the economic downturns of  1990-1991 and 2008-2009. In 1990-1991, close to 150 thousand records of  employment were issued for work-sharing, and in 2008-2009, close to 200  thousand records of employment were issued for the purpose of Work-Sharing.  However, in 1990-1991, over 14,000 unique employers were identified per month,  compared to less than 14,000 unique employers per month in 2008/2009. This  suggests that the average size of Work-Sharing agreements increased per  participating employer following the 2008-2009 recession.
There is no evidence to suggest that the program’s take-up,  in terms of the number of employees claiming Work-Sharing, increased beyond  what could be expected from its typical counter cyclicality.  However, during the 2008-2009 recession, the  number of employees per agreement increased. The dotted line of Figure 2  provides the monthly number of unique employers, summed for each year. The  number of unique employers follows a similar pattern to the total number of  employees. However, the number of employees was higher relative to the number  of employers during the 2009-2010 peak as compared to the 1990-1991 peak,  suggesting an increase in the average agreement size.
2.4.2 Characteristics of Work-Sharing participants
Analysis of the EI administrative data shows that, in  all years, men made up the majority of the Work-Sharing program participation,  accounting for around 69% of claims since the year 2000. Women’s participation  never reached above 38% of claims and was at its lowest point in 2008 and 2009,  when Work-Sharing participation was at its highest.
In terms of age, the vast majority of Work-Sharing  participants are in the working age category, between 25 and 54. This age group  remained relatively constant at around 79%. Workers aged 55 and older made up  an increasingly larger share of the users while youth participation declined,  but both remained relatively small compared to the prime working age category.  In terms of percentage of claims, Ontario has consistently been the largest  user of the Work-Sharing program. In 2008-09, it accounted for more than half  of all new claims.  Quebec has consistently  been the second biggest user, and when comparing regional participation  relative to the employment level, since the year 2000, Quebec is the only  province to be systematically higher than the Canadian average.
During the 2008-2009 recession, participation in  British Columbia also increased above the Canadian average. Additional  statistical analysis found that during the recession, for a given employee  requiring assistance from the EI program, firms in Ontario and British Columbia  were the most likely to have employees claiming Work-Sharing benefits over  regular EI benefits.
In the industrial sector, the manufacturing industry has  consistently been the largest user of the Work-Sharing program, typically  accounting for two thirds to three quarters of the programs use. The service  sector has been the second biggest user of the program, but seldom accounts for  more than one fifth of new yearly claims.
The  majority of program officers indicated that the Work-Sharing program has  traditionally been a good fit in supporting manufacturing companies. They  identified the characteristics of manufacturing companies as large and  medium-sized organizations, with multiple people completing similar tasks and  job responsibilities. They also explained that these companies typically have  clear cut and repetitive production schedules, producing goods with easily  quantifiable inputs and outputs, and workers that are primarily trained on the  job.
Similarly, evidence from the file  review suggested that manufacturing employees were often listed as doing jobs  very similar in nature from one another, and therefore, hours of labour are  easily substituted between employees, making them a good fit for the  Work-Sharing program.  However, a large  proportion of the workforce is now employed in non-manufacturing type jobs.  Based on Statistics Canada labour force data and ESDC’s records on Work-Sharing  applications, the manufacturing sector accounts for 80% of Work-Sharing  applicants but only 10% of Canada’s total labour force. This disconnect between  program usage and the size of the manufacturing sector in the economy suggests  that there may be missed opportunities in supporting non-manufacturing  sectors.
Outside of  the industrial sector, most programs officers questioned the continued  relevance of Work-Sharing in an economy that includes a growing number of  information and service based industries. They identified the service industry, including  retail, real estate, professional companies (lawyers, architects), the  financial industry, and the non-profit sector as underutilizing the program.  Smaller firms, those with specialized and varied job descriptions and those  which are not able to have employees ‘share’ responsibilities were all  identified as not generally using the program to a significant degree.
The officers indicated that the  biggest barrier to the program uptake by these sectors is the application  guidelines favored towards firms with simple production processes and where  production inputs and outputs can be easily identified for the purpose of  applying to the program.  They explained  that firms in the underutilized sectors are not as able to identify specific  production targets or recruitment-based activities that are required to meet  the current guidelines.
However, employment may be more  cyclical in the manufacturing sector compared to other industries. There was  also evidence from the files reviewed that firms were frequently engaged in  work-sharing practices and/or planning to engage in work-sharing practices,  regardless of receiving assistance through the Work-Sharing program.  In approximately one fifth of the case files  reviewed that contained a recovery plan, employers indicated they had already  begun work-sharing arrangements prior to applying to the program. When looking  only at manufacturing firms, this number jumps to over 68%. This suggests that  work-sharing practices are perhaps more natural in the manufacturing sector,  and is not something that can be easily encouraged in other industries by  altering program requirements.
2.4.3 Program utilization
Analysis of EI administrative data shows that the average  work reduction per fiscal year has been relatively consistent throughout the  years, averaging approximately 28%. Not surprisingly, the average weekly  benefits paid have been consistent as well. But, the average length of claims  rose significantly during the 2008-2009 recession.  Table 3 shows that the average duration of  claims have typically been around 17.5 weeks, but increased to 39.4 and 35.6 in  2008-09 and 2009-10 respectively. This coincides with the 2008-2009 recession  but also the period in which the maximum agreement lengths were temporarily  increased. This suggests that employers made use of the temporary Work-Sharing  measures during the recession.
Table 3: Average work reduction, weekly benefits, and  duration of Work-Sharing claims
Fiscal year
Average work reduction (%)
Average duration (weeks)
Average weekly benefits (Nominal $)
Average weekly benefits (2007–08 $)
2000-01
29.2
17.1
59.6
68.2
2001-02
26.8
18.9
55.7
62.5
2002–03
27.6
16.2
54.2
59.4
2003–04
26.9
16.3
49.0
52.7
2004–05
28.5
15.8
57.4
60.7
2005–06
28.0
16.6
59.2
61.1
2006–07
29.0
18.4
59.9
60.8
2007–08
28.4
21.3
65.5
65.2
2008-09
28.6
39.4
57.0
55.6
2009-10
25.5
35.6
49.2
47.6
2010-11
27.1
21.9
58.5
55.8
2011–12
27.0
21.1
58.9
54.7
2012–13
27.6
21.1
63.4
58.1
Additional statistical analysis looked at the distribution  of Work-Sharing claim durations. Table 4 provides the distribution of  Work-Sharing claim durations, by fiscal year in which the claim started
Table 4: Distribution of Work-Sharing claim  durations, by fiscal year in which the claim started
Fiscal year
0-20 weeks
21-26 weeks
27-38 weeks
39-60 weeks
60-78 weeks
79-104 weeks
1989–90
71%
14%
15%
0%
0%
0%
1990-91
59%
25%
14%
1%
0%
0%
1991–92
63%
24%
12%
1%
0%
0%
1992–93
64%
24%
12%
1%
0%
0%
1993–94
71%
21%
7%
0%
0%
0%
1994–95
69%
18%
11%
1%
0%
0%
1995–96
70%
19%
10%
0%
0%
0%
1996–97
71%
19%
9%
0%
0%
0%
1997–98
68%
20%
11%
1%
0%
0%
1998–99
61%
21%
16%
1%
0%
0%
1999–00
76%
15%
9%
0%
0%
0%
2000-01
63%
22%
13%
1%
0%
0%
2001-02
57%
25%
18%
1%
0%
0%
2002–03
70%
21%
8%
1%
0%
0%
2003–04
66%
23%
11%
0%
0%
0%
2004–05
71%
19%
9%
0%
0%
0%
2005–06
68%
22%
10%
0%
0%
0%
2006–07
61%
22%
15%
2%
0%
0%
2007–08
57%
19%
16%
3%
4%
1%
2008-09
28%
17%
10%
23%
14%
8%
2009-10
27%
13%
19%
27%
13%
0%
2010-11
50%
25%
14%
10%
1%
0%
2011–12
57%
25%
14%
4%
0%
0%
Notes:
Percentages rounded to nearest whole number
Table 4  shows that from 1989-90 to  2005-06, the distribution of Work-Sharing claims by weeks was fairly stable and  there was only a small increase in the average duration in the years with an  economic recession. During the 1990-1991 recession, around 60% of claims lasted  20 weeks or less, and around 85% lasted 26 weeks or less. So, in spite of the  economic recession, most claims during 1990-1991 recession were potentially not  constrained by the official maximum of 38 weeks. Although no two economic  recessions are perfectly comparable, as they can each differ in their length  and severity, as well as in the particular industries they impact, it is still  noteworthy that 45% of claims starting in 2008 lasted longer than 38 weeks. The  analysis suggests that the shift in the distribution of claim durations is  likely greater than can be explained by the economic recession alone, and can  be at least partially attributable to the temporary program measures introduced  in 2009 to allow employers to extend their Work-Sharing agreements in order to  have more time to work towards recovery.
Regarding the new  provision allowing for laid-off workers to be called back to employment as part  of a Work-Sharing agreement, the evaluation found that the delivery of the new  provision varied between officers from different regions. Some indicated they  proactively discussed with the firm the possibility of calling back laid-off  workers while others assumed  it was done only if it was part of the recovery plan, such that the firm needed  the skills of the laid-off employee to recover. One region indicated they  worked with employers prior to the onset of the final approval to ensure that  the names of employees who could be potentially called back would be included  in the agreement, thus giving the employer the flexibility to meet production  demands without delay.
According to most program officers interviewed, hiring  of new employees does occur during the period of Work-Sharing  agreements: two  interviewees said it happens rarely, and two others indicated that it happens  regularly.  The reason provided for  hiring new employees was to introduce a skill level necessary for the recovery  plan that was not available from within the affected works listed in the  agreement.  Respondents explained that  some employers had to hire new employees to increase production demands as the  recovery plan was implemented and others had to replace affected workers who  left for employment in more stable organizations.
Overall, it was felt that employers were using the  provision in an appropriate manner. Additional evidence from the files reviewed  confirmed that new employees were being hired while companies had active  Work-Sharing agreements but this was not a frequent occurrence: 8.2% of the  files approved contained evidence of employers bringing on additional resources  during an agreement period.  Similarly,  the justification provided was that new employees were brought on to support  recovery efforts such as opening new sales territories and selling new  products.
2.5 Impacts
2.5.1 Averted layoffs
More than 75% of firm representatives said that the costs of lay-offs in  terms of subsequent recruitment and training would have been substantial and  that avoiding this was the principal benefit of applying to the program.  However, estimating the number of layoffs averted is not an easy task. The best  estimates are based on a number of assumptions and often only consider layoffs  averted during the period of agreement. If layoffs occur after the termination of the agreement, these layoffs  are postponed. As this is a key issue to determine the success of the program,  the department continues its analysis through studies produced for the annual  EI Monitoring and Assessment Report.
The ensuing discussion will cover the methods, and their limitations,  used to estimate the number of layoffs averted by the program, followed by the  results of a statistical analysis which considers the share of work sharing  agreements that can only be considered as postponements of layoffs (i.e., the  number of layoffs occurring within six months of agreement terminations (for  more details see the peer reviewed technical studies referenced in Appendix  I)). Some additional evidence and discussion regarding the impact the  Work-Sharing program had on averting layoffs, and the effects of the temporary  Work-Sharing measures then proceeds.
While important limitations and alternative measures will be discussed  further below, the simplest and most common method used to estimate the impact  of Work-Sharing on lay-offs is one that assumes a perfect substitution between  one hour of work reduction through Work-Sharing and one hour of work reduction  through lay-offs. In other words, if employers reduced employee hours by 30%  under Work-Sharing, it is assumed that they would have laid off 30% of the work  unit if Work-Sharing were not available. With this method, we assume the  average work reduction would be equal to the average labour force  reduction.
Multiplying the average work reduction by the number of Work-Sharing  claims provides an estimate of the number of layoffs averted and postponed by  the program. The results are summarized in table 5 below. Since 2000-01, the  number of layoffs averted and postponed by the Work-Sharing Program ranged from  a low of 3,000 in 2006-07 to a high of 35,500 in 2009-10 during a recessionary  period. Clearly, just as program participation is counter cyclical, so are the  layoffs averted and postponed by the program. This is largely attributed to the  consistency of the average work reduction over the years, averaging 28%.
Table 5: Estimated layoffs averted and postponed by  the Work-Sharing Program
Fiscal year
Number of Work-Sharing claims
Percentage of average work reduction
Estimated layoffs averted and postponed
1
2000-01
17,270
29.2%
5,000
2001-02
47,835
26.8%
13,000
2002–03
16,791
27.6%
4,500
2003–04
31,248
26.9%
8,500
2004–05
11,932
28.5%
3,500
2005–06
11,368
28.0%
3,000
2006–07
10,452
29.0%
3,000
2007–08
14,735
28.4%
4,000
2008-09
77,220
28.6%
22,000
2009-10
138,935
25.5%
35,500
2010-11
22,743
27.1%
6,000
2011–12
25,539
27.0%
7,000
2012–13
15,479
27.6%
4,500
1
Estimated layoffs averted or postponed are rounded to the nearest 500
As indicated above, there are limitations with  this methodology. For one, the assumption of perfect substitution between  methods of work reduction can be incorrect. For example, if each individual’s  average productivity increases with the number of hours they work, the  production of two workers working 50% of their hours would be lower than one  worker working full-time.  Under this  scenario, the reported number of layoffs averted above would also be  overstated. On the other hand, if two workers are complementary factors in a  production process, the production of two workers working half of their  full-time hours would be greater than one worker working full-time.  Under this scenario, the reported number of  layoffs averted above would be understated.
Either way, the number of jobs saved is always  less than the number of participants in the program, and therefore as Boeri  (2011) points out, this implies a deadweight cost.
Footnote
6
Similarly, to avoid layoffs, some  employers will maintain full staff when faced by work shortages, even in the  absence of a Work-Sharing program. This would suggest the estimates above are  overstated and represent another form of deadweight cost. Hijzen and Venn  (2011) estimate that this deadweight could have been as high as one-third of  participants, on average for countries they studied during the 2008-2009  recession.
Footnote
7
Furthermore, the methodology above does not consider possible  displacement effects. If the program preserves jobs that are not viable and  delays rather than averts layoffs, then this could represent a barrier to job  creation by firms with the potential to grow.
For these reasons, the OECD suggests  considering additional steps to mitigate deadweight and displacement costs by  ensuring that only firms experiencing temporary shortages of work participate,  and making firms bear a part of the wage costs for the hours not worked, or  requiring firms to repay all or part of the subsidy if the employee is laid off  after the program ends
Footnote
8
.
However, it is important to note that these  suggestions would likely have an adverse impact on program take-up, and  considering program participation is already very low in Canada, the benefit to  the programs overall cost-effectiveness would be minimal.  Also, as previously noted, although it is  true that labour markets should be sufficiently flexible in the presence of  structural adjustments, excessive mobility in response to temporary shifts in  the demand for labour is inefficient, because the cost of replacing experienced  employees can be substantial.  When a  firm’s normal production levels return and laid-off workers have sought  employment elsewhere, the costs and delays of training and recruiting new  employees can negatively impact a company’s competitiveness and put them at  risk of an unsuccessful recovery, and potentially the firm’s closure.
For the employee, there are also significant  costs involved with being unemployed that must be considered.  Not only can the loss of income be  substantial, but the employees overall wellbeing is at stake as the negative  psychological impacts associated with being laid-off are well documented
Footnote
9
. Furthermore, as employees search for new jobs during a period of reduced  business activity, finding new employment can be difficult and can take  additional time. The longer employees remain out of work, the more their skills  deteriorate, and the more they risk becoming long-term unemployed.  This could be a significant added cost to the  EI account, especially when compared to the Work-Sharing alternative, which  represents a relatively small share of total EI expenditures. Reid (1983)
Footnote
10
further argues that work sharing  can be an effective transitional mechanism for employees searching a new job.  He explains that it can be advantageous for workers to be employed while  searching for work as it removes the stigma of unemployment which might  influence prospective employers. Furthermore, Work-Sharing would provide a  higher level of income during the job search process and reduce the negative  psychological impacts of unemployment, which he explains can sometimes be more  tragic than the economic consequences.
The program file review used another method to  estimate the number of layoffs averted. In the program files are estimates,  provided by employers at the time of application, on the number of layoffs that  would occur if their application were to be refused.  Also contained in the files is the actual  number of layoffs that occurred during the agreement. The difference between  these two numbers provides another estimate of layoffs averted.
Based on 226 approved Work-Sharing files reviewed, it is estimated that  50% of claimants averted layoffs for a total of about 1,800.  However, because employers tend to overstate  the number of layoffs that would occur if their application were to be refused  at the time of application, estimates using this methodology are likely to be  overstated. During interviews, employers recognized that it is challenging to  calculate the precise number of layoffs averted by Work-Sharing, because their  economic circumstances change during the life of the agreement.
When considering the period after the agreement, statistical analysis  was conducted using EI administrative data on Work-Sharing claims and layoffs 6  months after the claim termination. Table 6 shows that the number of employees  on a Work-Sharing agreement, laid off within 6 months of their agreement  follows a counter-cyclical pattern. Approximately 1,300 layoffs occurred  following agreement terminations in the years 2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07,  whereas in 2008-09 and 2009-10, approximately 11,000 workers were laid-off  following agreement terminations.
Table  6: Layoffs within 6 months of the Work-Sharing agreement termination, by the  year the claim started
Fiscal year
Number of Work-Sharing claims
Estimated layoffs averted and postponed
Percent of layoffs observed
Number of layoffs observed
Estimated net layoffs averted
Proportion of net layoffs averted
2000-01
17,270
5,000
19%
3,281
1,719
34%
2001-02
47,835
13,000
9%
4,305
8,695
67%
2002–03
16,791
4,500
11%
1,847
2,653
59%
2003–04
31,248
8,500
8%
2,500
6,000
71%
2004–05
11,932
3,500
11%
1,313
2,187
62%
2005–06
11,368
3,000
11%
1,250
1,750
58%
2006–07
10,452
3,000
13%
1,359
1,641
55%
2007–08
14,735
4,000
20%
2,947
1,053
26%
2008-09
77,220
22,000
14%
10,811
11,189
51%
2009-10
138,935
35,500
8%
11,115
24,385
69%
2010-11
22,743
6,000
9%
2,047
3,953
66%
2000-01
2010-11
1
36,412
9,818
11%
3,889
5,930
60%
1
Percentages are weighted averages
Table 6  also provides an estimate of the net layoffs averted by subtracting from the  initial estimate of layoffs averted and postponed, the observed number of  layoffs that occurred following agreement terminations. If we take the ratio of  this estimate with the estimated layoffs averted and postponed, we find that  from 2000-01 to 2010-11, using a weighted average, 60% of layoffs initially  avoided during the agreement were avoided for at least 6 months following the  agreement termination. Both methodology and the estimates of layoffs averted  are consistent with the 2004 evaluation of the Work-Sharing Program
Footnote
11
. In comparison, the 2004 evaluation found that on average from 1990-91 to  2001-02, 49% of lay-offs initially avoided during the agreement, were further  avoided for at least 26 weeks following the agreement termination
Footnote
12
.
If one  considers the normal rate of attrition and turnover that occurs naturally,  business cycle aside, this would explain some of the layoffs that occur after  the termination of a Work-Sharing agreement. Furthermore, if layoffs do occur  after the termination of a Work-Sharing agreement, Reid (1982, 1983) argues that this does not necessarily represent a  misuse of the program. He explains that Work-Sharing still provides firms with  a mechanism to immediately reduce working hours, and with time, working hours  can gradually be increased as the workforce shrinks with normal attrition,  saving the firm the costs of hiring and training that would have been  associated with normal turnover.  He also  argues that Work-Sharing is not intended to affect the overall hours of  employment in the economy, the overall amount of leisure, or the overall amount  of EI benefits paid.  It is intended to  affect the distributions of these factors
Footnote
13
The review of program files also provided evidence as to the  likelihood of a firm completely shutting down after the termination of a  Work-Sharing agreement.  The evaluation  found that this happened  rarely for firms of over five employees on a Work-Sharing agreement and  virtually never for firms with over 25 employees on a Work-Sharing agreement.  This suggests that the program is not delaying closure of failing businesses,  but rather supporting companies who are facing work-shortages due to temporary  business downturns.
During  employer interviews, most said they did return to normal levels of business  after the termination of their agreement. There were also a few that stated  they returned to full production before the agreement expired. Further evidence  from the review of program files confirms that 74% of the 226 approved  agreement files reviewed reported returning to normal levels of business by the  end of the agreement.
When  employers were asked about what contributing factors led to the recovery, most  referred to normal level of business being regained as a result of the return  for the demand of their products. But had the Work-Sharing program not been  available, employers noted they would have been concerned about permanently  losing laid-off workers. Some did therefore attribute the program with helping  them transition back to normal production volumes while avoiding the costs and  delays from hiring and training.
Finally, to test for the effect of  the budget changes on the likelihood of being laid off, a statistical analysis used the two short  periods between Budgets 2010 and 2011 where the program reverted back to its 38  week agreement maximum. Although  it is true that three successive budgets and an economic update allowed for  extensions to the maximum agreement lengths, the program reverted back to its  38 week agreement maximum between the expiry of the temporary measures under  Budget 2010 on April 2, 2011 and the approval of Budget 2011 on  May 29, 2011. Similarly, the Work-Sharing temporary measures of  Budget 2011 expired on October 29, 2011, and the temporary  measures under the 2011 Economic Update were not approved until December 23, 2011.
While controlling for a linear time  trend, the unemployment rate in the economic region, the age and gender of the  individual claimant, whether the firm was from the manufacturing industry, and  the number of the Work-Sharing claims per firm, the regression tested for the  likelihood of a worker being laid off after the termination of their agreement  by comparing workers whose claims ended just before and just after the expiry of  Budget 2010 on April 3, 2011. The study found there to be no effect of the  budget changes, either positive or negative, on the likelihood of being laid  off in the six months following the expiry of the Work-Sharing agreement. It  concluded rather, layoff rates followed a counter-cyclical pattern regardless  of whether or not agreement extensions were available.
2.5.2 Impact on communities
The  evaluation relied on both qualitative and quantitative evidence to evaluate the  impact the Work-Sharing program has on communities.  First, testimonial evidence was provided by  program officers from across the country, and secondly, a statistical study was  conducted to specifically quantify the Work-Sharing program’s impact. All  program officers indicated that Work-Sharing had a positive impact on a variety  of communities.  Anecdotally, program  officers indicated that the Work-Sharing program helped avert layoffs and  allowed employees to retain their jobs and to maintain non-salary benefits not  available otherwise.
Specifically,  they indicated that in towns where there was one major employer, some  households relied solely on the jobs available from that employer. The program  made it possible for those households to maintain economic viability.  Southwestern Ontario border towns impacted by the economic difficulties in the  United States were able to greatly reduce layoffs and job loss due to the  intervention of the program.  Northern  and isolated Ontario towns that are mono-industrial (forestry, mining) were  also able to avoid high levels of unemployment and the closing of the major  employer in the region.  During the  recession, the south-west of Ontario which has a concentration of small to  medium-sized manufacturers was a big user of the program.
Work-Sharing was also identified by program officers as providing  support to communities, not just during recessionary periods, but also in the  presence of other unforeseen events affecting production, such as natural  disasters or states of emergency. Special measures under Work-Sharing, which  involve a waiver of certain program criteria, were made available as part of  the overall response effort launched to assist local employers temporarily  affected by the June 2013 flooding in Alberta and Manitoba as well as the July  2013 train derailment in Lac-Mégantic, Quebec.
From a  quantitative standpoint, using aggregated data at the level of the EI economic  region, the regression analysis examined the presence Work-Sharing claims in  local communities and its impact on regional employment and layoff rates. The  study found that when Work-Sharing is triggered, its true effect is hidden by a  number of negative shocks that greatly and adversely affect the labour market  in that region, so limited conclusions could be drawn as to the effectiveness  of the program. The inconclusiveness of the results were partly attributed to  the fact that even during peaks of Work-Sharing activity, the scale of the  program is very small relative to that of the entire Canadian labour market.
2.5.3 Impact on employees
From  employee representative interviews, other than the EI benefit received in  compensation for their reduced hours of work, other monetary benefits were  savings on commuting, child care costs normally incurred, and the retention of  employee health benefit plans.  Employee  representatives also acknowledge a wide range of potential non-monetary benefits  from participating in the program. They cited a positive impact on  employee/firm relations, and an overall improvement in employee morale stemming  from reduced stress and a feeling of increased job security and value as an  employee.
Work-Sharing  changes the distribution of losses among workers. The burden of economic losses  among affected workers is spread more widely but with smaller per-worker  consequences.  Employee representatives  indicated that the loss of wages, vacation pay, and future pension benefits  were all monetary costs associated with participating in a Work-Sharing  agreement. Workers who would not have otherwise been laid off bear the greatest  portion of the Work-Sharing cost. However, depending on the extent of the work  reduction, the workers utility may in fact increase; especially considering if  their reduction in work is greater than their reduction in income.
Employers  were also asked about the potential non-monetary benefits of the program to  employees. They also cited improvements in employee/firm relationships as being  significant. They believed there to be positive impacts to employee morale and  that Work-Sharing agreements provide a feeling of job security. Neither  employees nor employers interviewed had any comments on the potential  non-monetary costs of the program.
The  majority of employee representatives interviewed were uncertain of what program  participants undertook during their reduced hours of work. Some respondents  reported that they participated in either training or job search activities.  Some interviewees indicated that in-house training was provided, either on the  production line, on workplace behaviour or on safety re-certification. One  respondent indicated that college-based training was undertaken by some  employees to upgrade their trade certification. Another respondent noted while  employees looked into ESDC training options, they did not find any part-time  and/or short-term training programs. Based on their research, they found that  programs tended to be fulltime and required two years of study. However, in  reality, ESDC training options vary over time, and are not all fulltime or  require years of study.
All  employee and union representatives interviewed generally believed Work-Sharing  to be successful and responsive to employee needs as it primarily responds to  the need for job security. Other positive aspects of the program mentioned were  online reporting and the support services provided by program staff.
Respondents identified some program  issues from their experiences. The most frequently cited issue pertains to  delays in the initial reception of benefits.   Some respondents experienced difficulty regarding the application of  program criteria or on the impacts of participating in the program on future EI  or Canadian Pension Plan (CPP) benefits. A few respondents also identified the  potential clawbacks in Work-Sharing benefits due to other income sources such  as pensions as a program aspect that is not responsive to some employee’s  needs.
Communications is an area that can be  improved (e.g. providing a brochure that explains potential financial impacts  of participating in government funded programs). By improving the speed of the  delivery model and increasing outreach activities to employees so they have  more program knowledge, Work-Sharing can increase its responsiveness to  employees’ needs.
A few respondents did comment that the program  is fair and inclusive of all employees regardless of their seniority, which is  especially beneficial for more junior employees who are most likely the first  to be let go when there is less work available. Only one employee  representative indicated that the program may be less responsive to senior  employees who have acquired sufficient seniority to be protected from being  laid-off and for whom Work-Sharing results in a greater loss of wages as senior  employees tend to be at higher pay scales.
2.5.4 Work-Sharing as an automatic stabilizer
Work-Sharing programs can be viewed as human capital policies to assist  employers retain skilled workers in periods when they face temporary decreases  in demand due to factors beyond their control. But, they are also viewed as a  policy tool to reduce labour market disruptions during recessions, acting as an  automatic stabilizer.
From a macroeconomic perspective, Work-Sharing arrangements can  contribute to the stabilization of the economy through the lower variability of  income associated with work-sharing benefits paid to workers who experience  reduction in their hours of work, which in turn can contribute to maintain  consumer confidence during a recessionary period.
However, these effects are minor due to the relatively small scale of  the program. Even during recessions, Work-Sharing claims as a proportion of all  job separations are quite low. During the 2001-2002 downturn, Work-Sharing  claims represented less than 4% of regular EI claims. The 35,000 lay-offs  averted and postponed in 2009-10 due to the Work-Sharing program represent only  slightly more than 1% of total unemployment in Canada during the same period.
2.6  Service delivery
2.6.1 Program awareness
The majority of program officers indicated  that prior to the recession in 2008-2009, there were limited resources directed  towards creating program awareness.   However, with the inclusion of temporary Work-Sharing measures in the  2009 Budget Plan, the program received considerable media and public attention,  and as a result, employers became more aware.
Program officers are able to gauge  awareness of the program in a number of ways, including the number of  applications they receive; feedback from community partners; departmental  colleagues; media scans; inquiries at trade fairs; call centre data; and  feedback from employers.
Employers cited the web site and meetings with human resources  professionals as sources where they obtained information on the program.  A few employers had previous experience with  the program or were aware of other firms who had. Nearly half of the employees  interviewed, however, felt there was limited awareness of the program by  employers. This suggests the need for stronger promotion of the program so that  companies eligible to benefit from Work-Sharing are made aware. They attributed  their own firm’s awareness of the program to previous Work-Sharing agreements,  media reports, and word of mouth.
In responding to challenges identified by  employers and employees with respect to awareness, program officers explained that as a part of Service  Canada’s delivery mechanism, each region receives monthly statistics on program  inquiries. However this data is not being used to develop coordinated outreach  efforts. Program officers in Quebec, in particular, stated that because the  program was one which supports ‘crises’, ongoing promotion was not a priority.  In contrast, in Ontario, where program participation is greatest, a provincial  government branch proactively educates a variety of sectors on all ESDC  programs. Program officers reach out to employers proactively when layoffs are  imminent, and propose introducing the Work-Sharing as an alternative to layoffs  and regular EI. Although outreach activities are low, other regions  indicated they were looking to do more.
2.6.2 Service delivery model
From interviews with program officers, it was found  that the service delivery models vary across the country and in many ways have  become hybrid models neither fully centralized nor decentralized. Ontario, for  example, has developed an integrated service delivery system that centralizes  processing. The centralized unit ensures easily accessible support to officers  from a group of knowledgeable staff who can pull together and ensure that files  are quickly addressed and moved forward for approval.
The majority of program officers from Ontario  positively acknowledge this approach stating that it enhances decision-making  across the province and ensures consistency across files. Ontario has managed  to meet a faster level of service of 20 days for approval, almost 10 days under  the national recommended standard of 30 days that is communicated to employers,  despite an increased number of files. From the representative sample of files  reviewed across the country, on average, agreements took 23 business days to complete.
In the Western Region, program officers developed a  template to help articulate the recovery plan, which in turn improves the  efficiency of both the application and approval processes. The template helps  guide employers in their application and allows for faster verification of  necessary information. Based on this leading practice, National Headquarters  (NHQ) developed a template for all regions to use.
Despite the development of process maps and timeline  protocols, most interviewees as well as program officers flagged the issue of  timeliness in moving files through the various signing authorities. Files are  often held up, especially if they must go to NHQ and the Canadian EI Commission  for approval.
However, most firm representatives interviewed  described the application process as being effective and timely - some did note  delays during the period following the 2008-2009 recession when application  volumes increased.  From the employers’  perspective, developing the recovery plan is the lengthiest part of the  process. It is considered to be a core component of the application process and  some applicants had to revise their plans to meet ESDC requirements. Despite  delays, there were no specific references to firms withdrawing applications  because of seemingly lengthy process. A few employers even expressed gratitude  to the helpful role ESDC played in developing their recovery plans.
2.6.3 Responsiveness to employer’s needs
Most firm representatives interviewed were positive  about their dealings with Service Canada, often referring to local office staff  as knowledgeable, helpful and committed to making the program work effectively.  Employers were found to be satisfied with the length of time to process their  application. Most were also positive about the overall level of Government  support. A few  respondents who participated in the program when the temporary changes and  improvements were implemented thought that program staff members were facing  significant workload increases that meant that program officers were sometimes  unable to answer questions and in other cases took more time to do so.
Before the introduction of the data gateway in 2010, a  key administrative element of the system involved forwarding employee’s weekly  cards to the EI office. If the unit was large, this could be a significant  administrative burden. Most employers who participated in the interviews were  very positive in their assessment of the new data gateway that replaced this  older system. In particular, firms that had used Work-Sharing previously and  had experience with both the manual system and the electronic gateway were  highly positive in describing the new system.
Similarly,  program officers were asked about the kind of feedback they have been receiving  from employers. All participants indicated that the feedback on the gateway had  been positive. It reduced the administrative burden on companies and allowed  for seamless reporting to Service Canada. Program officers remarked that errors  were easier to identify for both reporting and EI eligibility. However, in some  smaller firms or those with less robust electronic information management  systems, there are challenges in using the electronic gateway.
2.6.4 Recovery plans
The recovery plan is seen to be the key determinant of the length of an  agreement. The typical  process is for the employer to identify the length of support required based on  the recovery plan and depending on the complexity of the file, the project  officer and the business analyst work together to determine if the employer’s  predictions are realistic.
Evidence  from the files reviewed showed that employers tend to overestimate their  expected usage at the time of application. Employers explained that agreements  should be adjusted based on the economic cycle. They felt that the expected duration of  reduced business activity should determine the length of agreements. Only a minority of employers  interviewed spoke positively about the process of developing a recovery plan  that assisted them with their own business planning.  A few felt the preparation of the plan was  time-consuming.
According to interviews with program officers, it was noted that  reviewing the recovery plan is the most time-consuming task they undertake in  assessing the application. The process of extending agreements was identified  by program officers as the next most time-consuming component.  They explained that extensions of existing  agreements required almost the same amount of time and staff resources as did  new applications.
Furthermore,  the majority of program officers interviewed felt employers could sometimes  anticipate the recovery process in their recovery plans, particularly larger  companies who had the resources and business expertise to develop comprehensive  plans. However, smaller firms or those whose issues were related to the overall  economic state and unforeseen circumstances had more difficulty in predicting  full recovery. Often outcomes were beyond the control of the employers. For  example, when firms were subsidiaries of companies from other countries, the  local recovery activities may have little impact on decisions taken by  companies headquartered outside Canada.
In light of these challenges around this  program requirement, temporary changes to the recovery plan were introduced in  Budget 2009, requiring employers to only provide steps they would take  to remain viable during the timeframe of the agreement. These changes were well  received and allowed employers to maximize their agreement lengths. Program officers identified the  change as having a positive impact on program resources. They felt that by  applying for the maximum agreement length meant that firms impacted by economic  recession did not have to go through the process of applying for an extension,  allowing management to turn their attention to their recovery and allowing  program staff to address new applications.
In addition, the temporary changes to the  recovery plan were also identified by program officers as being particularly  important during the Tsunami crisis. They explained that for certain sectors,  no other markets existed from which to obtain parts and supplies, so full  recovery was not possible until the crisis had passed.
Concerns raised that the reduced administrative requirements might have  encouraged adverse program take-up by firms not experiencing temporary work  shortages, were not substantiated as the evaluation did not find any evidence  to suggest that program take-up increased beyond what could be expected from its  typical counter cyclicality. The literature reviewed suggests that  administrative requirements are not an important factor in the program take-up.  Gray (1998)
Footnote
14
suggests  that the take-up of Work-Sharing arrangements depends mainly on the comparison  of Work-Sharing benefits to regular EI benefits and the relative costs of  lay-offs for the firms.
Rather, the literature suggests that the major implication of reduced  administrative requirements is on the processing cost of the Work-Sharing  claim. A study conducted in the United States by Walsh et al. (1997) found that  states requiring more approvals from various stakeholders or specialists took  more time to approve applications. However, the approval rates were universally  high suggesting redundancies of some of the requirements and approval  processes. They suggested that if the program approval requirements and process  could be simplified and automated similar to the ongoing claim process, the  administration cost of the program could be reduced
Footnote
15
.
In this regard, the evaluation finds that the temporary changes in  Budget 2009, eliminating the requirements for a recovery plan, positively  impacted the costs and efficiency of the program during the recession.  Similarly, the permanent changes introduced in Budget 2011, simplifying the  recovery plan by eliminating multiple requirements in the application process,  would have also reduced the administrative cost and inefficiency of the  program, although to a lesser degree as the requirement for a recovery plan  returned.
2.7 Demonstration of efficiency and economy
Greater participation leads to greater program costs. But  how much of the increased participation can be attributed to the economic  recession, the additional weeks, or the relaxed admission requirements? While  little evidence was found to suggest that the number of new claims was impacted  by the additional weeks or the relaxed admission requirements, it was noted  that employers used the additional weeks of benefits to apply for longer  agreements during the recession.
The evaluation also found evidence that a portion of  claimants were laid off after the termination of their agreement, and that the  longer agreement lengths did not have any impact at reducing the rate of these  layoffs. The additional weeks of paid benefits to these employees who were  subsequently laid off after their extended agreement ended might represent an  additional cost to the Work-Sharing program that cannot be attributed to the  economic recession alone. This evaluation however, could not explicitly  differentiate between the many factors that would have led to the additional  program cost.
3.Conclusions
3.1 Conclusions
The evaluation supports a continued need for the Work-Sharing program,  especially during periods of economic recession or unforeseen events such as  disasters or states of emergency. The program helped employees and employers  affected by the 2008-2009 recession. It continues to provide ongoing assistance  to specific communities. The program aligns with the federal roles and  responsibilities outlined under Part I of the Employment Insurance Act.
Temporary changes to the program provided support to the government’s  Budget Plan objectives of strengthening benefits, addressing labour market  challenges, and supporting Canadians affected by the short-term economic  recession. Most countries with similar Work-Sharing policies acted in a similar  fashion by making changes to their program in response to the recession.
3.1.1 Recovery plan
The evaluation found that larger companies who had the  resources and business expertise to develop comprehensive plans were able to  anticipate the recovery process in their plans. However, smaller firms or those  whose issues were related to the overall economic state and unforeseen  circumstances had more difficulty in predicting full recovery. It was also  found that during a recession, outcomes are often beyond the control of employers,  especially when firms are subsidiaries of companies from other countries. Some  found the process of developing the recovery plan to be challenging, often seen  as lengthy and burdensome. Program officers echoed these sentiments and noted  that reviewing the recovery plan is the most time-consuming task they undertake  in assessing the application.
3.1.2 Program  participation
The program continues to be largely  used by the manufacturing industry. Other sectors made only limited use of the  program. These non-manufacturing sectors are typically characterized as  consisting of smaller firms  with employees who have specialized skills, varied job descriptions and are not  as able to ‘share’ responsibilities. Program officers identified the  application guidelines as the biggest barrier to increase program uptake.
3.1.3 Temporary measures
The evaluation found minimal evidence to suggest that  neither the reduced administrative requirements nor the extensions to the  maximum possible agreement lengths had a significant impact on the programs  take-up. However, the average  agreement length rose substantially.
3.1.4 Program outcomes
More than 75% of employers said that the costs of lay-offs in terms of  subsequent recruiting and training would have been very substantial and that  avoiding this was the principal benefit of applying to the program. Many  participating employers attributed Work-Sharing with helping their company  avoid temporary layoffs and returning to normal levels of production. But the  evaluation also found that a non-trivial percentage of layoffs that were  thought to be averted were actually only postponed until after the agreement.  The net outcome was that on average between 2000-01 and 2010-11, 60% of layoffs  averted during the agreement, remained averted for at least 6 months following  the agreement termination, resulting in an estimated net effect of 11,189 and  24,385 layoffs averted during the years 2008-09 and  2009-10 respectively. This was an improvement  over the estimated 49% of layoffs averted for 6 months during the 1990-91 to  2001-02 period, as documented by the 2004 Work-Sharing evaluation.
Furthermore, the evaluation found there to be no effect of the  temporary budget measures, either positive or negative, on the likelihood of  being laid off in the six months following the expiry of the Work-Sharing  agreement.  It concluded rather, layoff  rates followed a counter-cyclical pattern regardless of whether agreement  extensions were available.
The evaluation also found that the ability of the Work-Sharing program  to act as an automatic stabilizer during recessions is likely minimal due to  the consistently low levels of program participation relative to the country’s  total labour force.
3.2 Recommendations
The  evaluation makes the following nine recommendations.
Key fact:  The most frequently cited issue by employees was delays in the delivery of  benefits to employees, especially regarding the delivery of initial  benefits.
Recommendation  1: Explore ways to improve the speed of the delivery of benefits to employees.
Key fact: Employers were particularly positive regarding the new data gateway system, although it was  found to be less beneficial to smaller companies with less robust electronic  information management systems.
Recommendation  2: Explore ways to improve reporting processes for smaller companies.
Key fact: Most program officers raised the issue of the time it takes  to move files through the various signing authorities, and they expressed their  concern that there are too many opportunities for files to be held up,  especially for the files that must go to National Headquarters and the Canadian  Employment Insurance Commission for approval.
Recommendation  3: Examine the multiple signing authorities and how the process can be streamlined.
Key fact:  The delivery of the new provision allowing for laid-off workers to be  called back to employment as part of a Work-Sharing agreement varied between  regions. Some program officers indicated they proactively discussed with the  firm the possibility of calling back laid-off workers while others assumed it was done only if  it was part of the recovery plan.
Recommendation  4: Ensure greater consistency in program delivery across the country.
Key fact: The service delivery models vary across the country.  Ontario has developed an integrated service delivery system that centralizes  processing, and they have managed to meet a faster level of service of 20 days  for approval, almost 10 days under the national recommended standard of 30  days.
Recommendation  5: Improve the efficiency of program delivery by learning from the region’s  best practices.
Key fact: Very few employers spoke  positively about the process of developing the recovery plan, some describing it as lengthy  and burdensome, and program officers unanimously identified the recovery plan  as the most  time-consuming task they undertake in assessing the applications.
Recommendation  6: Draw upon  lessons learned from the implementation of temporary measures during the  2008-2009 economic recession to assess whether similar measures should be  considered during future recessions (e.g. examine the continued relevance of  the recovery plan or alternate ways to further streamline the application for  employers).
Key fact: The majority of  program officers indicated that prior to the recession, there were limited  resources directed towards creating program awareness.  Nearly half of employee representatives interviewed believed  that there was limited awareness of the program by employers.
Recommendation  7: Increase outreach activities to employers. Ensure that potential  beneficiaries of the program are aware of it.
Key fact: Employee representatives explained there was a lack of clarity regarding  the application of program criteria, potential clawbacks in Work-Sharing  benefits due to other income sources, and potential financial implications of  participating in the program on future EI or Canadian Pension Plan benefits.
Recommendation  8: Increase outreach activities to employees. Provide greater clarity on the  programs benefits, criteria and all the associated implications to their  participation.
Key fact: A large proportion of the  workforce is now employed in non-manufacturing type jobs. Program officers  explained that the biggest barrier to the programs take-up by these  non-manufacturing sectors is the application guidelines favored towards firms  with simple production processes.
Recommendation  9: Review the application process and explore how the program might be more  widely used by the non-manufacturing sectors.
Appendix I – Lines of  evidence
A literature  review
Footnote
16
provided theoretical justifications for the Work-Sharing program as well  as theoretical insight into a number of performance related questions. It also  served as the main source of information for comparing Canada’s Work-Sharing  program to policies in other countries.
A usage report
Footnote
17
provided estimates on program  participation broken down by provinces, industries and demographics. The report  also emphasized the cyclical nature of program participation, and provided  estimates on typical claim duration, extent of work reduction, amount of  benefits paid, and a preliminary estimate of the number of layoffs postponed or  averted by the program.
A program file review
Footnote
18
examined the content of 300 case files from firms who applied for Work-Sharing  assistance between February 2006 and January 2012. Documents reviewed included  application and amendment forms, Service Canada recommendation reports,  monitoring checklists, recovery plans, Work-Sharing unit sheets, and other  materials such as faxes, signed agreements, etc. The files were selected to reflect  the overall distribution of agreements across Canada. Of the 300 files, 226  were approved agreements, 38 were withdrawn by the employer, 26 were rejected  by Service Canada, and 10 were approved but either never signed or implemented.  The file review process provided evidence to ten evaluation questions.  Especially in regards to questions which pertained to the “life” of an  agreement, in terms of comparing firm outcomes at the end of an agreement, with  projections made at the beginning of the application process.
Interviews with employees
Footnote
19
provided evidence to a total of six evaluation questions. Particularly in  regards to how employees use the program, what they perceive as the costs and  benefits of participation, and how responsive the program is to their needs.  Responses were documented from 15 employee representatives from firms that  participated in or applied to the Work-Sharing program.
Interviews with employers
Footnote
20
provided  evidence to a total of 16 evaluation questions. Particularly in regards to  questions pertaining to the application process and how responsive the program  is to employer needs. Most firm representatives were human resource managers  although in smaller firms, chief executives or owners were more likely to be  involved. Telephone interviews were conducted with 16 informants and 13 of  these were with employer representatives who had a Work-Sharing agreement, two  were with firms that had a cancelled (withdrawn) agreement and one was with a  rejected applicant.
Interviews with program officers
Footnote
21
provided evidence to 14 evaluation questions in terms of program relevance and  performance. Twenty-two key informants were interviewed, distributed between  the regional areas across the country (Western Canada, Ontario, Quebec, and the  Atlantic regions) as well as the National Headquarters (NHQ). Participants  represented those with direct experience prior to the temporary changes, during  the economic recession, and following the latest revisions to program  guidelines.
To ensure a common understanding of the terms  used in the evaluation and reporting of interview results, the following  guidelines have been used:
“A few/ a  small number of interviewees” = 1% to 24%
“Some” = 25%  to 49%
“A majority  of interviewees” = 50% to 74%
“Most interviewees”  = 75% to 99%; and
“All  interviewees” = 100%
A first statistical study
Footnote
22
using administrative data
Footnote
23
from 1989 to 2012, focused on Work-Sharing benefit extensions, and was the  primary piece of evidence used to provide the evaluation with an estimate of  the layoffs occurring after the termination of an agreement.
A second statistical  study
Footnote
24
examined the effect of Work-Sharing on communities. Using ESDC employment data  and Canada’s Labour Force Survey, the study used standard econometric methodology  to examine the incidence of Work-Sharing on employment growth and layoff rates  aggregated at the level of the economic region.
A third statistical study
Footnote
25
evaluated firm level usage of the Work-Sharing program using claimant level  data, and how the usage changed after the 2009 extension to program benefits.  Although not highly referenced throughout the evaluation, it did provide some  supporting evidence in relation to how the program is used.
Appendix II – Evaluation matrix
Continued need for program
Q1.
Question 1.
Is there still a need for the  Work-Sharing program?
Literature review, Program file review, Program officer interviews, Employer interviews, Employee interviews
Q2.
Question 2.
What  are the characteristics of the industries who participate in the Work-Sharing  program?
Program  file review, Program officer interviews
Q3.
Question 3.
Is the rationale for extending the benefit period of Work-Sharing agreement and easing the admission requirements during the 2008-2009 recession relevant and  why?
Program officer interviews, Employer interviews, Employee interviews
Q4.
Question 4.
How  does Canada’s Work-Sharing program compare to Work-Sharing policies in other  countries?
Literature  review
Alignment with government priorities
Q5.
Question 5.
Do the temporary  changes to the Work-Sharing program line up with the Economic Action Plan  objectives?
N/A
Alignment with federal roles and responsibilities
Q6.
Question 6.
How is the Work-Sharing  program aligned with the Federal roles and responsibilities?
N/A
Achievement of expected outcomes
Q7.
Question 7.
How is the program used?  (gender, number of employees, level of work reduction, duration of the claims,  etc.)
Usage report, Technical study: employer reliance
Q8.
Question 8.
How does the actual  usage compare to the agreement reported numbers? In what way is the use  restricted due to the enforcement of the eligibility rules of EI regular  claims?
Program file revie, Employer interviews
Q9.
Question 9.
To what degree are the costs of lay-off to the employer  in terms of subsequent recruitment and training of a skilled work force  avoided?
Employer interviews
Q10.
Question 10.
Is there evidence of missed opportunities or  underutilization in some sectors?
Program file review, Program officer interviews
Q11.
Question 11.
How is the new provision being used which allows for  laid-off workers to be called back to be employment as part of a Work-Sharing  agreement?
Program officer interviews
Q12.
Question 12.
How frequently are new employees hired during the  period of WS agreements?
Program file review, Program officer interviews
Q13.
Question 13.
What are the determinants of the employer’s awareness of the program?
Program officer interviews, Employer interviews, Employee interviews
Q14.
Question 14.
How is  the service delivery model influencing the speediness of the approval process?
Program officer interviews, Employer interviews
Q15.
Question 15.
How responsive is the Work-Sharing program to the  employer’s needs?
Program officer interviews, Employer interviews
Q16.
Question 16.
How is the electronic data gateway helping answering  employer’s needs?
Program officer interviews, Employer interviews
Q17.
Question 17.
Do the reduced requirements in the application process  and the extension of the benefits increase the take-up over and above the cyclical growth?
Literature review, Program officer interviews, Employer interviews, Technical study: employer reliance, Technical study: impacts of temporary budgetary changes
Q18.
Question 18.
What are the determinants of the appropriate duration of a Work-Sharing agreement?
Program officer interviews, Employer interviews, Technical study: impacts of temporary budgetary changes
Q19.
Question 19.
To what extent does the recovery plan reflect the actual  recovery process?
Program file review, Program officer interviews, Employer interviews
Q20.
Question 20.
How is the Government degree of support and follow-up  appropriate from an employer’s perspective?
Employer interviews
Q21.
Question 21.
What are the monetary and non-monetary costs and  benefits of the WS program for the employees?
Employer interviews, Employee interviews
Q22.
Question 22.
How are the reduced hours  used by employees? Is training or job search activities undertaken?
Employee interviews
Q23.
Question 23.
How responsive is the  Work-Sharing program to the employee’s needs?
Employee interviews
Q24.
Question 24.
How many temporary layoffs are averted as a result of  employers participating in the Work-Sharing program? How much of the Work  Sharing take-up is only postponing unemployment?
Literature review, Program file review, Employer interviews, Usage report, Technical study: impacts of temporary budgetary changes
Q25.
Question 25.
What proportion of participating businesses returned to  normal levels of business during or after the end of the agreements? To what  extent was the program a contributing factor?
Program file review, Employer interviews
Q26.
Question 26.
What is the impact of the Work-Sharing program on  communities? Do the temporary changes have a greater impact on communities?
Program officer interviews, Technical study: impact on regional employment
Q27.
Question 27.
What is the impact of the Work Sharing on the  stabilization of the economy? To what extent can the program be seen as an  automatic stabilizer?
Literature review
Demonstration of efficiency and economy
Q28.
Question 28.
How  much of the additional costs of the Work-Sharing program are due to the  downturn in the economy, the addition in weeks or the relaxed admission  requirements?
Usage report, Technical study: employer reliance, Technical study: impacts of temporary budgetary changes
Q29.
Question 29.
Do the  reduced requirements in the application process have a positive impact on the  administrative costs and efficiency of the program?
Literature review, Program file review, Program  officer interviews
Footnotes
Footnote 1
The last evaluation report was completed in 2004.
Return to footnote
1
referrer
Footnote 2
The work unit consists of all company employees that will be participating in a Work-Sharing agreement, but not all company employees necessarily make up the work unit.
Return to footnote
2
referrer
Footnote 3
Vroman, Wayne, and Vera Brusentsev. 2009. Short-Time Compensation as a Policy to Stabilize Employment. Memeo. University of Delaware, Department of Economics.
European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and working Conditions. 2009. Europe in recession: employment initiatives at company and Member State level. Background paper.
Return to footnote
3
referrer
Footnote 4
Department of Finance Canada (2009), Budget 2009 Canada’s Economic Action Plan, p.17.
Return to footnote
4
referrer
Footnote 5
The 2008-2009 recession started in the third quarter of 2008 and ended in the second quarter of 2009.
Return to footnote
5
referrer
Footnote 6
Boeri, T. and Bruecker, H. (2011) “Short-Time Work Benefits Revisited: Some Lessons from the Great Recession” IZA Discussion Paper No. 5635.
Return to footnote
6
referrer
Footnote 7
Hijzen, A. and D. Venn (2011) “The role of Short-Time Work schemes during the 2008-2009 Recession”, OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers, No. 115, OECD Publishing, Paris.
Return to footnote
7
referrer
Footnote 8
OECD (2015) “Back toWork: Canada: Improving the Re-employment Prospects of Displaced Workers” OECD Publishing, Paris.
Return to footnote
8
referrer
Footnote 9
Cobb, S. and Kasl, S.V. (1977) “Termination: The consequences of Job Loss” U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare, Publiation No. 77-24.
Return to footnote
9
referrer
Footnote 10
Reid, Frank. (1983) “Conceptual Issues in the Evaluation of Work Sharing” Employment and Immigration Canada.
Return to footnote
10
referrer
Footnote 11
The 2004 Work-Sharing evaluation used 26 weeks and 38 weeks to report layoffs after Work-Sharing agreement terminations as these are the limits on normal and extended Work-Sharing agreement lengths respectively.
Return to footnote
11
referrer
Footnote 12
Evaluation of the Work-Sharing Program (2004), Human Resources Development Canada
Return to footnote
12
referrer
Footnote 13
Reid, Frank. 1982. UI-Assisted Worksharing as an Alternative to Lay-offs: The Canadian Experience. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 35, no. 3 (April): 319-329.
Reid, Frank (1983), “Conceptual Issues in the Evaluation of Work Sharing in Canada,” Prepared under contract for Employment and Immigration Canada. February.
Return to footnote
13
referrer
Footnote 14
Gray, David. 1998. When Might a Distressed Firm Share Work? Evidence from the Short-Time Compensation Programme in France. British Journal of Industrial Relations 36, no. 1 (January 1): 43-72.
Return to footnote
14
referrer
Footnote 15
Walsh, Stephen, Rebecca London, Deana McCanne, Karen Needels, Walter Nicholson, and Stuart Kerachsky. 1997. Evaluation of short-time compensation programs: final report. English. Washington, DC: Unemployment Insurance Service.
Return to footnote
15
referrer
Footnote 16
2010, C. Vincent “Literature Review for the Evaluation of the Work-Sharing Initiative:  Final Report”.
Return to footnote
16
referrer
Footnote 17
2015, ESDC “Usage of the Work-Sharing Program: 2000-01 to 2012–13”.
Return to footnote
17
referrer
Footnote 18
2015, ESDC “Technical Study for the Evaluation of the Work-Sharing Program: File Review Work-Sharing Agreements and Program Documentation”.
Return to footnote
18
referrer
Footnote 19
2013, EKOS Research Associates Inc. “Key Informant Interviews with Employee Representatives on the Work-Sharing Program”.
Return to footnote
19
referrer
Footnote 20
2013, ESDC “Evaluation of the Work Sharing Program: Employer Key Informant Interview”.
Return to footnote
20
referrer
Footnote 21
2012, The Whetstone Group “Final Report for Program Staff Key Informant Interviews for the Work-Sharing Program Evaluation”.
Return to footnote
21
referrer
Footnote 22
2013, P. Leonard “An Examination of the Impacts of Temporary Budgetary Changes on Work-Sharing Claim Duration and Subsequent Employee Layoff: A Technical Report on the Work-Sharing Program”.
Return to footnote
22
referrer
Footnote 23
Record of Employment (ROE) and Status Vector (STVC) file data from Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC).
Return to footnote
23
referrer
Footnote 24
2015, D.Gray, J.T.McDonald “Analyzing the Impact of Work-Sharing Benefits on Regional Employment: Does the intervention make Employment More resilient”.
Return to footnote
24
referrer
Footnote 25
2015, ESDC “Employers’ Intensity of Reliance on the Work-Sharing Program: Evidence from Administrative Data”.
Return to footnote
25
referrer
Report a problem or mistake on this page
Please select all that apply:
A link, button or video is not working
It has a spelling mistake
Information is missing
Information is outdated or wrong
Login error when trying to access an account
I can't find what I'm looking for
Other issue not in this list
Submit
Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries,
contact us
.
Date modified:
2022-04-25