Summary of the Evaluation of Bilateral and Regional Labour Affairs and the International Trade and Labour Stream
From:
Employment and Social Development Canada
Alternate formats
Evaluation of Bilateral and Regional Labour Affairs and the International Trade and Labour Stream – Final Report [
PDF
– 237
KB
]
Bilateral and Regional Labour Affairs negotiates, implements, monitors, and resolves disputes related to Labour Provisions of Free Trade Agreements ("the labour provisions") with partner countries to:
Promote fundamental labour rights internationally.
Help protect Canadians from unfair competition.
Key findings
Put in force nine trade agreements with labour provisions that require parties to respect
internationally-recognized
labour rights and principles and completed 3 additional negotiations.
Provided funding of $4.2M provided to projects in partner countries to assist with improving and maintaining labour legislation and enforcement capacity.
Made efforts to address non-compliance with the agreements contributed to improvements in partners' labour legislation and enforcement.
The labour provisions and regional engagement efforts contributed to the promotion of fundamental labour rights and principles internationally.
Challenges
Limited stakeholder consultations during negotiations.
Gaps in efforts to implement and monitor labour provisions.
Four lessons learned
Modifying consultations to increase the involvement of provinces, territories, and other stakeholders could enhance analysis and negotiations.
Considering how the monitoring pilot project could progress, i.e., how it could become a sustainable tool to help address gaps in efforts to monitor labour provisions, and how it could support the monitoring requirements in the labour provisions.
Adjustments to the project approval process could help focus on areas of most pressing need. Adjustments to project duration could contribute to sustainability.
Opportunities may exist to improve how performance data is organized and to collect more data on examples of contributions to long-term outcomes.
The full
Evaluation of Bilateral and Regional Labour Affairs and the International Trade and Labour Stream
is available on Employment and Social Development Canada's website.
Report a problem or mistake on this page
Please select all that apply:
A link, button or video is not working
It has a spelling mistake
Information is missing
Information is outdated or wrong
Login error when trying to access an account
I can't find what I'm looking for
Other issue not in this list
Submit
Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries,
contact us
.
Date modified:
2018-06-14