Evaluation of the Employment Insurance pilot projects nos. 7, 9, 11, 13 and 16
Official title:
Evaluation of the Employment Insurance pilot projects calculating benefit rate based on claimant’s 14 highest weeks of insurable earnings and providing increased access to Employment and Unemployment Benefits for new entrants and re-entrants
Alternate formats
Download PDF version (682 MB)
Large print, braille,
MP3
(audio), e-text and
DAISY
formats are available on demand by
ordering online
or calling 1 800 O-Canada (1-800-622-6232). If you use a teletypewriter (
TTY
), call 1-800-926-9105.
Table of contents
Executive summary
Management  response
1. Introduction
1.1 Evaluation  goals
1.2 Overview
1.3 Methodology
2.  Description
2.1 Pilot  descriptions
2.2 Other  pilots and temporary provisions
2.3  Expected impact of pilots on claimants’ incentives to accept all available work
3.  Relevance
3.1 Need  for program
3.2 Do  the design features of the pilots support the needs of non-standard workers and  encourage greater labour market attachment?
3.3  Alignment with government priorities
3.4 Alignment  with federal roles and responsibilities
4.  Performance
4.1  Achievement of expected outcomes
4.1.1 Short-term outcomes
4.1.2 Changes in claimants’ behaviour
4.1.3 Employers’ behaviour
4.2  Efficiency and economy
5.  Conclusion
6.  Bibliography
List of acronyms
List of tables
Appendix  A: Evaluation matrix
Appendix  B: Lines of evidence
Appendix  C: Pilot EI economic regions
Appendix  D: Letters sent to NERE pilot claimants
Appendix  E: Rate calculation formulas
Footnotes
Executive summary
This report presents the evaluation of the Employment  Insurance (EI) pilot projects on Calculating Benefit Rate Based on Claimant’s  14 Highest Weeks of Insurable Earnings (Best 14 Weeks) and Providing Increased  Access to Employment and Unemployment Benefits for New Entrants and Re-entrants  (NERE). These pilot projects were implemented for the purpose of testing:
whether paying benefits based  on calculating the rate of weekly benefits using the insurable earnings from a  claimant’s 14 highest weeks of insurable earning in the qualifying period would  encourage claimants to accept all available work;
the labour market impact of  decreasing, for new entrants and re-entrants to the labour force who have  access to employment programs established under Part II of the Act, the number  of hours of insurable employment required for them to qualify for benefits.
The report summarizes findings from  multiple lines of evidence, employing qualitative and quantitative  methodologies.
Best 14 Weeks pilots
The Best 14 Weeks pilot projects, in effect  from October 2005 to April 2013, changed the way EI benefits were calculated by  removing a potential disincentive for claimants to accept a week of employment  with below-average earnings during the rate calculation period. The pilots were  designed to test whether the  modified approach to paying benefits would provide an incentive for individuals  to accept all available work and whether employers facing labour shortages  would have access to additional workers.
The pilots replaced the 26 week benefit  rate approach with one based on claimants’ best 14 weeks over the 52 week  period preceding their claim, or since their last claim, whichever was shorter.  The modified approach also removed the minimum divisor provision, which  stipulated a lower bound to the number of weeks that were used to calculate  claimants’ average insured earnings. The minimum divisor varied according to  the regional unemployment rate, ranging from 14 to 22 weeks (lower in high  unemployment EI economic regions). The 26 week benefit rate approach also had a  provision which excluded small weeks of earnings (under $225) from the benefit  rate calculation, provided that the minimum divisor had been satisfied.
These changes are estimated to have  increased the benefit rate for approximately half of claimants in the  designated pilot project EI economic regions and resulted in approximately  $1.9B of additional benefits being paid to claimants over the course of the  pilot projects (an average of $250M a year from 2006 to 2012).
Many claimants in pilot regions had significant variation  in weekly insured earnings, which resulted in higher benefit rates under the  Best 14 Weeks pilot projects
Under the 26 week benefit rate approach, a  week of below average earnings that occurred in the rate calculation period  could result in a lower benefit rate. Under the Best 14 Weeks, an additional  week of lower earnings would not impact the benefit rate, provided the claimant  had already worked 14 “good” weeks. As such, the Best 14 Weeks pilots benefited  claimants whose insured earnings varied from week to week and those who had  higher average earnings in the 52 weeks preceding their claim than they did in  the 26 weeks preceding their claim.
It is estimated that between 40% and 58% of  claimants in pilot project regions benefited from the Best 14 Weeks pilot  projects. While 58% were found to have a higher benefit rate under the Best 14  Weeks pilots, some of these claimants may have received the same rate under the  small weeks rule. According to the EI Monitoring and Assessment Report, as many  as 19% of claimants benefit from the small weeks rule over the time period of  the pilots. Thus, a plausible range for the estimated number of pilot  beneficiaries is 40% to 58%.
The average increase in the benefit rate  among pilot claimants was between 15 and 21 dollars per week, depending on the  year. Note that the national average regular benefit rate over that period was  $360/week. Women and youth were the most likely to benefit from the Best 14  Weeks pilots, while frequent claimants (seasonal or otherwise) were less likely  to benefit from the pilot than first time claimants.
Changes to the rate calculation formula under the Best 14  Weeks pilots had no statistically measureable impact on the hours worked prior  to a claim
While one study that analyzed a rather  narrow subsample of pilot claimants found that the insured hours of pilot  claimants increased by 35 to 80 hours between 2006 and 2008 compared to  non-pilot claimants, a similar study that used a somewhat broader sample of  claimants found no statistically significant impact of the pilots on insured  hours. Evidence from key informant interviews with claimants and employers on  claimants’ insured hours and other measures of labour market attachment is also  mixed. Claimants from pilot regions indicated that the pilots did not impact  their decision to work additional weeks because they have always accepted all  available work. However, employers noted some behavioural changes. They  reported that workers were more willing to work partial weeks under the pilots.  They also observed that the pilots increased the amount of work that would be  taken, as employees looked to make a particular week one of their “best” weeks.  However, in some regions employers reported that the pilots decreased work  effort among workers who had already worked 14 good weeks (i.e. weeks with  typical or above typical earnings).
New Entrant and Re-Entrant (NERE) pilots
The NERE pilot projects, in effect from  December 2005 to December 2010, reduced the number of hours, from 910 to 840,  that a new-entrant or re-entrant to the labour market would need to accumulate  in the qualifying period in order to receive EI benefits. The pilots also  informed claimants of the availability of guidance and employment services. The  objectives of the pilots were to improve employability and help reduce future  reliance on EI benefits.
Over the course of the NERE pilot projects,  it is estimated that the probability that a NERE qualified for EI benefits  increased by over five percentage points, all else held constant. This resulted  in approximately 6,500 claims per year qualifying for benefits with 840 to 909 insured  hours. The estimated benefit cost, controlling for behavioural changes, was $204M  (approximately $40M a year between 2006 and 2010). Beneficiaries of the NERE  pilots were more likely to be a youth and had lower average household income  than NEREs who qualified with over 910 insured hours.
Lowering the eligibility threshold for NERE claimants had  a modest impact on the number of hours worked for NEREs targeted by the pilots
Lowering the required number of insured  hours for a NERE to be eligible to receive benefits decreased hours worked in  the qualifying period among a small proportion of NEREs. Statistical analysis shows  that approximately 0.6% of NERE job separators in the pilot project regions  worked fewer hours in their qualifying period in response to the NERE Pilot. The  behavioural impact was among NEREs who would have qualified for EI benefits  with over 910 hours, but worked fewer hours in accordance with the lower pilot  eligibility threshold. This suggests that around 15% of pilot beneficiaries  would have qualified for EI benefits regardless of the NERE pilots.
Training take-up rates were unchanged among NEREs
As part of the NERE pilots, letters were to  be sent to NERE claimants in the range of insured hours affected by the NERE  pilots encouraging them to access guidance and support services. However,  Service Canada administrative data shows that only about 700 letters were sent  between April 2006 and March 2008, out of approximately 9,000 claimants who  were eligible under the NERE pilots. Consequently, very few pilot claimants  were aware from this communication method that they were part of a pilot and the  take-up rate for training did not change.
Management response
Background
The Employment Insurance (EI) program  provides temporary financial assistance to workers who have lost their job  through no fault of their own while they look for work or upgrade their skills,  and helps unemployed people across the country find employment. The EI program  also provides assistance to workers who are sick, pregnant, or caring for a  newborn, adopted, or critically ill child and to those caring for a family  member who is gravely ill with a significant risk of death. In 2012-2013, $10.1  billion of regular benefits and $4.5 billion of special benefits were paid to  1.9 million claims, and $2.0 billion was transferred to the provinces and  territories under Labour Market Development Agreements to fund re-employment  measures.
The Employment Insurance Act (
EI Act
) grants the Canada Employment  Insurance Commission (CEIC) the authority to make regulations regarding pilot  projects for testing amendments which would make the
EI Act
or
Employment  Insurance Regulations
(
EI Regulations
)  more consistent with current employment practices or trends, or would improve  service to the public. The
EI Act
specifies that pilot projects can have a maximum duration of three years.
Three regional pilot projects, which were  in effect from 2005 to 2013, calculated the rate of weekly benefits using  claimants’ 14 highest weeks of earnings. The pilot projects tested whether  paying benefits using this approach would provide an incentive for individuals  to accept work that would have previously lowered their benefits, as well as  whether employers facing labour shortages would have improved access to  workers.
Similarly, two regional pilot projects,  which were in effect from 2005 to 2010, tested the labour market impact of decreasing  the number of hours of employment new entrants and re-entrants (NERE) to the  labour force required to qualify for EI regular benefits, from 910 to 840  hours.
Response to findings
This evaluation provides valuable insight  on the labour market impacts of the Best 14 Weeks and NERE pilot projects.
Best 14 Weeks pilot projects
Since 1996, various provisions have been implemented to address disincentives  to accept partial weeks of work that could have decrease future EI benefits. A  Small Weeks provision, first implemented in 1997, excluded some weeks of low  earnings from the calculation of EI benefits. The Best 14 Weeks pilot projects  were implemented to improve upon the Small Weeks provision and provide an even  greater incentive to accept all available work. Similarly, lessons learned from  the Best 14 Weeks pilot projects provided much of the analytical base for the  Variable Best Weeks (VBW) legislation now in place.
This evaluation finds that the pilot  projects were most likely to increase benefits for female claimants and youth. Both  of these groups are proportionally overrepresented in non-standard employment,  which may be associated with earnings that are variable from week to week.
The evaluation also finds that changes to  the rate calculation formula did not correspond to subsequent changes in hours  worked prior to claim commencement. However, it should be noted that other  studies of the Best 14 Weeks pilot projects found evidence of an increase in  hours worked due to the pilot projects. The design of the VBW legislation  strengthens work incentives as the number of weeks used for calculating the  benefit rate ranges from 14 to 22, depending on the unemployment rate in a  claimant’s EI economic region (e.g., 14 weeks in regions with unemployment rates  of 13.1% or higher versus 22 weeks for regions with unemployment rates below  6.1%). This limits the disincentive to accept work once 14 weeks of earnings  are accumulated.
In addition, since the original pilot  project regions were selected based on unemployment rates of 10% or higher,  which then fluctuated over approximately eight years, the pilot parameters  performance were observed as unemployment rates decreased in some regions. The  VBW legislation introduced following the conclusion of the last Best 14 Weeks  pilot project is national in scope and has systematic adjustments based on the  EI regional unemployment rate.
By aligning the calculation of weekly  benefits with the regional unemployment rate, the VBW approach builds on the  strengths of the Best 14 Weeks pilot projects, making the program more  responsive to local labour market conditions and increasing fairness in the EI  program by ensuring that people living in regions with similar labour market  conditions are treated in a similar fashion.
New Entrant and Re-Entrant pilot projects
The results of this evaluation indicate that the pilot projects increased the  probability that NERE who lost their employment through no fault of their own  would qualify for EI regular benefits. Reducing the entrance requirement for  NERE by 70 hours increased their eligibility rate for regular benefits by more  than five percentage points. The evaluation does not find evidence of a marked  decrease in work effort in response to the lower entrance requirement.
The evaluation finds that although the  pilot projects allowed an annual average of 6,500 NERE to receive EI regular  benefits, very few NERE were notified about employment services for which they  may have been eligible. Program Management acknowledges the importance of  effective communication with clients, in particular NERE who may have limited  knowledge of the EI program. Moving forward, the Government of Canada is  exploring avenues to modernize EI service delivery and improve communication  with clients.
The pilot projects also tested whether  reducing the entrance requirement for regular benefits for NERE would reduce  future reliance on EI benefits. This evaluation cites the 2011 Summative  Evaluation of New Entrants and Re-Entrants, which found that the seasonality of  the industry in which an individual works may be more of a determining factor  on future frequent use of EI than being a NERE.
Conclusions
Since 2012, significant steps have been  taken to improve the national consistency of the EI program by allowing  regionally targeted pilot projects to sunset, such as the pilot projects  relating to extended benefits and the Best 14 Weeks pilot project. Furthermore,  the only pilot project in effect as of February 2015 (the Working While on  Claim pilot project) is national in nature.
The Government of Canada is committed to  ensuring that the EI program is fair, flexible and responsive to labour market  conditions. Given that the Government is constantly monitoring the  effectiveness of the EI program in addressing the needs of Canadian workers,  their families and their employers, the findings presented in this evaluation  will be taken into consideration. Further, the VBW legislation, which has been  in effect since April 2013, has taken into account the findings of this  evaluation regarding the impact of the Best 14 Weeks pilot projects on benefit  rates and work effort.
1. Introduction
1.1  Evaluation goals
This  report presents the evaluation of Employment Insurance (EI) pilot projects  referred to as Calculating Benefit Rate Based on Claimant’s 14 Highest Weeks of  Insurable Earnings (Pilots #7, #11, and #16) and Providing  Increased Access to Employment and Unemployment Benefits for New Entrants and  Re-entrants (Pilots #9 and #13). The objectives of the evaluation are to  examine the relevance and performance of the pilots in relatively high  unemployment rate EI economic regions in meeting the needs of non-standard and  seasonal workers and encouraging greater labour market attachment.
1.2  Overview
Three pilot projects were implemented in  the fall of 2005 to test changes to the EI program. The Pilots were expected to  affect claimants with seasonal and non-standard work. The three pilots are:
Calculating Benefit Rate Based  on Claimant’s 14 Highest Weeks of Insurable Earnings (Best 14 Weeks).
Providing Increased Access to  Employment and Unemployment Benefits for New Entrants and Re-entrants (NERE).
Increasing the Allowable  Earnings from Employment While a Claimant is Receiving Benefits (Working While  on Claim).
The Best 14 Weeks Pilot concluded, after  the pilot parameters were twice reintroduced and twice extended, on April 6,  2013. The NERE pilot concluded, after the parameters were reintroduced one time,  on December 4, 2010.
A version of the Working While on Claim  Pilot was reintroduced on several occasions with varied parameters. The Working  While on Claim Pilots will be evaluated separately, since a Working While on  Claim Pilot is still in effect.
1.3 Methodology
The methodologies used in this evaluation  incorporated multiple lines of inquiry, consisting of both qualitative and  quantitative studies. They are described in detail in
Appendix B
.
2. Description
2.1 Pilot descriptions
On October 5, 2004, with the Speech from  the Throne, the Government of Canada made a commitment to “review the EI Program  to ensure it remained well-suited to the needs of Canada’s workforce.”
Footnote
1
Consideration was given to how the legislated EI benefit rate may have been less  responsive to regular beneficiaries in seasonal and non-standard employment,  and may have created disincentives for some claimants to accept all available  work.
Adjustments to the EI Program following  Budget 2005
Footnote
2
included the two pilots that are the subject of this evaluation. The  pilots were implemented in EI economic regions where the unemployment rate was  10% or above in order to test the impacts of changes to the way that EI  benefits are calculated (Best 14 Weeks Pilot) and to benefit eligibility for  NERE claimants (the NERE Pilot). Specifically, the two pilots altered the  legislated approach in the following ways:
Pilot Project #7: Calculating Benefit Rate  Based On Claimant’s 14 Highest Weeks of Insurable Earnings (Best 14 Weeks)
This Pilot modified the benefit rate, compared  to the 26 week benefit rate approach, by basing the rate on the claimant’s  highest, or best, 14 weeks of earnings over the 52 weeks preceding their claim  (or since the beginning of their last claim, whichever was shorter). The former  legislated approach, which remained in effect in non-pilot regions, continued  to calculate benefits using the claimant’s average earnings over the 26 weeks  preceding their claim (or since the beginning of their last claim).
Footnote
3
The types of benefits  included in the Pilot were regular, sickness, maternity, parental, and compassionate care benefits.
The new benefit rate was meant to better  reflect seasonal claimants’ typical insured earnings, and provide greater  incentives for claimants to accept all available work. The Pilot was designed  to test whether paying benefits using the modified approach provided an  incentive for individuals to accept work that would have previously lowered  their benefits, and whether employers facing labour shortages had access to  additional workers.
Footnote
4
Pilot Project #9: Providing Increased  Access to Employment and Unemployment Benefits for New Entrants and Re-Entrants  (NERE)
This pilot allowed individuals who were new  to the labour market, or who were returning after a significant absence, to  qualify for EI benefits with 840 insured hours in the qualifying period, rather  than the legislated NERE provision of 910 hours. It also informed claimants of  the availability of guidance and employment services.
Footnote
5
The Pilot was intended to test whether these changes would improve  employability and help reduce future reliance on EI benefits.
Footnote
6
Though the NERE and Best 14 Weeks pilots  were to expire in the fall of 2008, insufficient evidence had been collected as  to the effects of the program changes on the Canadian labour market. Therefore,  the pilot parameters were reintroduced with modifications so that these changes  to the EI parameters could be more thoroughly examined prior to proposing  amendments to the legislation. Through the reintroductions, the pilot regions were  modified to include EI economic regions with an unemployment rate of 8% or  higher at the time of reintroduction. This resulted in two EI economic regions being  excluded from the pilots, while four other EI economic regions were added (see  appendix C for a list of pilot regions).
Footnote
7
The Best 14 Weeks Pilot  parameters were reintroduced as Pilot #11 from October 26, 2008, to October 23,  2010, and were subsequently extended by eight months until June 25, 2011. In  the fall of 2008, the economy entered a recessionary period. The changing  economic circumstances, and the Government’s response through the annual  Budgets, altered the environment in which to evaluate EI pilots. Therefore, the  parameters of the Best 14 Weeks Pilot were reintroduced as Pilot #16 from June  26, 2011 to June 23, 2012, and subsequently extended until April 6, 2013.
Footnote
8
On April 7, 2013 a new Variable Best Weeks approach to the benefit  rate calculation was implemented nationally via permanent legislation.
The NERE Pilot parameters were  reintroduced as Pilot #13 from December 7, 2008, to December 4, 2010.
Summary  of Pilot Projects and Extensions
Pilot Project #7: Calculating  Benefit Rate Based On Claimant’s 14 Highest Weeks of Insurable Earnings (Best  14 Weeks).
Replaced by Pilot Project #11,  running from October 26, 2008 to October 23, 2010. Further extended for 8  months.
Replaced by Pilot Project #16  from June 26, 2011 to June 23, 2012; and extended from June 24, 2012 to April  6, 2013.
Pilot Project #9: Providing Increased Access to Employment and  Unemployment Benefits for New Entrants and Re-Entrants (NERE).
Replaced by Pilot Project #13  from December 7, 2008 to December 4, 2010
2.2 Other pilots and temporary provisions
Many of the same EI economic regions that  participated in the pilots were, at the same time, under additional temporary  measures. The Working While on Claim pilots (Pilot #8, Pilot #12, Pilot #17,  and Pilot #18) increased the limits on a claimant’s employment earnings while  on claim before benefits were clawed back. In fact, Pilot #8 was in effect in  the same EI economic regions as the Best 14 Weeks pilot and the NERE pilot  until being replaced by Pilot #12 beginning on December 7, 2008, which was  national in scope. Pilot #17 reintroduced the parameters of Pilot #12, and  Pilot #18 introduced a modified approach to Working While on Claim. Pilot #18  is scheduled to expire on August 1, 2015.
Additionally, Pilot #6 and Pilot #10  extended benefit entitlement by five weeks (while leaving the maximum benefit  entitlement of 45 weeks unchanged). Pilot #6 ran from June 6, 2004 to June 4,  2006 in 24 EI economic regions where the unemployment rate was 10% or greater. Likewise,  Pilot #10 ran from June 11, 2006, to February 28, 2009, in 21 EI economic  regions where the unemployment rate was 10% of greater. In March 2009 Pilot #10  was replaced by Bill C-10, which  extended benefit entitlement by five weeks to all EI economic regions of the  country, while also extending the maximum benefit entitlement to 50 weeks. Bill C-10 was in effect until September  11, 2010. Pilot #15 ran from September 12, 2010, to  September 15, 2012, and extended benefit entitlement by five weeks in 21  designated EI economic regions.
The list of EI economic regions  participating in one or more pilots is given in
Appendix C
.
2.3 Expected impact of pilots on claimants’  incentives to accept all available work
Best 14 Weeks
The Best 14 Weeks Pilots changed the  incentives for claimants to accept weeks of work with below-average employment  earnings in the qualifying period. The expected impact on incentives is through  two main channels: first, the exclusion of weeks of earnings on the benefit  level if those weeks are not among the claimant’s 14 highest weeks of earnings;  and, secondly, the removal of the minimum divisor provision. To understand the  significance of the changes, first consider how benefits were calculated in  non-pilot regions at the time of the Best 14 Weeks pilots (i.e. before the  legislative change introduced in 2014 with the Variable Best Weeks).
The former legislated rate, referred to as  the 26 week benefit rate approach,
Footnote
9
was equal to 55% of a claimant’s average weekly insured earnings in  the 26 weeks preceding the claim (or since the beginning of the previous claim,  whichever was shorter). However, the small week rule excluded weeks with  earnings below $225 from the claimant’s average if the claimant had enough  weeks of work to satisfy the minimum divisor rule. The minimum divisor rule set  a lower bound to the number of weeks that would be included in the average  weekly insured earnings. The minimum divisor varied according to the regional  unemployment rate, ranging from 14 to 22 weeks (lower in high unemployment EI  economic regions). Thus, if a claimant did not have enough weeks of earnings  above $225 to satisfy the minimum divisor, then a small or even zero earnings  week would be included in their average earnings. Thus the minimum divisor  created a strong incentive for claimants to have insured earnings in at least  as many weeks as the minimum divisor.
Under the 26 week benefit rate approach, a  claimant would lower their benefit rate by having a low earnings week of work  under the following conditions: i) The week was within the rate calculation  period, ii) the claimant had already worked enough weeks to satisfy the minimum  divisor, and iii) the week in question was lower than their average insured  earnings, but greater than $225. It was believed that this disincentive  prevented some claimants from accepting all available work. Thus, by basing the  benefit rate on claimants’ 14 highest weeks of earnings, the Best 14 Weeks  pilots were expected to result in a greater number of weeks worked among  claimants with variable weekly hours and non-standard work arrangement.
Moreover, the Best 14 Weeks pilots could  result in a higher benefit rate for claimants whose insured earnings varied  from week to week, or claimants who had higher average earnings in the 52 week  qualification period than they did in the 26 week rate calculation period. For  claimants who had constant earnings over the qualification period, or who were  already at the maximum benefit rate, it would leave the benefit rate unchanged.  No claimant could have a lower benefit rate as a result of the pilots.
The incentives under the Best 14 Weeks  pilots are explored further in
Section 3.2
.
New Entrants and Re-Entrants
Regulations for New Entrants and  Re-Entrants (NEREs) have been in place since amendments to the
EI Act
in 1978. The original intent of  the provision was to discourage repeat usage of EI for entrants into the  workforce and to strengthen the attachment of workers to the labour force. A  new entrant or re-entrant is a claimant who is in the work force for the first  time, or is re-entering the work force after an absence or reduced  participation. Strictly speaking, they are EI claimants who, in the 52 weeks  preceding the claim qualifying period (also known as the pre-qualifying  period), had fewer than 490 hours of labour force attachment.
Footnote
10
The provision requires identified NEREs to  have a minimum of 910 hours of insurable employment in the qualifying period in  order to establish a claim for regular benefits, rather than the typical 420 to  700 hours required under the regional variable entrance requirement. The aims  of the NERE provision are to discourage a cycle of reliance on EI benefits,  ensure that workers make a reasonable contribution to the system before  collecting benefits, and to strengthen the relationship between work effort and  benefit entitlement. An evaluation of the NERE provision conducted in 2011  found that the provision was not sufficient to achieve these outcomes.
Footnote
11
The NERE Pilots tested the labour market  impacts of reducing the number of hours required for NEREs to be eligible for  EI benefits from 910 hours to 840 hours in regions with an unemployment rate of  10% or higher (changed to 8% or higher in 2008). In addition, NERE claimants  with between 840 and 909 insured hours in the qualifying period were to be sent  a letter encouraging them to contact an employment service agency or employment  centre to access supports (see
Appendix D
).
The incentives under the NERE pilots are  much simpler than under the Best 14 Weeks. By lowering the threshold for  claimants to be eligible for EI benefits, the NERE pilots provided some  incentives for claimants to reduce their hours worked in the qualifying period  in line with the lower threshold. Conversely, workers who would not have met  the 910 hour threshold may have been able to increase their hours worked to meet  the new threshold. Thus the pilots were expected to increase work incentives  for claimants who would have had fewer than 840 insured hours, and decrease  work incentives for claimants who would have had more than 840 insured hours. However,  as with non-NERE claimants in this range of hours worked, reducing the number  of insured hours would result in fewer weeks of benefit entitlement.
3. Relevance
3.1 Need for program
Q-1a: What are the factors underlying the EI support for  part-time workers or temporary workers, particularly those workers with  variable work hours?
The NERE and  Best 14 Weeks pilot projects represent a policy response to concerns over the  adequacy of EI income support in some regions of the country. This may have been  especially the case in rural and remote regions.
The design of  the pilots recognized the high degree of variation in the circumstances of  workers with limited work alternatives, which often result in sporadic work  patterns. The pilots increased the support that non-standard workers received.
Non-standard  workers are more commonly women, youth, and those with less experience or  education. Non-standard work is typically thought of as less optimal for  workers; however, some non-standard workers may choose a non-standard work  arrangement out of convenience (Gunderson, 2005). Moreover, some evidence  indicates that considerable transitioning from non-standard to standard  employment can happen over time, suggesting that standard and non-standard  employment are not permanent states (Kapsalis and Tourigny, 2005).
Q-1b: Were workers turning down overtime or small weeks of work before the  Best 14 Weeks pilots were implemented?
Interviews were conducted with employers in  key industries in the EI economic regions participating in the pilots. In  addition, focus groups were conducted with pilot claimants. From these  analyses, it appears that some claimants may have been turning down  smaller-earning weeks prior to the pilots. For instance, employers noted that  prior to the Best 14 Weeks pilots some workers would request to be laid off at  the end of a full week, rather than have a partial week (with lower earnings)  in their rate calculation period, and that under the pilots employees were more  often available for partial weeks of employment and large hourly-weeks, or  overtime. However, the behaviour does not appear to have been widespread. Moreover,  the majority of focus group participants indicated that they almost always  accepted all available work. This question is taken up further in section 4.
Q-1c: What were the underlying issues regarding the EI  rules for NEREs?
The NERE provision was introduced to  discourage dependence on EI and to induce greater levels of work effort before  claiming EI. However, according to the 2011 Summative Evaluation of New  Entrants and Re-Entrants,
Footnote
12
frequent EI use appears to be strongly correlated to industry of  employment, the seasonality of the occupation, and the regional unemployment  rate, rather than the number of hours worked prior to a claimant’s first claim.  That is, the NERE provision does not seem to influence future frequent use of  EI. However, the NERE provision does encourage greater levels of work effort  for new entrants to the labour market by restricting access to EI benefits for  NEREs with a smaller number of insured hours.
3.2 Do the design features  of the pilots support the needs of non-standard workers and encourage greater  labour market attachment?
Q-2a: Do the new design features of the Best 14 Weeks pilots  encourage workers to accept more work?
The Best 14 Weeks rate calculation formula  impacted work incentives differently depending on the specific circumstances of  the claim.
To see this consider the example of two  claimants with identical work histories, but facing slightly different  scenarios depending on the EI economic region they reside in and the value of  the minimum divisor. Both claimants have already worked 14 weeks earning $500  per week, and have the choice to work in a 15
th
week and earn $300. The  claimants know that they will be laid off following the 15
th
week  and be eligible for EI benefits.
Section 3.2.1 shows what the claimant’s  benefit rate would be if they did or did not work the 15
th
week. In  the first scenario, the claimant resides in a region with a minimum divisor  equal to 14 weeks. If the objective of the claimant is to maximize their  benefit rate, they would be better off financially not taking all available  work prior to their claim.
In contrast, the second claimant resides in  a region where the minimum divisor is equal to 16 weeks. In this scenario, it  is clear that the claimant is better off working the 15
th
week.
3.2.1  Benefit Rate under the 26 week Rate Calculation
Scenario 1: 26 week Benefit Rate: Minimum Divisor = 14
The claimant does not work in 15
th
week
Textual description of the claimant does not work in 15
th
week formula
The base rate is equal to 55%. It is multiplied by the result of 500$ multiplied and divided 14. Total equals 275$ for each week.
The claimant does work in 15
th
week
Textual description of the claimant does work in 15
th
week formula
The base rate is equal to 55%. It is multiplied by the result of 500$ multiplied by 14 plus 300$ divided by 15. Total equals 268$ for each week.
Scenario 2: 26 week Benefit Rate: Minimum Divisor = 16
The claimant does not work in 15
th
week
Textual description of the claimant does not work in 15
th
week formula
The base rate is equal to 55%. It is multiplied by the result of 500$ multiplied par 14 and divided by 16. Total equals a 241$ for each week
The claimant does work in 15
th
week
Textual description of the claimant does work in 15
th
week formula
The base rate is equal to 55%. It is multiplied by the result of 500$ multiplied by 14 plus 300$ divided by 16. Total equals 251$ for each week.
Best 14 Weeks Pilots
The claimant does not work in 15
th
week
Textual description of the claimant does not work in 15
th
week formula
The base rate is equal to 55%. It is multiplied by the result of 500$ multiplied par 14 and divided by 14. Total equals 275$ for each week.
The claimant does work in 15
th
week
Textual description of the claimant does work in 15
th
week formula
The base rate is equal to 55%. It is multiplied by the result of 500$ multiplied par 14 and divided by 14. Total equals 275$ for each week.
Under  the Best 14 Weeks pilots there is no minimum divisor rule. As such, regardless  of the region in which they lived, or if they worked or did not work the 15
th
week, the claimant’s benefit rate under the pilot would be $275 per week. Thus,  in the first scenario, the Best 14 Weeks pilots removed the disincentive  associated with working the 15
th
week. However, in the second  scenario, the Best 14 Weeks pilots removed the incentive to work the 15
th
week (though the usual incentive to work, i.e. getting paid, is, of course,  unaffected).
Q-2b: Who were the people working in the 840-909 hour  range? What are their characteristics compared to the characteristics of other  EI clients?
Analysis of job separators from 1995 to  2005 (a period of time prior to the NERE pilots) showed some key differences  between NEREs in the 840 – 909 hours range, NEREs in the 910+ hours range, and  non-NEREs. NEREs in the 840 – 909 hour range are more commonly youth, less  likely to be married or in a common law relationship, or to have children. On  average, NEREs in the 840 – 909 hour range had lower household income than both  non-NEREs and NEREs with 910+ insured hours. Compared to non-NEREs, NEREs in  the 840 – 909 range were more likely to be female.
Table 3.2.2 Profile of NEREs and Non-NEREs, 1995 to 2005
Footnote
13
Hours
NERE
Non-NERE
NERE
Non-NERE
840-909
0-839
910+
840-909
0-839
910+
Part-time job at layoff
26.6
13.0
20.9
33.6
14.1
19.7
17.5
11.0
Youth
49.9
16.6
52.5
57.0
36.5
22.5
19.0
15.5
Prime
45.5
73.1
43.3
38.7
58.5
66.2
71.5
74.0
Older
4.6
10.3
4.3
4.4
5.0
11.3
9.6
10.5
Male
50.2
57.1
52.2
48.7
52.8
55.9
58.3
56.7
Female
49.8
42.9
47.9
51.3
47.2
44.1
41.7
43.3
Married/Common Law
34.9
58.5
30.6
30.6
43.2
58.7
54.6
59.9
With children under 15
30.8
36.8
29.0
30.6
31.3
36.7
35.6
37.2
Monthly Household Income ($)
3,078
3,374
2,889
2,972
3,254
3,042
2,913
3,564
Text description of Table 3.2.2 Profile of NEREs and Non-NEREs, 1995 to 2005
Table 3.2.2 shows the profiles of all NEREs and Non-NEREs, and the profiles according to the ranges of hours worked during the period from 1995 to 2005. The table has nine columns. The first column (from left to right) lists the ten characteristics shown. From top to bottom, the headings are Hours, Part-time job at layoff, Youth, Prime, Older, Male, Female, Married/Common Law, With children under 15, and Monthly Household Income (in dollars).
The second and third columns give for NEREs and Non-NEREs the percentages for each characteristic except for monthly household income, which is given in dollars. The fourth, fifth and sixth columns provide the percentages for NEREs who have worked 840 to 909 hours, 0 to 839 hours and 910 hours or more respectively. For Non NEREs, each of these ranges of hours is given in the seventh, eighth and ninth columns of the table.
Data: Canadian Out of Employment Panel- job separators from 1995 to 2005. All estimates weighted.
3.3 Alignment with government priorities
Q-3: Is the objective of the Best 14 Weeks and NERE pilots  consistent with government priorities and ESDC’s strategic outcomes?
The Best 14 Weeks and NERE pilots are  consistent with ESDC’s strategic outcome 1: A skilled, adaptable and inclusive  labour force and an efficient labour market. The Best 14 Weeks pilots are  designed to encourage greater labour market participation among EI claimants,  while the NERE pilots were created with the aim of making skills training more  accessible.
3.4 Alignment with federal roles and responsibilities
Q-4: Are the Best 14 Weeks and NERE pilots consistent with  federal roles and responsibilities?
The Federal Government, under the  provisions of the
Employment Insurance  Act
, has the authority to provide EI Part I benefits to persons who have  lost their job through no fault of their own. Therefore the Best 14 Weeks and  NERE pilots are consistent with federal roles and responsibilities.
4.  Performance
4.1 Achievement of expected  outcomes
4.1.1  Short-term outcomes
Q-5a: How many workers were better off under the Best 14  Weeks pilots? What was the average increase in benefits?
It is  estimated that approximately half of claims in the Best 14 Weeks pilot regions  benefited from the pilots (i.e. had a higher benefit rate than they would have  had in the absence of the pilots). Computing the number of claims that  benefited from the Best 14 Weeks pilots was accomplished by comparing the claim  benefit rate to what the benefit rate would have been under the 26 week benefit  rate approach. Claims were counted as having benefited from the pilots if (i)  the claim was in a pilot region during the period of the pilots, (ii) one of  the eligible benefit types had been paid on the claim
Footnote
14
, and (iii) the claim had a benefit  rate that was greater than the estimated 26 week benefit rate. With this  methodology, approximately 58% of claims in pilot regions during the course of  the pilots benefited from the Best 14 Weeks pilots (Table 4.1.1).
However, the  usefulness of the estimated 26 week benefit rate is limited since it did not  apply the small weeks rule to the calculation of the benefit rate. Accordingly,  the estimated 26 week benefit rate likely undervalues the true counterfactual  benefit rate, which in turn may inflate the estimated number of claims that  benefited from the Best 14 Weeks pilots. EI Monitoring and Assessment Reports
Footnote
15
state that from 2008 to 2012 the  small weeks rule impacted between 15.9% and 19.3% of claims. Therefore, a  plausible range for the proportion of claims that benefited from the Best 14  Weeks pilots is 40% to 58%.
For the  reason outlined above, the estimated 26 week benefit rate cannot be used to  accurately determine what the average increase in the benefit rate was. Therefore,  the increase in the benefit rate was estimated for pilot claimants using a  difference-in-differences regression model. Using this method, the average  increase among all pilot claims (not just claims that benefited from the  pilots) was estimated to be between 14.9 and 20.9 dollars/week, depending on  the year in question.
Table 4.1.1 Number of Best 14 Weeks pilots beneficiaries and average increase in benefit rate
Number who benefited
Proportion of claimants benefited (%)
Average increase in benefit rate ($/week)
2005
113,370
46.1
-
2006
342,980
59.2
14.9
2007
339,850
58.9
15.7
2008
352,640
57.2
15.0
2009
388,020
56.4
15.3
2010
359,370
60.0
18.8
2011
378,830
59.5
20.9
2012
353,140
59.1
-
2013
69,430
60.5
-
Total
2,697,630
58.0
-
Text description of Table 4.1.1 Number of Best 14 Weeks pilots beneficiaries and average increase in benefit rate
Table 4.1.1 shows the number and proportion of claimants who benefited from the best 14 weeks pilot projects, and the average increase in the benefit rate. The table has four columns. The first column (from left to right) lists all the years from 2005 to 2013, with “Total” on the eleventh line (from the top). The second column gives the number who benefited each year and the total for all years. The third column gives the proportion of claimants who benefited. The fourth column indicates the average increase in the benefit rate (in $ per week). The dashes on some lines of this column indicate that the data is not available for that year.
Data: Estimates are from a 10% sample of EI administrative data. Average increase in benefit rate refers to all pilot claimants, and not just those who benefit. It was estimated using a difference-in-differences regression model. Not all years were available.
Q-5b: Who are the people that are affected by the Best 14 Weeks pilots and  what are their characteristics compared to the characteristics of other EI  clients?
While the Best 14 Weeks pilots increased  the benefit rate for many pilot claimants, there was no change to the maximum  benefit rate. Thus, for any claimant that was already receiving the maximum  benefit rate, the Best 14 Weeks pilots would not be beneficial. This led to  certain demographic groups being more likely to benefit from the pilots. Female  claimants were more likely to benefit than were male claimants. From 2006 to  2011 between 76% and 78% of female claimants benefited from the pilots. This  compares to between 45% and 51% of male claimants over the same time period. The  average increase in the benefit rate for women was between 19 and 29  dollars/week, while for men it was between 11 and 16 dollars/week.
Footnote
16
Younger claimants were more likely to  benefit from the Best 14 Weeks pilots. From 2006 to 2011 between 70% and 74% of  claimants under the age of 25 benefited. This compares to between 56% and 61%  of claimants aged 25 to 35, and 52% to 60% of claimants over the age of 35.
Those with less stable work were less  likely to benefit from the pilots. While between 59% and 69% of claims  initiated by first time claimants benefited from the Best 14 Weeks pilots,  between 49% and 57% of claims by frequent claimants benefited, depending on the  year. There was almost no difference in the proportion that benefited between  frequent claimants whose claims were seasonal and frequent claimants whose  claims were non-seasonal.
Footnote
17
However, frequent seasonal claimants had the smallest average increase  in the benefit rate amongst all claimants.
Q-5c: How many more  claimants have received EI benefits under the NERE pilots? Are there more NERE  workers claiming EI?
Claimants  were counted as having benefited from the NERE pilots if they were in a pilot  region during the period of the pilots, were a new or re-entrant to the labour  force (that is, had fewer than 490 insured hours in the pre-qualifying period),  and had insured hours between 840 and 909 in the qualification period. Accordingly,  approximately 34,600 claimants benefited from the NERE pilots, an average of  about 6,700 claimants per year between 2006 and 2010. NERE pilot beneficiaries  represent about 1.3% of the claims in the pilot regions.
Statistical analysis of the NERE pilots  found that the probability that a NERE qualified for EI benefits increased by  over five percentage points as a result of the pilots, all else held constant.
Q-5d: Are NEREs applying for  EI Part II training? Was there increased participation in part II Measures?
Focus group  participants indicated that awareness for Part II measures was very low. They  indicated that the lack of publicity about the NERE pilots, and their resulting  inability to take advantage of what it offered in terms of training, were the main  drawbacks of the pilots. However, they also said that the NERE Pilots were a  good way to encourage those claimants to upgrade their skills.
Statistical  analysis showed that the pilots did not have an impact on either the take-up  rate of training programs by NEREs or the number of weeks spent in training by  NEREs.
One potential  explanation for the low take up of training was that very few letters were sent  to NERE claimants to advise them of the eligibility to receive guidance and  support services. Service Canada administrative data indicate that only about  700 claimants received letters between April 2006 and March 2008, even though  almost 9,000 new EI claims were made under the NERE pilot projects during that  period.
4.1.2     Changes  in claimants’ behaviour
Q-6a: Were Best 14 Weeks  pilot claimants more willing to pick up “low income” weeks of work? What is the  average additional insured hours worked prior to claim?
Evidence on the impact of the Best 14 Weeks  pilots on claimants’ insured hours and other measures of labour market  attachment is mixed. Claimants from pilot regions indicated that the pilots did  not impact their decision to work additional weeks because they have always  accepted all available work. However, employers noted some behavioural changes.  They reported that workers were more willing to work partial weeks under the  pilots. They also observed that the pilots increased the amount of work that  would be taken, as employees looked to make a particular week one of their  “best” weeks. However, in some regions employers reported that the pilots  decreased work effort among workers who had already worked 14 good weeks (i.e. weeks  with typical or above typical earnings). Key informant interviews with  employers indicated that the primary objective of workers who anticipated a job  separation was to secure enough insured hours to be eligible for benefits. The  same level of attention was not given to arranging hours worked in order to  maximize the benefit rate.
Statistical analysis of the impact of the  Best 14 Weeks pilots on insured hours using EI administrative data is not  conclusive. For instance, one study that analyzed a rather narrow subsample of  pilot claimants
Footnote
18
found that insured hours increased by 35 to 80 hours between 2006  and 2008 as a result of the Best 14 Weeks pilots. However, a similar study that  used a somewhat broader sample of claimants
Footnote
19
found no overall impact of the pilots on insured hours. The results  may stem from the fact that incentives under the pilots varied depending on the  claimants’ particular situations. The impact of the pilots may also vary  according to the business cycle. However, the design of the pilots is not well  suited to address how changes in the business cycle may have impacted claimant  behaviour under the Best 14 Weeks pilots.
Footnote
20
Q-6b: How has the Best 14  Weeks affected the weekly variability in earnings? Have hours become more  volatile for seasonal workers and workers overall? Is there a shift towards  bunching work into the best 14 weeks?
The changes to the rate calculation formula  initiated by the Best 14 Weeks pilots presented claimants with mixed incentives  with respect to the number of weeks they chose to work during the rate  calculation period. On one hand, the pilots removed the disincentive to accept  a below-average-earnings week of employment in the 26 weeks preceding a job  separation. However, on the other hand, a claimant could potentially achieve a  higher benefit rate if they were able to “bunch” the same number of hours into  smaller number of weeks. Moreover, claimants in EI economic regions that used  to have a minimum divisor that was greater than 14 weeks no longer had as  strong an incentive to work beyond 14 weeks prior to their claim.
Statistical analysis found that, in fact,  the number of weeks worked during the Rate Calculation Period declined as a  result of the pilots. The effect ranged between 0.6 weeks and 0.9 weeks between  2006 and 2011. The effect was even larger among claimants in EI economic  regions where the minimum divisor had been 17, 18, or 19 weeks, ranging from  1.2 to 1.8 weeks, except in 2006 when it was only 0.2 weeks. These results  suggest that the removal of the minimum divisor had an impact on behaviour  related to the number of weeks worked. However, it is important to recall that  there was no evidence of a decline in insured hours overall.
Some employers noted that under the Best 14  Weeks pilots employees were more willing to accept hours in order to make a  particular week one of their 14 best. However, there is no direct empirical  evidence specifically on the number of hours worked each week. Thus, there  appears to have been some “bunching” of hours under the pilots, but the extent  of its prevalence is unknown.
Q-6c: Are workers changing  their work behaviour as a result of the NERE pilots? Was there a shift away  from less than 840 insured hours into the 840-909 range of insured hours? Was  there a shift away from 910-1000 range of insured hours towards 840-909 rage of  insured hours?
There were  three possible behavioural changes that could have been expected as a result of  the NERE pilots. These are:
NERE  claimants who would have otherwise worked more than 910 hours deciding to work  between 840 and 909 hours.
NERE  claimants who would have otherwise worked fewer than 840 hours deciding to work  between 840 and 909 hours.
An  increase in the number of NEREs.
The third  response would involve potential EI claimants altering their work behaviour in  the pre-qualification period (between 52 and 104 weeks prior to initiating a  claim) because EI benefits are marginally easier to qualify for as a NERE. Statistical  analysis of EI administrative data found no evidence of this behaviour (i.e. there  was no change in the proportion of NEREs among job separators as a result of  the NERE pilots).
It is much  more likely that a potential claimant would change their behaviour in the  qualification period in response to the change in policy. This was in fact  observed in the data. Results from difference-in-differences regression  analysis showed that there was a decrease in the proportion of NERE claimants  in pilot regions with between 910 to 944 hours of 0.3 percentage points and a  decrease in the proportion of NERE claimants with between 945 and 979 of 0.3 percentage  points. At the same time there was an increase in the proportion of NEREs with  between 840 and 875 hours by 0.7 percentage points, and in the proportion of  NEREs with between 875 and 909 hours by 0.3 percentage points. Essentially  there was a shift whereby claimants who would have otherwise worked just enough  hours to qualify for benefits in the absence of the pilots worked fewer hours,  while still qualifying for benefits. Moreover, this shift is significant  considering that only 3.3% of NEREs had between 840 and 909 insured hours  during the pilot.
There was  little evidence of a change in the proportion of NEREs who worked between 770  and 839 hours. That is, NEREs who would have worked between 770 and 839 hours  in the absence of the pilots did not increase their hours in order to qualify  for benefits under the lower cut-off. Therefore, there was a significant shift  of claimants down into the new range of hours for benefit eligibility (i.e. behaviour  i), but there was not a corresponding shift by claimants up into that range  (i.e. behaviour ii).
4.1.3 Employers’ behaviour
Q-7a: Are the pilot rules affecting the hiring and lay-off  behaviours of employers?
According to key informant interviews,  employers were split on whether or not they considered EI rules when assigning  work. Typically smaller firms did consider EI eligibility, but they did not  consider the implications of weekly earnings on their employees’ benefit rates.  Employers who did consider EI rules indicated that their priority was to see that  all employees worked sufficient hours to qualify for benefits, and would assign  more work to a particular employee if they were short.
A few focus group claimants noted that  their employers would adjust work schedules to allow employees to have at least  14 weeks of higher income, but this was not common.
Some  employers reported in key informant interviews that workers were more willing  to work partial weeks under the Best 14 Weeks pilots. They also noted that the  increase in the benefit rate under the pilots made it easier to attract workers  to seasonal employment.
There was minimal awareness of the NERE  pilots among employers.
Q-7b: Did employers find that filling out the new section  of the ROEs for the Best 14 Weeks pilots was burdensome?
When the Best 14 Weeks pilot was first  implemented, Service Canada had recently launched the ROE Web, which allowed  employers to create and submit a 53-week ROE electronically. Employers who were  already using the ROE Web had no additional reporting requirements due to the  Best 14 Weeks pilots.
Footnote
21
However, for many employers, the greater reporting requirements  under the pilots coincided with shifting their reporting to the 53-week ROE  from the 26 week ROE. Thus findings pertaining to the reporting burden from the  Best 14 Weeks pilots are closely tied to employers’ impressions of the ROE web.
Footnote
22
For employers who were using older  reporting methods, the Best 14 Weeks pilots imposed on them greater reporting  requirements, which were often described as burdensome, time consuming, and  expensive.
Employer associations noted that weekly  earnings reporting on ROEs was a burden for employers and was perceived as  unnecessary in many cases, since only a proportion of ROEs are used to  establish an EI claim. Weekly reporting was especially difficult for employers  who operate on a two-week pay cycle.
Footnote
23
According to association representatives, employers who report on a  two-week pay cycle account for 80% of businesses in Canada. However, they also  noted that filling out the 53-week ROE was less time consuming than fielding  requests to look back over the year to find the highest paid 14 weeks.
4.2 Efficiency and economy
Q-8a: What are the estimated benefit costs of the Best 14  Weeks pilots? How does the cost compare with the costs associated with Small  Weeks rule?
Costs for the Best 14 Weeks pilots were  estimated by counting the additional benefits paid to claimants as a result of  the pilots. No administrative or operational costs were considered. Two methods  were used. The first utilised the estimated 26 week benefit rate as a  counterfactual to what was actually paid under the pilots, and adjusting for  the impact of the small weeks rule.
Footnote
24
The second method utilizes estimates from difference-in-differences  regression analysis to account for the impact of behavioural changes. The two  methods are described below.
The first method relies on estimates of  pilot claimants’ benefits had they been under the 26 week benefit rate  approach. However, as discussed previously, the estimated 26 week benefit rate will  undervalue the true counterfactual benefit rate for two reasons: 1) it does not  account for the small weeks rule, and 2) it does not account for how claimants  may have changed their behaviour in response to the pilots. For instance, if a  claimant had taken on a below average week of work in response to the pilot,  the estimated 26 benefit rate would have been smaller than what the claimant  would have actually received in the absence of the pilot. Likewise, if a  claimant had worked fewer weeks because the minimum divisor was removed, the  estimated 26 week rate would again be lower than what the claimant’s benefit  rate would have really been. For these reasons, it is expected that cost  estimates using the estimated 26 week benefit rate as a counterfactual will  overestimate the benefit costs of the pilots. Estimates from this method have  the cost of the Best 14 Weeks pilots at approximately $2.4B over all years (Table 4.2.1), an average of $317M a year, excluding the partial years of 2005  and 2013.
This estimate can be refined by accounting  for the absence of the small-weeks rule in the estimated 26 week benefit rate. A  simple estimate of the potential cost of the small-weeks rule in pilot regions  was computed by applying the impact of the rule in non-pilot regions during the  same period of time. On average, between 2008 and 2012, the small weeks rule  affected 17.7% of claims and led to an increase in their benefit rate of $18.60.  Applied to pilot region claimants, these estimates suggest that the small weeks  rule would have increased benefits by an average of approximately $49M a year  (excluding 2005 and 2013) had the pilots not been in effect. Adjusting the  first estimate for the potential impact of the small-weeks rule reduces the  estimated cost of the Best 14 Weeks pilots to $2.0B over all the years of the  Pilot (an average cost of $268M a year from 2006 to 2012).
Table 4.2.1 Estimated benefit cost of the Best 14 Weeks pilots compared to the 26 week rate calculation approach
Number of claimants    benefited
Average    benefit per claim, those who benefited ($)
Total    benefits ($ millions)
Estimated    cost of small weeks rule ($ millions)
Estimated    cost after adjusting for small weeks rule ($ millions)
2005
113,370
726
82.3
19.6 *
62.7
2006
342,980
748
256.7
45.2 *
211.5
2007
339,850
782
265.6
45.0 *
220.6
2008
352,640
860
303.3
33.5
269.8
2009
388,020
951
369.1
49.4
319.7
2010
359,370
950
341.3
61.4
279.9
2011
378,830
972
368.2
57.7
310.5
2012
353,140
904
319.3
53.9
265.4
2013
69,430
757
52.6
7.5 *
45.1
Total
2,697,630
2,358.4
373.2
1,985.2
Note: *
indicates that the effect of the small weeks rule in pilot region has been estimated using numbers from non-missing years (2008 to 2012).
Text description of Table 4.2.1 Estimated benefit cost of the Best 14 Weeks pilots compared to the 26 week rate calculation approach
Table 4.2.1 shows the estimated annual cost of the best 14 weeks pilots when the cost of the small weeks rule is deducted from total benefits. The table has six columns. The first column (from left to right) lists the years from 2005 to 2013, with “Total” on the last line (at the bottom) of this column. The second to the sixth columns give the number of claimants who benefited, the average benefit per claim, total benefits, the estimated cost of the small weeks rule and the estimated cost after adjustment. The information is given for each year and for all years except for the average benefit (third column) where the total is not calculated.
The second method for estimating the benefit costs of the Best 14 Weeks pilots utilizes the estimates from the difference-in-differences regression model of the impact of the pilots on the benefit rate. The model compares the average benefit rate in pilot regions during pilot years to i) the average benefit rate in pilot regions prior to the implementation of the pilot, and ii) the difference in the average benefit rate in non-pilot regions before and during the pilot years. Unlike the previous approach, this method accounts for behavioural changes among claimants that render the estimated 26 week benefit rate inaccurate. Furthermore, with this methodology there is no need to adjust for the application of the small weeks rule. As such, this is the preferred method for estimating pilot costs. Results suggest an estimated benefit cost of the Best 14 Weeks pilots of $1.9B over all the years of the pilots, or an average yearly cost between 2006 and 2012 of $251M (Table 4.2.2).
Table 4.2.2 Estimated benefit cost of the best 14 Weeks pilots controlling for impact of behavioural changes
Estimate change    in benefit rate, all pilot claims ($)
Number of    pilot claims
Average    number of weeks of benefits received
Estimated    cost of Best 14 weeks pilot ($ millions)
2005
16.8 *
246,040
24.2
100.0
2006
14.9
579,520
23.7
204.6
2007
15.7
576,670
23.7
214.6
2008
15.0
616,870
24.4
225.8
2009
15.3
688,110
25.8
271.6
2010
18.8
598,760
25.3
284.8
2011
20.9
636,280
24.0
319.2
2012
16.8 *
597,880
23.7
238.1
2013
16.8 *
114,730
19.8
38.2
Average
16.8
Total
1,896.8
Note: *
indicates the estimated change in the benefit rate was unavailable for this year and has been imputed as the average. For this reason, the 2012 cost estimate should be treated with caution.
Text description of Table 4.2.2 Estimated benefit cost of the best 14 Weeks pilots controlling for impact of behavioural changes
Table 4.2.2 shows the estimated annual cost of the best 14 weeks pilots when behavioural changes are taken into account. The table has five columns. The first column (from left to right) lists the years from 2005 to 2013, with “average” and “total” on the tenth and eleventh lines (from the top) respectively. The second to fifth columns in the table show the change in benefit rate, the number of pilot claims, the average number of weeks of benefits received and the estimated costs of the pilot projects. The information is given for each year; the average is calculated only for the change in the benefit rate and the total only for the estimated cost of the pilot projects.
Q-8b: What were the benefit costs of the NERE pilots?
Estimating the benefit costs of the NERE pilots  is relatively straight forward, compared to the Best 14 Weeks pilots. Since the  Pilot provided eligibility for NEREs who would not have qualified for regular  benefits, any NERE claim with between 840 and 909 insured hours can be  considered a cost of the pilots. Under this method the cost of the pilots was  approximately $249M (an average of $49M a year from 2006 to 2009).
However, adjusting for claimants who would  have worked more than 909 hours if the pilots did not exists provides a more  accurate estimate. Since these claimants would have been paid EI benefits  regardless of the NERE pilots, they should not be counted as a pilot cost. The  proportion of NERE job separators who worked fewer than 910 hours as a result  of the NERE pilots was estimated to be 0.6% (or about 18% of pilot beneficiaries).  Adjusting for these claims reduces the estimated cost of the NERE pilots to approximately  $204M over all years of the NERE pilots, an average of about $40M a year from  2006 to 2010 (see Table 4.2.3).
Table 4.2.3 Estimated benefit cost of the NERE pilots under two methods
Number of    pilot beneficiaries
Average    weeks of benefits received
Total cost    of claims that benefited ($ millions)
Total cost    adjusted for behavioural change ($ millions)
2005
890
23.8
5.6
4.6
2006
6,930
24.4
44.8
36.7
2007
6,700
24.0
43.0
35.2
2008
6,580
25.8
48.4
39.7
2009
7,460
27.1
59.5
48.8
2010
6,050
26.8
47.9
39.3
Total
34,610
249.3
204.4
Text description of Table 4.2.3 Estimated Benefit Cost of the NERE Pilots under Two Methods
Table 4.2.3 shows the estimated annual cost of the NERE pilots under two methods. The table has five columns. The first column (from left to right) lists the years 2005 to 2010, with “Total” on the ninth line (from the top). The second to fifth columns of the table show, in order, the number of pilot beneficiaries, the average number of weeks of benefits received, the total cost of claims that benefited and the total cost adjusted for behavioural change. The information is given for each year and for all years except in the case of the average weeks of benefits (third column) where the total was not calculated.
5. Conclusion
The Best 14 Weeks pilots and NERE pilots  responded to concerns over the adequacy of EI income support in some regions of  the country. These pilots tested the labour market effects of changes to  various EI parameters. Initially, there were 23 EI economic regions selected  for the pilots based on an unemployment rate of 10% or greater.
The pilots provided a valuable opportunity  to study the impacts of changes to the EI system, while also increasing  benefits for those with variable weekly earnings under the Best 14 Weeks pilots,  and increasing access to benefits for the unemployed under the NERE pilots.
Best 14 Weeks pilots
The parameters of the Best 14 Weeks pilots  were in effect in select regions from October 2005 to April 2013. Claimants  benefited from the Best 14 Weeks benefit rate in approximately 40% to 58% of  the claims in pilot regions (about 360,000 claims a year between 2006 and  2012). By design, no claimant had a benefit rate that was lower than what they  would have received under the 26 week benefit rate approach. On average,  benefit rates were between 15 and 21 dollars per week greater under the pilots.  These changes cost an estimated $1.9B of additional benefits to claimants, an  average annual cost of about $250M between 2006 and 2012.
NERE Pilots
The parameters of the NERE pilots were in  effect in select regions from December 2005 to December 2010. About 1.3% of  regular claims in the pilot regions benefited from the NERE pilots (about 6,500  a year). As a result, the probability that an unemployed NERE in a pilot region  qualified for EI benefits increased by over five percentage points, all else  held constant.
The NERE pilots are estimated to have had a  benefit cost of $204M (an average of about $40M a year between 2006 and 2010). As  with estimates of the Best 14 pilots’ costs, these estimates only include  dollars that were transferred to EI claimants in the form of higher benefit  rates or increased access. No attempt was made to account for administration or  operational costs.
Changes to the rate calculation formula had little or no  impact on the hours worked prior to claim commencement; however, changes to the  eligibility threshold for NERE claimants did have a modest impact on behaviour.
Some employers, typically smaller firms,  indicated that they would consider EI rules when assigning work; however, their  priority when doing so was to ensure that all employees had sufficient hours to  be eligible for benefits. Employees, on the other hand, stated that they did  not typically have control over their work schedule, and even if they did,  would choose to accept all work available. Statistical analysis of the impacts  of the Best 14 Weeks pilots on the overall number of hours worked prior to a  claim is inconclusive. Thus it appears that there were few opportunities for  the Best 14 Weeks pilots to affect hours worked.
However, statistical analysis of the NERE  pilots showed that a small number of NERE claimants worked less than 910  insured hours in response to the pilots. Together, the evidence suggests that  changes to eligibility requirements may be more likely to initiate a behavioural  change among EI claimants than are changes to how benefits are calculated.
Changing the benefit rate to a best weeks approach  resulted in a higher benefit rate for between 40% and 58% of claimants in pilot  regions. Moreover, it was most likely to increase benefits for female claimants  and youth.
Between 40% and 58% of claimants in pilot  regions received a higher benefit rate under the Best 14 Weeks pilots than they  would have received under the 26 week benefit rate approach. This shows that a  large number of claimants in the pilot regions had employment earnings that  varied from week to week. Moreover, women and youth were the most likely to  benefit from the Best 14 Weeks pilots, as were first time claimants.
Training take-up rates were unchanged under the NERE pilots  due to low awareness of the available opportunities.
One of the goals of the NERE pilots was to  encourage greater participation in EI Part II training measures with a view to  enhancing the skills and improving their job prospects. However, analysis of EI  data found that there was no significant effect of the pilots on training  take-up rates. Focus group participants were generally unaware that they were  part of a pilot project or that there were training opportunities available to  them. Only a fraction of NERE pilot claimants received a letter from Service  Canada that explained the conditions of the pilot projects and invited them to  seek out skills development opportunities.
6. Bibliography
Data Probe Economic  Consulting Inc. "Profiles of Beneficiaries of Three Employment Insurance  Pilots: Update Study."
ESDC
, 2011.
ESDC. "Cost Estimates of  the Best 14 Weeks Pilot."
ESDC
, 2014.
ESDC. "Cost Estimates of  the NERE Pilot."
ESDC
, 2014.
ESDC. "Labour Supply and  the Impacts of the Best 14 Weeks Pilot."
ESDC
, 2013.
ESDC. "Report on the NERE  Pilot Project: Distribution of Hours for New Entrants and Re-Entrants."
ESDC
,  2007.
ESDC. "Summative  Evaluation of New Entrants and Re-Entrants."
ESDC
, 2011.
Fleishman-Hillard Canada.  "Key Informant Interviews of Employers for the 3 Employment Insurance  Pilot Projects."
ESDC
, 2008.
Friesen, Jane. "The  Impacts of the Pilot Project for calculating Benefit rate Based on Claimant’s  14 Highest Weeks of Insurable Earnings - Update."
ESDC
, 2011.
Gray, David and McDonald, Ted.  "Evaluation Report on the Impacts of the EI Pilot Project on Increased  Access to Benefits by New and Re-entrants."
ESDC
, 2011.
Gray, David and McDonald, Ted.  "Evaluation Report on the IMpacts of the EI Pilot Project on Increased  Access to Benefits by New and Re-entrants."
ESDC
, 2009.
Gunderson, Morley.  "Review of Research and Policy Literature on the Impacts of Employment  Insurance Programs for Seasonal Workers."
ESDC
, 2006.
Gunderson, Morley.  "Seasonal Employment in Canada: The Role of the Market, Collective  Bargaining and Policy."
HRSDC
, 2005.
Kapsalis, Costas and Tourigny,  Pierre. "Duration of Non-Standard Employment."
Perspectives on  Labour and Income
, Spring 2005: 31-39.
Phoenix Strategic Perspectives  Inc. "Evaluation of Employment Insurance Pilot Projects: Component  Examining Impacts of the Pilot Projects on Target Groups of Claimants Using  Focus Groups."
ESDC
, 2008.
Vincent, Carole. "The  NERE Pilot Project Evaluation: Summary of Results for the 2009 Employment  Insurance Monitoring and Assessment Report."
ESDC
, 2009.
List of acronyms
EI: Employment Insurance
ESDC: Employment and Social  Development Canada
Best 14  Weeks: Calculating  Benefit Rate Based On Claimant’s 14 Highest Weeks of Insurable Earnings Pilot
NERE: New Entrant and Re-entrant
List of tables
Table  3.2.2
Profile of NEREs and Non-NEREs,  1995 to 2005
Table 4.1.1
Number  of Best 14 Weeks Pilot Beneficiaries and Average Increase in Benefit Rate
Table 4.2.1
Estimated Benefit  Cost of the Best 14 Weeks Pilots Compared to the 26 Week Rate Calculation  Approach
Table 4.2.2
Estimated Benefit  Cost of the Best 14 Weeks Pilots Controlling for Impact of Behavioural Changes
Table 4.2.3
Estimated  Benefit Cost of the NERE Pilots
Appendix A: Evaluation matrix
Lines of evidence by evaluation questions
Q-1a: What are the factors underlying the EI support for  part-time workers or temporary workers, particularly those workers with  variable work hours?
Lines of Evidence: Literature Review
Q-1b: Were workers turning  down overtime or small weeks of work before the Best 14 Weeks pilots were  implemented?
Lines of Evidence: Focus Groups
Q-1c: What were the underlying issues regarding the EI  rules for NEREs?
Lines of Evidence: Literature Review
Q-2a: Do the new design features of the Best 14 Weeks  pilots encourage workers to accept more work?
Lines of Evidence: Impacts of Best 14 Weeks  Pilot
Q-2b: Who were the people working in the 840-909 hour  range? What are their characteristics compared to the characteristics of other  EI clients?
Lines of Evidence: Distribution of Hours  Among NERE (M&A 2007)
Q-3: Is the objective of the Best 14 Weeks and NERE pilots  consistent with government priorities and ESDC’s strategic outcomes?
Lines of Evidence: Literature Review
Q-4: Are the Best 14 Weeks and NERE pilots consistent with  federal roles and responsibilities?
Lines of Evidence: Literature Review
Q-5a: How many workers are better off under the Best 14  Weeks pilots? What is the average increase in benefits?
Lines of Evidence: Labour Supply and Best  14 Weeks, Cost Estimates
Q-5b: Who are the people  that are affected by the Best 14 Weeks pilots and what are their  characteristics compared to the characteristics of other EI clients? What are  the shares of seasonal, non-seasonal workers that are better off with the Best  14 Weeks pilot projects?
Lines of Evidence: Impacts of Best 14 Weeks  Pilot
Q-5c: How many more claimants have received EI benefits  under the NERE pilots? Are there more NERE workers claiming EI?
Lines of Evidence: Impacts of Increased  Access for NERE, Cost Estimates
Q-5d: Are NEREs applying for part II training? Was there  increased participation in part II Measures?
Lines of Evidence: Focus Groups, NERE Pilot  Summary of Results (M&A 2009), Impacts of Increased Access for NERE
Q-6a: Were Best 14 Weeks pilot claimants more willing to  pick up “low income” weeks of work? What is the average additional insured  hours worked and insured earnings prior to claim?
Lines of Evidence: Focus Groups, Key  Informant Interviews, Impacts of Best 14 Weeks Pilot, Labour Supply and Best 14  Weeks
Q-6b: How has the Best 14 Weeks affected the weekly  variability in earnings? Have hours become more volatile for seasonal workers  and workers overall? Is there a shift towards bunching work into the best 14  weeks?
Lines of Evidence: Key Informant Interviews,  Labour Supply and Best 14 Weeks
Q-6c: Are workers changing their work behaviour as a  result of the NERE pilots? Was there a shift away from less than 840 insured  hours into the 840-909 range of insured hours? Was there a shift away from  910-1000 range of insured hours towards 840-909 rage of insured hours?
Lines of Evidence: Impacts of Increased  Access for NERE
Q-7a: Are the pilot rules affecting the hiring and lay-off  behaviours of employers?
Lines of Evidence: Focus Groups, Key  Informant Interviews
Q-7b: Are employers finding that filling out the new  section of the ROEs for the Best 14 Weeks pilots is burdensome?
Lines of Evidence: Key Informant Interviews
Q-8a: What are the estimated costs of the Best 14 Weeks  pilots? How does the cost compare with the costs associated with Small Weeks  rule?
Lines of Evidence: Cost Estimates
Q-8b: What were the costs of the NERE pilots?
Lines of Evidence: Cost Estimates
Appendix B: Lines of evidence
The following lines of evidence were  collected to answer the evaluation questions:
Literature review
A literature was conducted that focussed on  seasonal and other forms of non-standard work. The review summarized existing  research to show how the EI program has impacted seasonal and non-standard  workers, and if the determination of benefits met the needs of workers in  non-standard employment.
Focus group study
Focus group sessions were conducted with  participants of four pilot projects, including the Best 14 Weeks and NERE pilots.  There were 20 focus groups held in five cities, conducted in both English and  French. The focus groups provided qualitative evidence of how the pilots have  impacted the behaviour of claimants in accepting all available work, and other  behaviours that may have changed as a result of the pilots.
Key informant interviews
Interviews were conducted with 60 experts  who had experience with the pilots and could explain how the pilots have  affected the groups that they represent. Interviewees included business people,  union representatives, business associations and HRSDC officials. The  interviews provided qualitative evidence of how the pilots have impacted  claimants and businesses.
Statistical analysis
Several technical studies were conducted  with EI administrative data (Status Vector and Record of Employment). The  studies are:
Statistical profile of pilot beneficiaries
This study used  EI Administrative data to profile claimants who benefited from the pilots in  comparison to claimants who did not benefit. The methodology is descriptive.
Impacts of the Best 14 Weeks pilot
This technical study examined how insured  earnings and insured hours were affected by the Best 14 Weeks pilots. The study  used a difference-in-differences methodology.
Labour supply and impacts of the Best 14 Weeks pilot
This study updated the previous work on the  Best 14 Weeks pilots with more recent data and somewhat revised methodology.  The report also used a difference-in-differences methodology.
Distribution of hours for NEREs
This study maps out the distribution of  hours worked for NEREs and for other workers before and after the  implementation of the pilot projects. The study was conducted for the 2007 EI  Monitoring and Assessment Report.
NERE descriptive study
This study examines the proportion of  claimants in various ranges of hours worked. It was written for the 2009 EI  Monitoring and Assessment Report. The analysis is descriptive.
Impacts of increased access to benefits for NEREs
This study looks at how the NERE pilots  impacted the hours worked for NEREs. In particular, it focuses on the  proportion of NEREs who had insured hours in various ranges associated with EI  eligibility and non-eligibility. The study uses a difference-in-differences  methodology.
Cost studies
Two cost studies were complete, one for  each of the pilots.
Appendix C: Pilot EI economic regions
Extended EI pilots
Best 14 Weeks pilots
Working While on Claim (WWOC)     pilots
New Entrants and Re-Entrants     (NERE)
Pilot Project Number
Pilot Project No. 6
Pilot Project No. 10
Pilot Project No. 15
Pilot Project    No. 7
Pilot Project    No. 11
Pilot Project    No. 16
Pilot Project No.8
Pilot Project No. 12
Pilot Project No. 17
Pilot Project No. 18
Pilot Project    No. 9
Pilot Project    No. 13
Start date
June 6, 2004
June 11,2006
Sept. 12, 2010
Oct. 30, 2005
Oct. 26, 2008
June 26, 2011
Dec. 11, 2005
Dec. 7, 2008
August 7, 2011
August 5, 2012
Dec. 11, 2005
Dec. 7, 2008
End date
June 4, 2006
February 28, 2009
Sept. 15, 2012
Oct. 25, 2008
June 25, 2011
April 6, 2013
Dec. 6, 2008
August 6, 2011
August 4, 2012
August 1, 2015
Dec. 6, 2008
Dec. 4, 2010
Number of participating regions
24
21
21
23
25
25
23
All
All
All
23
25
Unemployment Rate of Participating Region
10
10
N/A
10
8
8
10
N/A
N/A
N/A
10
8
Participating regions
1. St. John's
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable*
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Nationwide
Nationwide
Nationwide
Applicable
Applicable
2. Newfoundland/Labrador
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Nationwide
Nationwide
Nationwide
Applicable
Applicable
3. Prince Edward Island
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Nationwide
Nationwide
Nationwide
Applicable
Applicable
4. Eastern Nova Scotia
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Nationwide
Nationwide
Nationwide
Applicable
Applicable
5. Western Nova Scotia
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Nationwide
Nationwide
Nationwide
Applicable
Applicable
8. Madawaska-Charlotte
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Nationwide
Nationwide
Nationwide
Applicable
Applicable
9. Restigouche-Albert
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Nationwide
Nationwide
Nationwide
Applicable
Applicable
10. Gaspésie-Îles de la Madelaine
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Nationwide
Nationwide
Nationwide
Applicable
Applicable
12. Trois-Rivières
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Nationwide
Nationwide
Nationwide
Applicable
Applicable
17. Central Quebec
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Nationwide
Nationwide
Nationwide
Applicable
Applicable
18. North Western Quebec
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Nationwide
Nationwide
Nationwide
Applicable
Applicable
19. Lower St.    Laurence and North Shore
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Nationwide
Nationwide
Nationwide
Applicable
Applicable
21. Chicoutimi-Jonquière
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable*
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Nationwide
Nationwide
Nationwide
Applicable
Applicable
26. Oshawa
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Applicable
Applicable
N/A
Nationwide
Nationwide
Nationwide
N/A
Applicable
31. Niagara
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Applicable
Applicable
N/A
Nationwide
Nationwide
Nationwide
N/A
Applicable
32. Windsor
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Applicable
Applicable
N/A
Nationwide
Nationwide
Nationwide
N/A
Applicable
34. Huron
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Applicable
Applicable
N/A
Nationwide
Nationwide
Nationwide
N/A
Applicable
36. Sudbury
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable*
Applicable
N/A
N/A
Applicable
Nationwide
Nationwide
Nationwide
Applicable
N/A
38. Northern Ontario
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Nationwide
Nationwide
Nationwide
Applicable
Applicable
41. Northern Manitoba
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Nationwide
Nationwide
Nationwide
Applicable
Applicable
45. Northern Saskatchewan
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Nationwide
Nationwide
Nationwide
Applicable
Applicable
48. Northern Alberta
Applicable
N/A
N/A
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Nationwide
Nationwide
Nationwide
Applicable
Applicable
50. Southern Interior BC
Applicable
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Nationwide
Nationwide
Nationwide
N/A
N/A
54. Southern Coastal BC
Applicable
N/A
N/A
Applicable
N/A
N/A
Applicable
Nationwide
Nationwide
Nationwide
Applicable
N/A
55. Northern BC
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Nationwide
Nationwide
Nationwide
Applicable
Applicable
56. Yukon
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Nationwide
Nationwide
Nationwide
Applicable
Applicable
57. NWT
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Nationwide
Nationwide
Nationwide
Applicable
Applicable
58. Nunavut
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Nationwide
Nationwide
Nationwide
Applicable
Applicable
Note: *
Pilot Project No. 15 ceased to apply in: St. John’s on September 24, 2011; Chicoutimi-Jonquière on March 24, 2012; and Sudbury on June 23, 2012.
Text description of Appendix C: Pilot EI economic regions
Appendix C is a table that identifies the regions participating in each Employment Insurance pilot project. The following headings appear in the first column of the table (from left to right) on the second to the seventh lines (from top to bottom): Pilot Project Number, Start Date, End Date, Number of Participating Regions, Unemployment Rate of Participating Region and Participating Regions; this is followed by a list of the 27 Employment Insurance economic regions.
The other columns read, from left to right, Pilot Projects No. 6, No. 10 and No. 15 under Extended EI Pilots; Pilot Projects No. 7, No. 11 and No. 16 under Best 14 Weeks Pilots; Pilot Projects No. 8, No. 12, No. 17 and No. 18 under Working While on Claim (WWOC) Pilots, and Pilot Projects No. 9 and No. 13 under New Entrants and Re Entrants (NERE).
Appendix D: Letters sent to NERE pilot claimants
One  of the following two letters was sent to NERE Pilot claimants, depending on if  the service provision was provincial discretion or if it was co-managed.
N-10-00-01: Invitation to contact an employment service provider –  employment services co-managed
The Department of Human Resources and Skills  Development Canada (HRSDC) has implemented a three-year pilot project in which  Employment Insurance claimants who are new to the work force or returning to  the work force after an extended absence and who live in regions of high  unemployment now qualify for Employment Insurance benefits at a reduced number  of hours (840 hours instead of 910 hours).
According to your application, you have  qualified for Employment Insurance benefits based on the pilot project  criteria. Qualifying for Employment Insurance allows you to access employment  services and benefits which are designed to address your employment needs and  help you return to work.
As part of your participation in this pilot  project you are being invited, by means of this letter, to contact an  employment service agency (see attachment) where you can receive help to  determine your employment needs and guidance in developing a plan for you to  return to work. The employment service agency may advise you on information  about the labour market and services such as counselling, career decision making and possible referral to an employment benefit  such as training. In addition, they may offer employment assistance programs  such as Job Finding Clubs, résumé writing, job search skills and other  employability supports.
If you are unable to visit an employment  service agency (see attachment), you may wish to contact an official at your  local Service Canada Centre (SCC) who will be able to advise you of  alternatives to receive the help you need to return to work.
For your convenience, we are providing the web-link to
HRSDC services
where you can locate the SCC office nearest you.
Yours sincerely,
Att.: Employment Service Agency
N-10-00-02: Invitation to contact an employment  service provider - employment services totally transferred to the provinces/territories
Human Resources and Skills Development Canada  (HRSDC) and Service Canada have implemented a three-year pilot project in high  unemployment regions under which Employment Insurance (EI) claimants who are  new to the work force or are returning to work after an extended absence now  qualify for EI benefits at a reduced number of hours (840 hours instead of 910  hours).
According to your application, you have  qualified for Employment Insurance benefits based on the pilot project  criteria. Qualifying for Employment Insurance allows you to access provincial  or territorial employment programs which are designed to address your  employment needs and help you return to work.
As part of your participation in this pilot  project, you are being invited, by means of this letter, to contact a  provincial or territorial local employment center (see attachment) where you  can receive help to determine your employment needs and guidance in developing  a plan for you to return to work. Your provincial or territorial local  employment center may also assist you with information on the labour market and  available employment services, including counseling, career advice, and  training.
If you are unable to visit one of the  provincial or territorial local employment centers identified on the attached  list, you may wish to contact your provincial or territorial government to  learn about alternatives to receive employment assistance to help you return to  work.
Yours sincerely,
Att: List of Employment Service Centres or  offices
Appendix E: Rate calculation formulas
The 26 week benefit rate calculation, which  was replaced in pilot regions by the Best 14 Weeks formula and was in effect in  non-pilot regions until April 2013, is given by:
Textual description
The 26 week benefit rate is equal to 55% of the ratio of insured earnings in the rate calculation period over the number of weeks worked or over the minimum divisor, whichever has the greatest value.
ŧ excluding small weeks, which are weeks with earnings below $225, unless they are required to satisfy the minimum divisor.
The rate calculation formula under the Best 14 Weeks Pilot is given by:
Textual description
The best 14 weeks benefit rate is equal to 55% of the average of the 14 highest earning weeks in the qualifying period.
Footnotes
Footnote 1
“Speech  from the Throne to Open the First Session of the 38th Parliament of  Canada”
.  October 5, 2004.
Return to footnote
1
referrer
Footnote 2
Budget 2005, presented on February 23, 2005, announced  that adjustments would be made to the EI program to “respond to the evolving  challenges and circumstances facing unemployed workers,” which would be  detailed in the future.
Budget Plan  2005,
Return to
first
footnote
2
referrer
Footnote 3
The  26 week rate calculation approach also contained a provision for weeks with  small earnings, and a minimum divisor rule.   These are described in detail in section 2.4.
Return to
first
footnote
3
referrer
Footnote 4
See  rationale in
Canada Gazette
.
under the  bookmark : Wednesday, September 17, 2008, vol. 142, no 19 SOR/2008-247 to  290 and SI/2008-93 to 107
Return to
first
footnote
4
referrer
Footnote 5
A  copy of the letters that were sent to NERE Pilot claimants are available in  Appendix D.
Return to
first
footnote
5
referrer
Footnote 6
Canada Gazette
Under  the bookmark : SOR/DORS/2008-257
Return to
first
footnote
6
referrer
Footnote 7
Ibid.
Return to
first
footnote
7
referrer
Footnote 8
For further  details of extensions and reintroductions see Canada Gazette:
Vol. 144, No. 22 — October 27, 2010
Vol. 145, No. 14 — July 6, 2011
Vol. 146, No. 14 — July 4, 2012
Return to
first
footnote
8
referrer
Footnote 9
See Appendix E for the depiction of the rate  calculation formula under the 26 week and the Best 14 Weeks schemes.
Return to
first
footnote
9
referrer
Footnote 10
Workforce  attachment hours include hours of insurable employment, weeks of EI benefit  receipt, or other prescribed hours related to employment (e.g.  workers’ compensation, training, or labour  disputes).
Return to
first
footnote
10
referrer
Footnote 11
NERE  Evaluation
.
Return to
first
footnote
11
referrer
Footnote 12
ESDC,  2011.  Summative Evaluation of New Entrants and  Re-Entrants.
Return to
first
footnote
12
referrer
Footnote 13
Source: Report on the NERE Pilot Project: Distribution  of Hours for New Entrants and Re-entrants (Prepared for the Monitoring and Assessment  Report 2007).
Return to
first
footnote
13
referrer
Footnote 14
The Best 14 Weeks Pilot applied  to regular, sickness, maternity, parental, and compassionate care benefits.
Return to
first
footnote
14
referrer
Footnote 15
Various  reports from 2009 to 2012-2013.
Return to
first
footnote
15
referrer
Footnote 16
As  before, pilot beneficiaries were identified using the estimated 26 week benefit  rate.  No adjustment was made for the  potential impact of the small weeks rule.  The estimated increase in the benefit rate is  from difference-in-differences regression models.
Return to
first
footnote
16
referrer
Footnote 17
For  the purpose of this report, frequent  claimants were defined as having had three or more claims in the previous five  years.  Frequent seasonal claimants have  had three or more claims in the previous five years with those claims occurring  around the same time of the year.
Return to
first
footnote
17
referrer
Footnote 18
Regular  claimants who worked fewer than 26 weeks in the 26-week period preceding the  separation date and whose claim was supported by a single ROE.
Return to
first
footnote
18
referrer
Footnote 19
Regular claimants who worked fewer than 52 weeks  in the 52-week period preceding the separation date, for claims established  between 2006 and 2011.
Return to
first
footnote
19
referrer
Footnote 20
This  is because the counterfactual to pilot claimants is provided by claimants in  non-pilot regions. However, since pilot regions were selected based on a  high-unemployment rate, changes in the general economic conditions are likely  to impact claimants in the pilot regions differently than in non-pilot regions,  making the comparison difficult.
Return to
first
footnote
20
referrer
Footnote 21
This  evidence was collected in July, 2008.  From  2005 to 2008 the proportion of ROEs submitted through the Internet increased  from 13% to 40%.  By 2013, 88% of ROEs  were submitted over the Internet.
Return to
first
footnote
2
1 referrer
Footnote 22
An  audit of the ROE-Web was conducted by HRSDC in 2008.
Return to
first
footnote
22
referrer
Footnote 23
Note  that this evidence pertained to employers prior to May, 2008.  On March 15, 2009, changes to
Regulation 19(3)
allowed employers who  submitted an ROE online to align the issuance of electronic ROEs more closely  with their payroll cycles.
Return to
first
footnote
23
referrer
Footnote 24
See  Section 4.1 – Q1 and Appendix E for a description of the 26 week benefit rate.
Return to
first
footnote
24
referrer
Report a problem or mistake on this page
Please select all that apply:
A link, button or video is not working
It has a spelling mistake
Information is missing
Information is outdated or wrong
Login error when trying to access an account
I can't find what I'm looking for
Other issue not in this list
Submit
Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries,
contact us
.
Date modified:
2022-04-12