Summary of the Multilateral Labour Affairs Evaluation 2010-2016
Summary of the Multilateral Labour Affairs Evaluation 2010-2016
[
PDF
- 176
KB
]
Text description of Infographic
Summary of the Multilateral Labour Affairs Evaluation 2010-2016
The Program represents the Government of Canada in international labour forums and facilitates domestic labour-related discussions.
Key findings
The Program effectively supported the Government of Canada in advancing international and domestic labour standards by:
coordinating Canada’s ratification of four International Labour Organization conventions,
facilitating various processes of consultations with government, employer, and worker entities to develop Canada’s positions at the international level, and
Reporting on Canada’s progress in meeting its international obligations including:
facilitating solutions to complaints made to the International Labour Organization by Canadian workers’ organizations.
Challenges:
Shortage of resources in order to balance its international and domestic obligations.
Receipt of timely input from provincial, territorial and federal government departments to meet various international timelines.
Recommendations
Conduct a thorough assessment of its resource requirements to ensure that the Program is meeting its broader mandate including representing Canada at appropriate level(s) in international forums.
Improve communications with various Canadian stakeholders to ensure timely and complete reporting to the International Labour Organization.
The full
Multilateral Labour Affairs Evaluation
is now available.
Report a problem or mistake on this page
Please select all that apply:
A link, button or video is not working
It has a spelling mistake
Information is missing
Information is outdated or wrong
Login error when trying to access an account
I can't find what I'm looking for
Other issue not in this list
Submit
Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries,
contact us
.
Date modified:
2018-06-14