Summary of the Evaluation of the Employment Insurance Maternity and Parental Benefits
Alternate formats
Summary of the Evaluation of the Employment Insurance Maternity and Parental Benefits
[
PDF
- 223
KB
]
Large print, braille,
MP3
(audio), e-text and
DAISY
formats are available on demand by
ordering online
or calling 1 800 O-Canada (1-800-622-6232). If you use a teletypewriter (
TTY
), call 1-800-926-9105.
About Employment Insurance Maternity and  Parental Benefits
Employment Insurance (EI) maternity  benefits are only available to the eligible person who is away from work  because:
they're pregnant, or
have recently given birth
EI parental benefits are available to  EI-eligible parents. This allows either parent to take time off work to care  for a newborn or newly adopted child. Budget 2017 and Budget 2018 introduced  changes such as:
allowing parents to opt between standard or  extended parental benefits, and
providing additional  weeks of benefits to parents who share parental benefits
Since 2006, new parents in Québec have  been receiving benefits under Québec Parental Insurance Plan (QPIP) instead of  EI. QPIP can be accessed at lower insurable earnings and offers more generous  benefits, but at a cost of higher premiums
.
Key findings
Finding 1: From  2006 to 2019, close to 72% of female parents and 81% of male parents were  covered by the EI program. Of them, about 90% were eligible for maternity and  parental benefits. These rates were lower than those observed under the QPIP,  which has a lower entrance requirement
Finding 2: The participation rate of male  parents was relatively low over the study period (below 13%). However, early  results indicate that the recent changes to parental benefits significantly  increased the rate. The rate increased from 13.6% in 2016 to 18.1% in 2019.  This rate was significantly lower than the one observed for male parents under  the QPIP, which has more generous benefits
Finding 3: The vast majority (85%) of new  parental benefit claimants opted for standard parental benefits. Those who  opted for extended parental benefits were more likely to:
be high-income earners
have higher family income
in couples
working in large organizations, and
receiving a top-up
Finding 4: Following recent policy changes to  parental benefits, the sharing of parental benefits increased from 14.5% in  2017 to 19.9% in 2019. However, key informants still believe that employers’  perceptions on parental leave tend to differ by gender. This is due to a  cultural stigma within the workplace attached to men taking leave
Finding 5: More female claimants than male  claimants served the waiting period in 2019 (159,000 and 25,000 respectively).This  is because female claimants typically access maternity benefits first. As a  result, a greater number of female than male claimants (14,100 compared to  1,800) had their first few weeks of benefits clawed back. This was due to  earnings during the waiting period
Finding 6: Claimants who have lost their job  before the birth/adoption of their child were less likely to access their full  parental benefit entitlements. This is due to the 50-week maximum rule when  regular and special benefits are combined. On average, each year of the studied  period, 3,300 female claimants were impacted by the 50-week rule. This was  compared to less than 500 male claimants. This is due to the combination of  regular, maternity and/or parental benefits
Finding 7: Longer maternity and parental  benefits duration increased the likelihood for female claimants to work for the  same employer after their parental leave, while the likelihood decreased for  their partners. However, for all claimants, the likelihood of having higher  future employment income decreased the longer they claimed benefits
Finding 8: Overall, the delivery (application  process) of EI maternity and parental benefits was deemed effective. There was  limited awareness of potential impacts on businesses of the recent changes
Recommendations
Explore approaches to improve eligibility and  access for parents to maternity and parental benefits, in particular spouses  and partners
Explore approaches to enhance flexibility for  claimants who need to combine maternity and parental benefits with regular  benefits
Report a problem or mistake on this page
Please select all that apply:
A link, button or video is not working
It has a spelling mistake
Information is missing
Information is outdated or wrong
Login error when trying to access an account
I can't find what I'm looking for
Other issue not in this list
Submit
Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries,
contact us
.
Date modified:
2023-04-24