Results at a glance: Evaluation of the Contribution to Brain Canada Foundation’s Canada Brain Research Fund 2011-12 to 2015-16
January 2017
Canada Brain Research Fund (CBRF)
Approximately 3.6 million Canadians are affected by some type of brain disease or disorder,  such as Alzheimer’s disease or depression.   As the Canadian population ages, more people will be at risk of or affected  by some type of brain disease or disorder.
In Budget 2011, the federal government provided up to $100 million to the Brain Canada  Foundation to establish the CBRF.  An  additional $20 million was provided in Budget 2016.
The CBRF finances  team research through Multi-Investigator Research Initiatives, the maintenance  of large databases through Platform Support Grants, and training awards to new  researchers to advance knowledge of the brain, brain diseases and disorders.
The CBRF research  involves researchers from different health fields to increase the knowledge of the  brain as a whole.
By the end  of 2015, 138 research projects had been funded through the CBRF with more than  700 researchers from 70 institutions across the country engaged in brain  research.
What the evaluation found
There is a  continued need for the CBRF and this investment is aligned with federal  government priorities and roles and responsibilities.
The team  Multi-Investigator Research Initiatives and the Platform Support Grants have  increased collaboration among researchers across different fields and within  the brain research community.
The matched  funding model has encouraged new donors to fund brain research.
The matched  funding model has created administrative challenges for donors, Brain Canada  Foundation and Health Canada resulting in a long and, at times, complicated  process.
Although  there may be some  overlap between CBRF and the Canadian  Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) research funding opportunities, the  evaluation found that the work of the two organizations is more complementary  than duplicative.
The peer  review process used by the CBRF for reviewing funding applications has  streamlined the way projects are chosen.
It is too  early to know whether the CBRF has met its long term goals. Research results  may take 15 years or more to impact the health system and Canadians. Some  anecdotal evidence suggests certain projects may impact treatments available for  brain diseases.
Recommendations and responses
It is recommended that Health  Canada consider adjusting the CBRF funding model.
Response
Health Canada has re-examined the  matched funding model in collaboration with Brain Canada Foundation, and  changes have been introduced.
About the evaluation
The evaluation  wanted to see whether there was still a need for this Fund and if it was  something the federal government should invest in. CBRF’s funding model was also reviewed.  Since fundraising for the CBRF only started  in 2012 the report also looked at how far the Fund has gone in meeting its short  and medium term goals during the period of March 2012 to March 2016.
The  evaluation team reviewed documents and academic journal articles, financial and  program data, as well as interviewed individuals within government and researchers,  donors, and staff connected to the CBRF.
The  evaluation was conducted by Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of  Canada’s Office of Audit and Evaluation.
Report a problem or mistake on this page
Please select all that apply:
A link, button or video is not working
It has a spelling mistake
Information is missing
Information is outdated or wrong
Login error when trying to access an account
I can't find what I'm looking for
Other issue not in this list
Submit
Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries,
contact us
.
Date modified:
2017-06-06