Management Response and Action Plan - Horizontal Evaluation of the Clean Air Agenda Adaptation Theme
Health Canada's
Footnote
1
Management Response and Action Plan
  Evaluation of the Clean Air Agenda Adaptation Theme
Recommendations
Response
Action Plan
Deliverables
Expected Completion Date
Accountability
Resources
Recommendation as stated in the evaluation report
Identify whether program management agrees, agrees with conditions, or disagrees with the recommendation, and why
Identify what action(s) program management will take to address the recommendation
Identify key
deliverables
Identify timeline for implementation of each deliverable
Identify Senior Management and Executive (DG and ADM level) accountable for the implementation of each deliverable
Describe the human and/or financial resources required to complete recommendation, including the source of resources (additional vs. existing budget)
Recommendation 1:
Review current adaptation program delivery    to identify opportunities to expand engagement among new and existing stakeholder groups and increase awareness of information, products, or    activities.
Agree
Since the development of the recommendations included in this Evaluation, Health Canada (HC) has been actively engaged in reviewing stakeholder needs and awareness levels, and completed actions in response to this recommendation.
Specifically,    there was health stakeholder engagement to support the development of the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change, and Public Opinion Research completed to better understand current awareness levels.  Some new program activities have already    been implemented as a result, such as expanded health outreach activities    during Spring/Summer 2017. This included new radio advertisements and news    articles, and the establishment of the National Heat Health Community of Practice    (CoP), which facilitates the sharing of information, experiences and best    adaptation practices among health stakeholders and officials across the country.
HC also expanded its Climate Change and Health Adaptation Program (CCHAP) to include First Nations South of 60.  As part of this expansion, the program held engagement and awareness workshops in all regions south of 60 as well as hosted similar    sessions in the Northern    Regions in support of previous and ongoing activities. The Northern Region also collaborated    with Indigenous and Northern    Affairs Canada (INAC) in the development and delivery of    these sessions.
In support of ongoing continuous improvement, FNIHB also reviewed its current activities to identify further opportunities to expand    engagement and increase awareness, including its internet presence.
1.    a) Host a stakeholder Workshop to identify stakeholder priorities, awareness, and engagement needs.
b)    Conduct environmental scans and review levels of stakeholder engagement needs and awareness.
c)    Conduct public Opinion Research to better understand current awareness levels    of climate change and health information.
1. a) Completed    June 2016.
b)    Completed March 2017.
c) Completed    March 2017.
1. Safe    Environments Directorate (SED) – DG
1. No additional    resources required (funding from Budget 2016 & Budget 2017 for Climate    Change Adaptation programming).
2. Workshop reports from engagement    sessions
2. Completed October 2017
2. Executive Director (ED), First Nations Inuit Health Branch (FNIHB) Office    of Public and Population Health (OPPH)    and FNIHB, Regional Executive for Northern Region
2 and 3: Resources will come from the Adaptation component    of the Pan Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change (PCF) announced    in Budget    2017.  Budget 2016 announced a renewal    of resources for Adaptation.
3. Successful    launch of climatetelling.info website
3. Completed July 2017
3. FNIHB,    ED OPPH
Recommendation    2:
Review    mechanisms for collaboration and information sharing between the Adaptation    program elements, as well as with federal and non-federal program partners,    in order to leverage best practices and resources, and avoid duplication of    effort.
Agree
HC actively participates in federal government-led forums    dedicated to climate change adaptation, including the inter-sectoral    Adaptation Platform and the recently established Pan-Canadian Framework governance    tables. HC is also strengthening coordination and information sharing across Departments    and Agencies that work on climate change and health adaptation programs    through the implementation of structured working-level and senior management    level engagement.
In response to this recommendation, HC also reviewed its mechanisms for    collaboration and information sharing with other federal partners with a view    to identifying any opportunities for continuous improvement.
1.    a) Support the establishment of the Pan-Canadian Framework Governance    structures, which will include HC and DISC members.
b)    Develop draft Terms of References for Health Coordination Committees to    coordinate on climate change and health issues.
1) a) Completed    May 2017
b) March    31, 2018
1) SED DG
1) No    additional resources required. (Funding from Budget 2016 and 2017 for Climate    Change Adaptation programming.)
2. Terms of Reference for the Climate Change and Health    Adaptation Program (CCHAP) Selection Committee refined to leverage expertise    and best practices from First Nations experts across southern Canada with    varying backgrounds – e.g. social work to environmental science.
2. Completed August 2017
2). FNIHB,    ED OPPH
2 and 3: Resources will come from the Adaptation component    of the Pan Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change (PCF)    announced in Budget 2017.  Budget 2016    announced a renewal of resources    for Adaptation.
3. New MOU between HC-FNIHB (now    DISC) and INAC on the Adaptation    program delivery to avoid duplication of effort and leverage federal and    non-federal resources.
3. MOU between HC-FNIHB (now DISC) and INAC was signed    August 2017.
3). FNIHB,    ED OPPH
Recommendation    3:
Review the current    performance measurement framework and data to improve tracking and reporting    on progress toward Adaptation-theme level intended results.
Agree
HC is supporting a range of federal initiatives on results    reporting, such as providing health expertise to the Secretariat of the Expert    Panel on Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience Results.
Specifically in response to this recommendation, with new    investments in climate change programming, the 2011-2016 theme level    performance measurement system was replaced by the Horizontal Management    Framework for Clean Growth and Climate Change (HMF).  Relevant HC indicators, outcomes and    actions have been developed and approved by senior management. Targets for    adaptation programming were included in the HMF that was approved September    2017.
1. Finalize the Horizontal Management Framework for Clean    Growth and Climate Change
1. Completed September 2017 as part of TB Submission.
1. SED DG with support from FNIHB, ED OPPH
1. No additional resources required. (Funding from Budget    2017 for Climate Change Adaptation Programming.)
Recommendation    4
:
In collaboration    with the departments' respective Chief Financial Officers, review current    processes for opportunities to improve the tracking and reporting of    financial information for Adaptation program elements.
Agree
HC has robust mechanisms in place to report and track on    its financial commitments. However, as part of our continuous improvement    efforts, HC will review current processes for opportunities to improve    financial tracking and reporting.
1. Review of current processes, including identification    of opportunities for improvement to be implemented according to the    established timelines.
1. March 31, 2018
1. SED-DG (lead) in collaboration with the Branch Senior    Financial Officer (BSFO) for the Healthy Environments and Consumer Safety    Branch (HECSB) and the financial office for DISC.
1. No additional resources required.
Footnote 1
The  First Nations and Inuit Health Branch (FNIHB), formerly a part of Health  Canada, was transferred to the Department of Indigenous Services Canada (DISC)  on November 30, 2017, by way of an Order-in-Council. As a result, all follow-up  actions related to the FNIHB mandate will be handled by DISC.
Return to footnote
1
referrer
Report a problem or mistake on this page
Please select all that apply:
A link, button or video is not working
It has a spelling mistake
Information is missing
Information is outdated or wrong
Login error when trying to access an account
I can't find what I'm looking for
Other issue not in this list
Submit
Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries,
contact us
.
Date modified:
2020-11-18