Joint Audit and Evaluation of the Impact Canada Initiative – Clean Technology Stream
Presented to the Departmental Audit Committee (DAC) January 21, 2022
Presented to the Performance Measurement, Evaluation and Experimentation Committee
(PMEEC) November 24, 2021
List of Acronyms
ADM
Assistant Deputy    Minister
AEB
Audit and Evaluation    Branch
ARLU
Annual Reference    Level Update
BEIS
UK Department for    Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy
CEMI
Centre for Mining    Innovation
CI!
Crush It!    Challenge
CoE
NRCan’s Centre of    Expertise on Grants and Contributions
CPS
Communications    and Portfolio Sector
CTF
Charging the    Future
CTS
Clean Technology    Stream
ETS
Energy Technology    Sector
FAA
Financial Administration Act
Gs&Cs
Grants and    Contributions
GARDN
Green Aviation    Research & Development Network
GHG
Greenhouse Gas
ICE
Indigenous Clean    Energy Social Enterprise
ICI
Impact Canada    Initiative
ICI-CTS
Impact Canada    Initiative - Clean Technology Stream
IIA Standards
International Standards for the    Professional Practice of Internal Auditing
IODI
Indigenous Off-Diesel    Initiative
LMS
Lands and    Minerals Sector
MaRS
MaRS Discovery    District
NRCan
Natural Resources    Canada
OERD
Office of Energy    Research and Development
PCF
Pan-Canadian    Framework (on Clean Growth and Climate Change)
PCO
Privy Council    Office
PCO COE
Privy Council    Office Centre of Expertise for the Impact Canada Initiative
PF
Power Forward
RD&D
Research,    Development and Demonstration
REDI
Reconciliation,    Equity, Diversity and Inclusion
SMEs
Small and Medium    Sized Enterprises
SAF
Sustainable    Aviation Fuel
STAC
Science and    Technology Assistance for Cleantech
STL
Sky’s the Limit
TB
Treasury Board    (of Canada)
TRL
Technology    Readiness Level
Ts&Cs
Terms and    Conditions
WICT
Women in Clean    Tech
Table of   Contents
Executive Summary
Introduction
Engagement   Objectives and Methods
What   We Found – Relevance
What   We Found - Governance
What   We Found – Design
What   We Found – Processes and Controls
What   We Found – Expected and Unexpected Outcomes
What   We Found – Factors Influencing Program Delivery
What   We Found – Lessons Learned
Conclusion
Appendix   A: Engagement Sub-Objectives and Criteria
Appendix   B: Joint Engagement Team
Executive Summary
About the Engagement
This report presents the findings, conclusions, and  recommendations from the joint audit and evaluation of the Impact Canada  Initiative (ICI) – Clean Technology Stream (CTS). Announced in Budget 2017, the  ICI is a whole-of-government effort, led by the Privy Council Office (PCO),  designed to help departments accelerate the adoption of outcomes-based  approaches to deliver results to Canadians. The  ICI promotes the flexible use of grants and contributions through a range of  innovative funding models, including prize challenges. Natural Resources Canada  (NRCan)’s Clean Technology Stream, one of the first program streams developed  under this new initiative, has launched six selected focus areas – i.e., the  Crush It! Challenge, Charging the Future Challenge, Power Forward Challenge,  Sky’s the Limit Challenge, Women in Clean Tech Challenge, and Indigenous  Off-Diesel Initiative.
The joint engagement examines the design and delivery of the  ICI-CTS from its announcement in Budget 2017 to March 2021, with updates  reflecting the impact of COVID-19 (extending the program to 2021-22 and  offering additional funding supports). The objectives of the joint engagement  are:
To assess the extent to which the program’s  design and delivery facilitates the effective and efficient achievement of  immediate results and complies with relevant authorities.
To identify and document lessons learned from  the experimental approaches under the Impact Canada – Clean Technology Stream  that can be applied to future interventions.
NRCan’s Audit and Evaluation Branch (AEB) conducted this  engagement in accordance with the Treasury Board (TB)
Policy on Results
(2016) and the Institute of Internal Auditors’
International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing
and  the Government of Canada’s
Policy on Internal Audit
.
What the Engagement Found
Relevance
We found that the ICI-CTS is relevant. The program aligns  with federal government and NRCan priorities, roles and responsibilities to  support innovations in clean technology related to Canada’s natural resource  sectors that tackle Canada’s most pressing environmental challenges and create  economic benefits. Each of the ICI-CTS’ six selected focus areas meet key  criteria that were set out for their prioritization. The narrow focus of focus  area sets this apart from other funding programs, with the suite of clean tech  challenges acting as vehicles to enhance the communication of priorities in the  Government of Canada’s environmental agenda.
More broadly, the ICI-CTS supports mandate commitments to  increase experimentation, and is structured to give more flexibility to  proponents to propose innovative solutions. It enables the Government of Canada  to test innovations and generate evidence of which efforts work best to create  greater public value in areas of high priority. The ICI-CTS provided an  opportunity to test innovative ways to address problems for which solutions are  not apparent.
Governance
Overall, we found that governance structures, processes and  mechanisms for ICI-CTS were defined, established and operating effectively. Roles,  responsibilities and accountabilities were clear, including delineation between  the responsibilities of PCO and NRCan, and any areas of complementary and  overarching responsibilities. However, the unfamiliar policy context resulted  in difficulties in the initial stages of program design and development, with fundamentally  different interpretations of the ICI-CTS Terms and Conditions (Ts&Cs) among  key intradepartmental players. These differences have since been addressed with  an ongoing collaborative approach.
Internal reporting mechanisms were also found to be  established and functioning as intended at all levels of program management.  These reporting mechanisms (both formal and informal) enabled key communication  on the program’s progression to senior management at intervals that supported  timely reporting across all phases of design and implementation.
Design
Challenges have a set of features meant to attract new  talent and new ideas, and accelerate progress towards solving problems that  matter to people. As a result, challenges are designed, promoted and delivered  differently than the types of funding programs that governments and their  stakeholders are accustomed to running and participating in. Many focus areas  also incorporated numerous experiments within this broader experiment, for  example, testing new models of Indigenous participation or new ways of working  with international partners.
We examined how and for whom the program’s experimental  tools are effective in facilitating the achievement of intended outputs and  outcomes, with a focus on five elements common to all focus areas, i.e.:  inclusive innovation (co-design), communications and outreach, collaborative arrangements,  flexible funding mechanisms, and additional (non-financial) proponent supports.  These elements are critical to the success of challenges. Overall, we found  that the design of focus areas under the ICI-CTS was consistent with principles  of Impact Canada and best practices in challenge models.
Stakeholder engagement in co-design was recognized as a key  strength for the program. This allowed NRCan to target key issues while scaling  the challenge to what would be achievable by solvers, including consideration  of specific barriers for the problem area. The program was responsive to this  feedback and, while there was some room for improvement, the resulting funding  flexibilities and non-financial proponent supports built into the design of  each focus area facilitated participation from diverse solvers (project  proponents and potential collaborators or investors).
To attract the interest of solvers there was also effort  dedicated to the development and delivery of communication strategies. While  this could have been more innovative and better resourced, the program did  attract a sufficient number of quality proposals.
NRCan also made good use of collaborators to co-develop and/or  deliver activities under the ICI-CTS. There is evidence that the collaborators  selected were both appropriate and effective in facilitating and/or  accelerating delivery of the program. In particular, working with Indigenous  collaborators on the Indigenous Off-Diesel Initiative (one of the six focus  areas) was perceived as a positive move towards a new model of collaborative (rather  than Crown-led) program delivery.
Processes and  Controls
Overall, we found that processes and controls are in place  to support compliance with relevant departmental guidance and the TB
Policy on Transfer Payments
. We also  found that key financial operational controls (refer to Appendix A) have been  designed and implemented and are operating effectively most of the time.
There is an opportunity to improve the retention of  documentation related to key decision processes, particularly for focus areas  that used a collaborator as an intermediary. Further, while all files sampled were noted to be signed by the  appropriate individual with a valid financial signing authority and adhered to  the required stacking provisions, the release of proactive disclosure  information was not always performed within the required reporting period.
The program’s identification of auditable agreements was  found to align with NRCan policies and procedures on the recipient-audit  process, with consideration to the inherent risk ratings of the agreements. However,  while the program uses corporate systems to capture audit related information  (i.e., status, findings and recommendations), its process for tracking, managing  and resolving recipient audit recommendations issued is not clear.
Expected and  Unexpected Outcomes
We examined the extent to which the ICI-CTS is making  progress towards program-level immediate outcomes identified in its draft logic  model, including increased collaboration and investment by stakeholders in the  clean tech ecosystem, increased awareness and participation in clean tech  (i.e., mobilization of “new talent”), and increased public awareness of clean  tech issues among Canadians. There are a number of internal and external  factors influencing program delivery. Within its sphere of influence, the program  has been responsive to mitigate or address barriers to delivery.
Impact Canada uses innovative approaches that necessitate  new methods and strategies for measuring program outcomes and impacts. While a  notional performance framework was included with program approvals, NRCan is  still working on its own and with PCO to enhance this framework and to develop  challenge-specific outcomes and related methodologies. Difficulties in the  design and application of performance metrics still need to be resolved. While  there is evidence that the design and delivery of each focus area considered  and worked to achieve the program’s immediate outcomes, complications in  performance measurement mean that calculation of results against ICI-CTS  indicators is not possible given data available.
Nevertheless, available evidence suggests that progress has  been made in each area. There is strong evidence to suggest that finalists are developing  their own formal and informal collaborative arrangements among diverse stakeholders.  Most finalists’ projects have also leveraged investments, at least to some  extent, and further leveraging across all focus areas could reasonably be  expected as projects continue to advance. While the vast majority of finalists  are not new to federal funding programs, a large number were SMEs or start-up  businesses. Two focus areas were also specifically designed to support outcomes  for underrepresented groups, i.e., to attract and maximize the participation of  women and Indigenous communities. Evidence indicates that the program has been  successful in mobilizing new talent in these areas. Evidence related to  enhanced public awareness indicates that the ICI-CTS performed relatively well  on social media compared to most government content. Communications beyond  NRCan’s accounts may also have been extensive. However, finalists noted that  there was less opportunity for or emphasis on communications promoting their  progress than they expected when they decided to apply (in part due to  restrictions imposed by COVID-19).
Our engagement was not designed to assess progress towards  intermediate and ultimate outcomes, as it is too soon to indicate whether these  will be achieved. However, a key difference in the design of challenge-based  models is that if the result is not achieved, the funding is not awarded. We  found progress at least insofar as finalists are progressing towards outcomes  specific to their project; projects are achieving expected project milestones. Progress  towards outcomes was also reported by solvers who are not selected as  finalists, with many continuing to advance their solutions, albeit at a slower  pace or to a more limited extent. The extent to which this can be attributed to  Impact Canada is unclear.
The issues targeted by each focus area will not be fully  addressed by the ICI-CTS, nor are they intended to be. There is no one, “silver  bullet” solution to these complex problems. While there is evidence of viable  pathways to scale success for each focus area, this requires dedicated efforts  that extend beyond the scope and timelines of the ICI-CTS but which may be  accelerated as a result of the program. However, the ICI-CTS is meant to help  advance and accelerate solutions. The challenge model is also such that there  is no guarantee that anyone will win the final prize. However, even for the one  area of the ICI-CTS where the challenge closed without the prize being awarded  (i.e., no producer met all the criteria before the submission deadline), there  were experimental learnings gained; this should not be viewed as a failure on  the part of the program. Moving forward, this intelligence is available to  inform perspectives for other programs and actors and may also accelerate the  design or implementation of parallel initiatives in related focus areas.
Lessons Learned
Overall, interviewees perceived the challenge model as  effective and appropriate but there was no consensus on whether this model  should be replicated in the future. We found the challenge model to be a new  tool that provides an alternative to traditional funding programs, but  decisions on when it is appropriate to use this model should be carefully  considered in light of the context of the outcomes to be achieved.
NRCan has also gained a lot of experimental learning by  testing additional innovations in each focus area. Best practices and lessons  learned are highlighted where relevant throughout this report. Future use of  design elements that were found to be strengths of the ICI-CTS (e.g., co-design,  supports to remove barriers for underrepresented groups, etc.) need not be  limited to challenge models.
Lessons learned by NRCan related to systemic and  departmental barriers to the use of flexible mechanisms have already fed into  guidance released by PCO, and should help accelerate future use of related  models by NRCan and impart new perspectives to corporate practices. We  expect NRCan to also apply lessons learned from the ICI-CTS in its own design of  future prize challenges, whether under the umbrella of Impact Canada or as part  of a separate initiative. In future, NRCan’s AEB will look for evidence that these  lessons learned have been considered at least in the proposed design of relevant  programs and activities. Key lessons learned include:
Design
Engage on co-design of the prize    challenge as early as possible in the design phase. If possible, future    interventions should undertake engagement and/or consultation in advance of    committing to a focus area.
Allow for the maximum possible    flexibility in the fiscal funding arrangements, including contingency plans    to deal with the unexpected. If possible, include a carry-forward provision    in funding authorities to simplify use of flexibilities in allocating funds    across fiscal years.
Engage corporate services early to enable    them to fully understand the program and its objectives.
Ensure that senior management is closely    engaged help overcome resistance to innovative programming, and that    expectations for the program’s implementation are clear and aligned to the    intended design and delivery of the initiatives proposed.
Recognizing the limits to co-creation    with external entities, carefully select collaborators based on who is best    positioned to support results and benefits to Canadians and ensure that their    role is clearly defined, understood, and does not introduce a real or    perceived conflict of interest.
Delivery
Ensure that dedicated resources are    available (within the program team and/or corporate services) to fully    deliver on innovative communications objectives as a core element in    challenge design.
Develop clear selection criteria and    clearly communicate to applicants how they will be assessed against these    pre-determined criteria, and ensure that documentation of decisions related    to selection of applicant proposals is complete.
Ensure that in cases where intermediaries    are used, required documentation identified per the funding agreements is    collected and retained to fulfil NRCan’s oversight role.
Ensure that approvals of proactive    disclosures of grants and contributions information are completed in a timely    manner.
Impact
Dedicate sufficient resources to performance    measurement, to assess the effectiveness (impact) and efficiency of the prize    challenge.
As early as possible in challenge design    or implementation, consider ways to effectively contribute to concrete    follow-on strategies towards the further advancement of government    priorities.
Recommendations and Management Response
Recommendation
Management Response
The ADM ETS should review and document lessons    learned from the Impact Canada – Clean Technology Stream, including those    that may emerge in final prize award and any post-program follow-on, and make    these available within NRCan, including with corporate services, and across    government such that they can inform the design and delivery of future prize    challenges.
Management Agrees.
The    Office of Energy Research and Development (OERD) will further formalize and    standardize its processes for documenting lessons learned from Impact Canada    Cleantech Challenges. OERD will also explore options and develop a plan for    sharing lessons from Impact Canada Cleantech with NRCan senior management and    other sectors.
Following the awarding of prizes and program wrap up, OERD will    develop a lessons learned summary document, which will be updated as lessons    emerge.
OERD will continue to share lessons with the PCO Impact and    Innovation Unit to support the development of “Challenge Resource Materials”    that are shared and presented to other federal departments and the public    (e.g. PCO case studies,
PCO Challenge    Guide
and
PCO    advice on challenge juries
).
OERD will also continue with its practice of giving    presentations on Impact Canada within NRCan and to other departments upon    request.
Position    Responsible:
DG, OERD on behalf of ADM, ETS
Date to achieve:
December 30, 2021 to develop plan for    documenting and sharing lessons
September 30, 2022 to develop lessons learned    document and then updated as lessons emerge
The ADM ETS should review and finalize the    performance measurement strategy for the ICI-CTS. This strategy should    include:
Logic model (or theory of change), indicators,    data collection methods, data sources, and potential counterfactuals.
Metrics for the program stream as a whole, as    well as for each challenge or initiative to demonstrate the achievement of    outcomes.
As applicable, metrics to inform GBA+    considerations.
A plan for the timing and means by which    reporting on program results and impacts will be communicated to senior    management.
Management agrees.
OERD    will update and finalize the core Impact Canada Cleantech performance    measurement strategy, including:
Finalize the draft Impact Canada Cleantech    logic model, indicators, data collection methods, data sources, and, where    appropriate and possible, identify suitable counterfactuals. OERD would like    to acknowledge that due the nature of transformative innovation and RD&D,    OERD will also draw on principles from innovation literature and    developmental evaluations by integrating new outcomes, indicators, and    updating assumptions based on emergent findings.
Work is underway to update and finalize core    metrics for individual challenges and the overall program.
Work is underway within OERD to integrate GBA+    metrics into program data collection and monitoring. OERD will continue to    collaborate within NRCan, and with PCO and Statistics Canada to collect and    monitor GBA+ and equity, diversity and inclusion data where possible.
Position    responsible:
DG OERD on behalf of ADM,ETS
Date to achieve:
March 31, 2022 for finalization of performance    measurement strategy.
Ongoing performance measurement and monitoring    until 2029 (at minimum)
The ADM ETS should ensure that the risk-based    recipient audit planning and methodology is strengthened to include the    tracking and monitoring the status and results of recipient audit    recommendations.
Management agrees.
OERD    will strengthen its risk-based recipient audit plan and methodology to ensure    that it better documents and tracks the status and results of audits at the    Branch (OERD) level, rather than Division level. OERD has already undertaken    a review of its risk-based audit processes and updated its methods for    planning, selecting and monitoring audits to ensure that all OERD programs    implement NRCan’s
Guide on Recipient    Auditing
in a consistent manner (ex. consistent sampling method). OERD    piloted its updated risk-based recipient audit planning and selection method    in Q2 2021. OERD is currently refining methods, and developing new guidance    documents and tools for monitoring OERD’s annual audit plan. Implementation    of processes and tools for monitoring audit recommendations and compliance    will occur in Q3&Q4 2021-22. This will include optimising the use of    NRCan’s AMI database for tracking audit results, and proponent’s audit    history.
Position    responsible:
DG, OERD on behalf of ADM, ETS
Date to achieve:
March 31, 2022
Introduction
This report presents the findings, conclusions, and  recommendations from the joint audit and evaluation of the Impact Canada  Initiative (ICI) – Clean Technology Stream (CTS). The engagement examines the  design and delivery of the program from its announcement in Budget 2017 to  March 2021, with updates reflecting the impact of COVID-19. The Audit and  Evaluation Branch (AEB) of Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) conducted this  engagement in accordance with the Treasury Board (TB)
Policy on Results
(2016) and the Institute of Internal Auditors’
International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing
and  the Government of Canada’s
Policy on Internal Audit
.
This is the first audit or evaluation of programming    launched under the Impact Canada Initiative. The results of the joint    engagement provide lessons learned that can be used to inform the future use    of outcomes-based approaches to innovation or related mechanisms.
Program Information
Announced in Budget 2017, the Impact Canada Initiative (ICI)  is a whole-of-government effort, led by the Privy Council Office (PCO), that is  designed to help departments accelerate the adoption of outcomes-based  approaches to deliver results to Canadians. The  ICI’s outcomes-based approach is intended as a new way of opening up the  problem-solving process to innovators who can bring fresh perspectives and new  ideas. The ICI promotes the flexible use of grants and contributions through a  range of innovative funding models, including prize challenges. These  approaches can be supplemented with additional funding supports to recipients  and/or third parties for project elements such as training, technical  assistance, business planning, and evaluation. The Government of Canada has  developed a common set of Terms and Conditions (Ts&Cs), housed within PCO,  as a horizontal authority for all departments to pursue this outcomes-based  programming.
Announced as part of the ICI in Budget 2017, NRCan’s Clean  Technology Stream (CTS) is one of the first program streams developed under  this new initiative. The objective of the ICI-CTS is to co-develop and launch a  series of prize challenges to achieve breakthroughs in clean tech innovation,  addressing climate change and environmental impacts while harnessing new  economic opportunities. Challenges are designed, marketed and delivered  differently from the types of funding programs that governments and their  stakeholders are accustomed to running and participating in. They provide  incentives (both financial and non-financial) to encourage a broad range of  innovators to tackle problems where solutions are not apparent, or current  responses are not achieving the desired results. Challenges may be structured  to use:
Pure  prizes
where specific technical criteria are clearly defined at the outset  and must be met before prizes are awarded;
Stage-gated  approaches
where challenge participants receive incentives at different  stages of the challenge to build capacity or narrow the field of applicants  before selecting winning projects; and/or
Competitive  accelerators
where prize funding is layered into intensive and time-limited  business supports to propel cohorts of early stage innovators towards achieving  particular outcomes.
Impact Canada also creates space for
Indigenous innovation initiatives
. These initiatives borrow  elements from challenge-based approaches but rely less on the competitive  aspects of the challenge model, and emphasize instead the importance of  Indigenous leadership and collaboration with and among communities.
1
This  latter approach is not explicitly recognized in the program’s foundational  documents but rather emerged as a result of NRCan and other federal  departments’ engagement with Indigenous peoples during delivery of the ICI.
Under the authorities of the ICI, specific parameters of  each clean tech challenge were to be developed, co-designed and refined by  NRCan through extensive stakeholder engagement before launch and challenge  delivery. Two focus areas were committed to as part of program  approvals, i.e., one focused on sustainable aviation fuels and another on  supporting Indigenous communities to reduce their reliance on diesel. The  program has since launched five challenges and one initiative (see Figure 1).  Each of these has its own mission and unique set of goals, performance targets,  incentive structures, timelines, collaborators, participants, outreach  strategies, and evaluation criteria.
Impact Canada’s umbrella Ts&Cs include an Annex specific  to the CTS. Budget 2017 allocated NRCan $75 million  (M) over two years for its delivery.  This was subsequently extended to four years prior to program launch, from  2017-18 to 2020-21. The program’s funding authorities notionally distributed the  funding between grants ($50.8 M) and contributions ($16.9 M), with the  remainder earmarked for program administration. The actual funding profile was to  be determined once challenge design was complete. Distribution of planned  expenditures assumed challenge design would be completed in Summer/Fall 2017,  with a full suite of challenges launched or ready to launch by Winter 2018.
Figure 1: Profile of ICI-CTS Focus Areas
Sky's the Limit (STL) Challenge
Launched in August 2018, a two-part challenge to accelerate innovation, production and use of sustainable aviation fuel (SAF) in Canada.
Part 1: Green Aviation Fuels Innovation. Top 4 consortia-based teams each receive up to $2.15M to support development of a 10L sample of the greenest and most cost-effective SAF. Grand prize of $5M to be announced by Spring 2022.
Part 2: Cross-Canada Flight. To complete the first cross-Canada flight using at least 10% SAF made in Canada. The first producer to meet all criteria would win a pure prize of $1M. Competion ran March 2019-January 2021.
Women in Clean Tech (WICT) Challenge
Launched in May 2018, this challenge works to improve gender balance in clean technology by enabling women to rapidly advance their clean technology solutions. It is delivered by the MaRS Discovery District via a contributon agreement with NRCan.
Six women each receive a stipend of $115K a year for 3 years, plus business and technical support from MaRS and $250K in value for federal labs to test and validate ideas in order to move toward commercialization.
Grand prize of $1M (to woman who made the most progress advancing her technology and growing her business) to be announced in Fall 2021.
Charging the Future (CTF) Challenge
Launched in July 2019, challenge is designed to increase the pace of Canadian innovation of battery technologies to strengthen the battery value chain in Canada and the world, and accelerate the most promising made-in-Canada innovation of battery technologies from the laboratory towards the marketplace.
Top 5 finalists receive up to $770K each to develop prototypes of proposed solutions.
Winner of $1M grand prize (project with highest likely impact on Canada's battery ecosystem) to be announced in Spring 2022.
Crush It! (CI!) Challenge
Launched in October 2018, challenge is designed to develop a new clean technology solution that transforms how energy is used for crushing and grinding rocks in the mining industry.
Total of 12 semi-finalists, with selected small-scale innovators awarded $10K each to help prepare and present their ideas to challenge jury. Top 6 finalists receive up to $860K each to start building and testing their solution.
Winner of $5M grand prize to be announced in Fall 2021.
Power Forward (PF) Challenge
Launched in October 2018, brings together innovators in Canada and the United Kingdom (UK) to develop innovative smart grid solutions for more integrated, cleaner, and flexible power grids for 2030 and beyond. Delivered as an international partnership, at least 20% of the proposed project should include firms from the partner country.
Total SME financial support of $1M/£600K in each country to eligible teams who have the most promising project vision. Top 7 finalist teams receive up to $3.15M/£1.8M each to build their pilot project.
Winner of $1M grand prize to be announced by Spring 2022.
Indigenous Off-Diesel Initiative (IODI)
To support Clean Energy Champions and their communities with tailored clean energy training, access to expertise and financial resources to develop and start implementing an ambitious plan to reduce diesel use for heat and power.
Phase 1: Clean Energy Champions participate in the 20/20 Catalysts program and receive $20K to get started. Phase 2 and 3: Up to $1.3M per community for training, capacity building, and to develop and implement community-scale clean energy plans.
In Spring 2023, up to an additional $9M will be awarded to leading communities to support project implementation over three more years.
In September 2020, the Minister of Natural Resources approved a program change to remove the expiry date of the Clean Tech Program Stream Annex in response to COVID-19. Funding was extended to 2021-22. Additional program modifications made in response to the pandemic (Box 1) and are reflected in the profile of focus areas presented in Figure 1.
Box 1: Program Response to COVID-19, by Focus Area
The    list below includes the concrete actions that were taken in each focus area    to support the delivery in the ICI-CTS in response to COVID-19.
Sky’s the Limit (STL):
Up to $150K in additional    funding offered to each finalist (total $600k) and extension for final prize    submission to August 31, 2021. GARDN (a challenge collaborator) was also offered    up to $36K in additional funding.
Crush It!:
Up to $60K in additional    funding offered to each finalist (total $360K) and extension for final prize    submission to May 31, 2021.
Power Forward (PF):
Up to $150K in additional    funding offered to each finalist (total $450K for Canadian finalists)
2
and extension for final prize submission to October 1, 2021.
Charging the Future (CTF):
Up to $70K in additional    funding offered to each finalist (total $350K) and extension for final prize    submission to October 29, 2021.
Women in Clean Tech    (WICT):
Up to $470K in additional funding offered, i.e., $345K for finalists and    $125K for MaRS (a challenge delivery agent
3
)    and extension for final pitch event where the winner will be selected to    September 2021.
Indigenous Off-Diesel    Initiative (IODI):
Up to $25K in additional funding offered to Clean Energy Champions    (total $300K for Phase 2 activities) and extension for Phase 3 submission to March    31, 2022. The Indigenous Clean Energy (ICE) Social Enterprise and the Pembina    Institute (both collaborator in the initiative) were offered additional    funding ($805K and $325K, respectively) and an extension to March 31, 2022.
Governance  Structure and Program Accountabilities
The ICI is a whole-of-government mechanism. PCO has  established a Centre of Expertise (COE) within its Impact and Innovation Unit  to support the design of program streams and individual departmental projects  across a range of challenge areas. While projects launched under the ICI-CTS  program stream are expected to follow PCO’s Impact Canada Ts&Cs, NRCan has  accountability for delivery of the ICI-CTS.
Within NRCan, the ICI-CTS falls under the responsibility of  the ADM of the Energy Technology Sector (ETS). The specific parameters of each  challenge were developed by ETS’ Office of Energy Research and Development  (OERD), in collaboration with other sectors as required. For example, NRCan’s  Lands and Minerals Sector (LMS) led the design and delivery of the Crush It! challenge.  NRCan’s Deputy Minister was responsible for ultimate approval of challenge  design prior to implementation.
While PCO does not manage program funding or oversee project  implementation, the PCO COE may still provide advisory support to NRCan, as requested. NRCan  is expected to make use of a government-wide interactive website (developed by  PCO as a core component of the ICI) to both inform Canadians on the challenges  launched and as the portal to process applications.
4
NRCan is  also required to inform the PCO COE on the design of its challenges and the  outcomes achieved through individual projects so that PCO can track overall  outcomes achieved under the ICI structure.
Expected  Results
The Impact Canada – Clean Technology Stream is part of the  Energy Innovation and Clean Technology Program under NRCan’s Core  Responsibility for ‘Innovative and Sustainable Natural Resources Development’  in the Departmental Results Framework.
The ICI-CTS’ performance measurement framework is still in  development. PCO has developed a logic model and narrative that presents (in a  general way) a basic theory of what Impact Canada expects to achieve with its  suite of challenges, including a broad objective to accelerate the use of  innovative and experimental approaches across the Government of Canada.
5
Building off this theory, Figure 2 presents a (draft) logic model developed by  NRCan’s OERD specific to the ICI-CTS. This model nests the outcomes targeted by  each challenge and initiative (indicated by green boxes in the figure) within  the expected results for the program stream as a whole (blue boxes).
Expected results of the ICI-CTS are aligned with other NRCan  energy RD&D programs, with a focus on advancing clean technology (clean  tech) closer to commercial readiness to improve the environmental and economic  performance of Canada’s clean tech and natural resource sectors. The ICI-CTS is  also expected to broaden the reach of NRCan’s traditional clean tech programming,  by increasing public awareness of clean tech problems or issues, stimulating  innovation ecosystems by building non-traditional collaborations, and  mobilizing new talent or solvers. Challenges were intended to be inclusive in  order to attract and encourage participation from different sectors. To this  end, the list of eligible recipients is broad and can include incorporated and  unincorporated groups, private sector and not-for-profit organizations, other  governments and other levels of government, Indigenous organizations, academia,  and individuals, with the range of eligible recipients narrowed as appropriate  for individual challenges based on desired outcomes.
Collaboration and partnership-building are also meant to be a  core feature to the design and delivery of each challenge. Depending on the  focus area, collaborators have been used as delivery agents, to provide  challenge participants with a range of supports, to build connections within  the innovation ecosystem and/or to draw the public’s attention to a challenge.
While recognizing the importance of the outcomes targeted by  each challenge and initiative, particularly to the relevance of the program,  this joint engagement is focused on expected results for the ICI-CTS as a  whole. This includes an expectation for experimental learning from the design  and implementation of the challenges and initiative as an outcome that  overarches all expected results for the program.
Figure 2: (Draft) NRCan Logic Model for the ICI-CTS
Text Description
Figure 2: (Draft) NRCan Logic Model for the ICI-CTS
Infographic showing the draft logic  model for the ICI-CTS.
The first row features two (2) ultimate  outcomes, which are:
First Outcome - Improved environmental performance of Canada's natural resource sectors.
Second Outcome - Improved economic performance of Canada's clean technology and natural resource sectors.
The second row features six (6)  challenge outcomes that support program’s ultimate outcomes. The six challenge  outcomes are:
Gender parity in the cleantech sector
Decarbonised aviation
Integrated, cleaner and flexible power grids ready for 2030
Significant reduction of energy use at Canadian mines
Significant reduction in reliance on diesel in remote communities
Canada’s battery value chain is globally competitive
The third row features two (2)  intermediate outcomes, which are:
New disruptive technologies, alternative business models, and capacity building activities facilitate
Project investments and ecosystem supports move emerging technologies closer to commercial readiness
The fourth row features six (6)  challenge outcomes supporting program’s intermediate outcomes, which former  are:
Strengthened female leadership in the cleantech sector
Sustainable aviation fuel produced in Canada with lower GHG emissions
Next-generation Canada/UK smart grid demonstration projects ready for scale-up
New mining technology reduces energy use in Canadian mines by at least 20%
Up to 15 Indigenous communities have new clean energy plans and projects underway to transition off diesel
Canada's five best battery technology innovations being advanced
The fifth row features four (4)  program’s immediate outcomes, which are:
Increased collaboration in clean technology challenges and projects
Increased investment by stakeholders in clean technology ecosystem
Increased awareness and participation in clean technology (i.e., new talent mobilized)
Increased public awareness of clean technology issues among Canadians.
The sixth row features five (5) program  outcomes, which are:
Increased  Co-designed challenges and initiatives
Communications and outreach strategies
Collaborator arrangements
Proponent supports
Solutions proposed and awarded
The seventh row features as sequence of  seven (7) activities, which are from left to right:
Challenge Selection
Challenge Design
Challenge Launch
Challenge Delivery
Final Award (Prize)
Transition Solutions
Measure & Share Results
The eighth row from the top of the  graphic features the results form the challenge selection and identifies  selected challenges, which are from left to right:
Women in Cleantech
Sky's the Limit
Power Forward
Crush It!
Indigenous Off-Diesel Initiative
Charging the Future
The ninth row from the top of the  graphic outlines the program’s input, which from left to right are:
NRCan Funding ($76.5M from 2017-18 to 2021-22)
NRCan Personnel (Approx. 10 FTE per FY)
Facilities (e.g., federal labs)
PCO Support (e.g., ICI Portal)
Terms & Conditions
On the far right of the infographic, a double-sided  arrow indicates that experimental learning is happening throughout the  program’s steps that appear in the program logic model.
Engagement  Objectives and Methods
The AEB included a commitment  to conduct this joint engagement in its Integrated Audit and Evaluation Plan  2019-2024. The AEB identified the need for this engagement through its  risk-based planning process and in response to a TB commitment to complete an  evaluation. The engagement also meets requirements for evaluation of ongoing  grant and contribution (Gs&Cs) programs under section 42.1 of the
Financial Administration Act
(FAA) and  the Treasury Board (TB)
Policy on Results
.  The Evaluation Division led this engagement, in collaboration with the Audit  Operations Division. Where relevant, the approach for this joint engagement  also followed the Institute of Internal Auditors’
International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal  Auditing
(IIA Standards) and the TB
Policy  on Internal Audit
.
The objectives of the joint engagement are:
To assess the extent to which the program’s  design and delivery facilitates the effective and efficient achievement of  immediate results and complies with relevant authorities.
To identify and document lessons learned from  the experimental approaches under the Impact Canada – Clean Technology Stream  that can be applied to future interventions.
The original scope of the engagement included NRCan’s design  and delivery of the Impact Canada – Clean Technology Stream from 2017-18 to  2019-20, including outcomes for the program stream as a whole and the  activities and outputs for each of its six focus areas. This was expanded in  March 2020 to enable the engagement to consider the impact of COVID-19 on  delivery of the program stream. While we consider the role of PCO in  facilitating design and delivery by NRCan, the engagement’s scope excludes the  performance of PCO and that of international collaborators in the Power Forward  Challenge.
Engagement  Questions and Sub-Objectives
Table 1 identifies the questions and related sub-objectives  to be addressed in this joint engagement. Appendix A summarizes the detailed  criteria applied in assessing these sub-objectives.
Table 1:  Engagement Questions and Sub-Objectives
Engagement Questions
Sub-Objectives
Are the Impact Canada – Clean Technology Stream and its related    challenges relevant?
To assess the extent to which the program is relevant.
Are adequate and effective governance    structures in place to support the Impact Canada – Clean Technology Stream?
To assess whether adequate and effective    governance structures and processes have been designed and implemented to    support the achievement of the Impact Canada – Clean Technology Stream’s    outcomes.
To what extent does the experimental design of the Impact Canada –    Clean Stream facilitate the achievement of intended outcomes?
To assess how and for whom the Impact Canada – Clean Technology    Stream’s experimental tools are effective in facilitating the achievement of    intended outcomes.
Do the delivery and monitoring of the Impact Canada – Clean    Technology Stream’s activities comply with relevant authorities?
To assess whether adequate and effective processes and controls are    in place to support the Impact Canada – Clean Technology Stream’s compliance    with relevant departmental guidance and the TB Policy on Transfer Payments.
To assess whether key financial and operational controls have been    designed and implemented, and are operating effectively.
What have been the outcomes (expected and unexpected) that the Impact    Canada – Clean Technology Stream has achieved to date?
To assess the extent to which the Impact Canada – Clean Technology    Stream is making progress towards its expected immediate outcomes.
To identify if any unexpected outcomes (positive or negative) have    resulted from the Impact Canada – Clean Technology Stream.
To what extent has the program been responsive to the internal and    external factors that (positively or negatively) influence its ability to    achieve intended outcomes and operate with efficiency?
To assess the extent to which the Impact Canada – Clean Technology    Stream appropriately considers the internal and external factors that could    impact its ability to effectively or efficiently achieve its intended outputs    and outcomes.
What are the conditions required to accelerate the use of the Impact    Canada – Clean Technology Stream’s innovative approaches to future    interventions?
To identify lessons learned that could support the positive evolution    of government systems to enable greater innovation.
Engagement  Methods
The joint engagement limits the duplication of effort that  would be required to conduct separate audit and evaluation projects. The  engagement was carried out in a manner that ensures the team’s neutrality and  objectivity, as per respective professional requirements and standards, and  ensures that observations and conclusions are evidence-based.
The approach and methodology used in this engagement  followed the TB
Policy on Results
,  including related
Standards on Evaluation
,  the Institute of Internal Auditors’ I
nternational  Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing
(IIA  Standards), and the TB
Policy on Internal  Audit
. These standards and policies required that the project be planned  and performed in such a way as to obtain reasonable assurance that engagement  objectives are achieved. The engagement included tests considered necessary to  provide such assurance.
The joint engagement used five data collection methods (see  Table 2), designed to ensure validity of the information collected and allow  for the triangulation of evidence.
Table 2:  Engagement Methods
Literature    Review
Key    Informant Interviews
Document    Review
File and    Database Analysis
Survey of    Non-Finalists
Given the relative novelty    of prize challenges for the Government of Canada, the engagement team    completed a review of available literature to identify best practices and    lessons learned in the design and delivery of such mechanisms, including a    review of their application in benchmark challenge-based programs and    innovation accelerators.
The evaluation team    conducted interviews with key informants (n=93), including NRCan senior    managers, program managers and challenge leads, federal labs, external    collaborators, and nearly all finalists from across the six focus areas of    the ICI-CTS.
6
Questions addressed related to program relevance, performance and lessons    learned.
The audit team conducted additional    interviews with both NRCan program staff and corporate services to address questions    related to program governance and compliance with authorities.
The joint engagement team    completed an extensive review of public and program documentation, including    financial information, related to the design and implementation of the Impact    Canada – Clean Technology Stream to inform the examination of the program’s    relevance, design and delivery, and outcomes achievement.
The audit team reviewed a    sample of 25 funding agreements across the six focus areas to determine    whether funding agreements comply with relevant FAA requirements.
The    engagement’s database analysis also included a review of the information    collected via PCO’s web portal, NRCan’s funding agreement tracker, and social    media analytics to inform analysis of outcomes achievement.
The    engagement conducted two surveys of non- and semi-finalists – one for the    five challenges and another to reflect the distinct design and language of    the IODI. The surveys obtained information about these applicants’    experiences with the program and their perspectives on the achievement of immediate    outcomes. The surveys were sent to over 300 applicants; 7 were IODI finalists    who could not attend interviews. In total, 85 participants responded to the    surveys (response rate of 24.6%).
Engagement  Limitations and Considerations
The engagement used multiple lines of evidence in order to  mitigate against any limitations associated with individual methods. This  enabled the triangulation of evidence across sources of information to identify  valid findings and conclusions relative to the engagement’s questions.  Nevertheless, the following limitations should be considered when reviewing the  findings from this engagement:
Timing  of Evaluation.
An evaluation of the ICI-CTS was required to be  completed at this time to comply with the TB
Policy on Results
and the
Financial  Administration Act
. However, it is really too soon to report on the impact  of this program; measurement of program outcomes will require tracking the  trajectory of results over the long-term.
COVID-19.
COVID-19  had a significant impact on the design and delivery of both the program and the  joint engagement. The conduct (data collection) phase of the joint engagement  was delayed by several months to allow time for program collaborators, stakeholders  and participants to adjust to the pandemic. The program has also effected  important design changes in response to pandemic-related delays and financial  pressures (e.g., to the structure of payments and timelines for project  completion). Related decisions were not all finalized and/or communicated at  time of data collection. Pressures related to COVID-19 also limited the ability  of some key informants to participate in the engagement.
Document  Review.
The document review, file and database analysis were constrained  by the information that is collected and maintained by OERD. Documentation  required for review was generally accessible but varies considerably in quality  and consistency by focus area. Given timing of data collection, mid-project  reports to inform our analysis of progress towards outcomes were not yet  available for all focus areas. Funding agreements were reviewed in  consideration of NRCan’s responsibilities for their delivery, and limited work  was performed in assessing areas of responsibility where delivery agents were  used.
Analysis of internal reporting mechanisms included a review of  reporting documentation beginning as early as challenge design and development  to challenge launch, which spanned the period from April 2017 through to  December 2018. Documentation related to one challenge (CTF) was not included in  this material due to its development and launch in a later period.
Key  Informants.
Respondents for interviews and the engagement’s surveys were  not all familiar with some elements of design and implementation. In some  cases, the respondent was not necessarily the same as the applicant for a  specific project and so could not comment on early activities and outputs in  program delivery (e.g., effectiveness of initial outreach or innovations in the  application process). The time elapsed between co-design or application process  and the conduct of the engagement also meant some respondents could not recall  all details or make any specific recommendations for improvement. Companies  receiving services from the Centre for Mining Innovation (CEMI), a collaborator  on Crush It!, were not included among respondents for this engagement and we  lack their perspectives on CEMI’s appropriateness or effectiveness.
Survey.
The overall survey response rate of 24.6% is considered adequate for purposes  of this engagement. Response rates by focus area range from 20.4% for the IODI  to 50% for STL. However, the total number of applicants and thus survey  respondents is not divided evenly among focus areas. The relatively small  sample for some specific focus area makes it difficult to report disaggregated  data on a challenge-by-challenge basis.
Additional  limitations and considerations are identified where relevant throughout this  report.
What We Found –  Relevance
Summary of    Key Findings:
The ICI-CTS is relevant. The program aligns    with federal government and NRCan priorities, roles and responsibilities.    Impact Canada supports mandate commitments to increase experimentation across    the Government of Canada, and is structured to give more flexibility to    proponents to propose innovative solutions. The narrow focus of each    challenge and initiative sets this apart from other funding programs, with    the suite of clean tech challenges acting as vehicles to enhance the    communication of priorities in the Government of Canada’s environmental    agenda.
The selected challenges    and initiative also meet key criteria for the prioritization of focus areas.    They target breakthrough (i.e., non-incremental) solutions, have a high    potential for benefits to Canadians, are complementary to existing government    and non-government efforts without creating duplication, and their design    demonstrates an ability to leverage collaborators and resources to accelerate    results.
The ICI-CTS aligns with federal government and NRCan  priorities, roles and responsibilities.
In 2015, a Ministerial mandate letter directed the President  of the Treasury Board to “work with […] colleagues to ensure that they are  devoting a fixed percentage of program funds to experimenting with new  approaches to existing problems and measuring the impact of their programs”.  Budget 2017 announced the Impact Canada Initiative and identified this as a  mechanism by which this mandate commitment could be achieved. The ICI is  perceived to fill an important gap in the Government of Canada’s programming toolkit  by establishing a mechanism to work with and support departments to employ  innovative funding models. Interviewees agreed that the program is structured  in such as way as to be more flexible and less administratively burdensome for  proponents, giving more flexibility to propose innovative solutions.
The Impact Canada – Clean Tech Stream is more specifically  aligned with federal government and NRCan priorities for clean tech. In 2015,  the Minister of Natural Resources was mandated to invest in clean tech  producers in our natural resource sectors so that they can tackle Canada’s most  pressing environmental challenges and create more opportunities for Canadian  workers. Canada also made a Mission Innovation pledge to double its investments  in clean energy and clean tech research and development by 2019-20 and  encourage private sector investment in early-stage clean energy innovation  companies in Canada. In Budget 2017, the federal government committed more than  $2B to numerous initiatives (including the ICI-CTS) aimed to boost the growth  of Canada’s clean tech sector. More recent Ministerial mandate letters (2019)  and Throne Speeches (2019) continue to prioritize positioning Canada as a  global leader in clean tech.
From the perspective of program representatives, the narrow  focus of each challenge or initiative sets this apart from other funding  programs, with the suite of focus areas acting as vehicles to enhance the  communication of priorities in the Government of Canada’s environmental agenda.  For example, four of the challenges and the initiative specifically target  environmental benefits related to energy efficiency and greenhouse gas (GHG)  mitigation. The WICT challenge is targeted more broadly at environmental  benefits, but aligned with priorities to increase gender equity and the  participation of women in the Canadian economy and clean tech. The IODI is  aligned to priorities for both reconciliation and building the resilience of  Indigenous communities, including a mandate commitment (2015) to support the  transition of Indigenous communities from reliance on diesel-fueled power to  clean, renewable and reliable energy by 2030.
The Impact Canada – Clean Technology Stream gave priority  to the selection of relevant challenges and initiatives
.
During program design, an analysis of best practices  determined that running between four and six clean tech challenges was optimal  given the program’s funding profile. However, only two focus areas were  identified in program approvals – i.e., supporting Indigenous communities to  reduce their reliance on diesel and a sustainable aviation fuels challenge to  reduce GHG emissions in aviation – with the remainder to be prioritized based  on a specific set of criteria. The criteria and our observations on related  program alignment are as follows:
Breakthrough  Solutions.
The program was expected to focus on unlocking transformative  (i.e., not incremental), high-impact solutions to complex and persistent  problems in the clean tech sector. We found that the program has a clear  definition of what would constitute a “breakthrough”; its approach brings  focused attention to barriers and opportunities specific to each problem area  without specifying how the result is to be achieved, leaving space for  innovation to occur. There is evidence that the transformations targeted were  well researched in the design phase. The objectives of the challenges and  initiative are diverse but are all expected to provide innovative solutions to  disrupt the market and/or create knock-on or ripple effects that will boost the  entire ecosystem in their problem area (Table 3). While the IODI is unlikely to  spur growth in new clean technologies, it presents a breakthrough in ensuring  that traditional knowledge and consideration of systemic inequalities are at  the center of program design and delivery. Recognizing the federal government’s  responsibility to respect the right of Indigenous peoples to  self-determination, the design of the IODI relies on communities to develop  their own solutions.
Table 3:  Issues Addressed by ICI-CTS Focus Areas
Focus Area
The Issue
Women in Clean Tech
Women    are a powerful force in Canada's innovation economy, but are significantly    underrepresented in the area of clean tech. It's time to change that.
Sky’s the Limit
Existing    technologies and aircraft efficiency improvements aren’t enough for the    aviation industry to achieve its ambitious goals of carbon neutral growth. Accelerating    the affordability and availability of sustainable aviation fuel is an    important part of Canada’s transition to a low-carbon economy.
Power Forward
Between    now and 2030, millions of new devices, including electric vehicles,    renewables, batteries, and smart devices) will challenge traditional    operating models of energy systems, adding complexity and volatility to    grids.
Crush It!
Comminution    processing consumes a disproportionate amount of the total energy used in    mining, is a contributor to the mining sector’s GHG emissions, and represents    one of the industry’s largest costs. Over the history of comminution,    breakthrough advances have been limited.
Charging the Future
The    batteries industry anticipates exponential growth to meet expected demand on    electrical vehicles, support greater integration of renewable energy, and    provide opportunities to help manage the electricity grid. Although batteries    have significantly developed since their invention, there continues to be    unlocked potential to harness from such technologies.
Indigenous Off-Diesel    Initiative
There    are over 200 remote communities in Canada that rely on diesel for both their    heat and power, the majority of which are Indigenous communities. While    diesel has remained the status quo for many years, rapid advances in    renewable and energy efficiency technologies make it possible to more easily integrate    cleaner energy systems. The federal    government has committed to ensure that Indigenous communities that currently    rely on diesel are powered by clean, reliable energy by 2030.
Text Description
Infographic that illustrates, using a basic Venn diagram, the program’s potential benefits to Canadians that are of five types:environmental, policy, societal, economic and technical
High Potential for Impact and  Benefits to Canadians.
The program was expected to prioritize focus areas  with a strong potential for reducing environmental impacts and improving  economic performance, as well as for increasing the participation of women and  Indigenous peoples. We found that all focus areas were designed to target  environmental benefits. In some cases, targeted benefits have been quantified  (e.g., project proponents for Crush It! are challenged to generate a  step-change reduction equal to or better than a 20% reduction in the energy  consumed by crushing and grinding when compared to a pre-established baseline).  Challenges were also selected in areas where there are significant  opportunities for economic benefit and market growth. Technical benefits would  be derived from the solutions themselves as well as from potential ripple  effects across the entire value chain or that create new value chains, and are  expected to amplify the environmental and economic benefits. Early or  accelerated commercialization of clean technologies would also provide a competitive  advantage in the global market. Unlike the other challenges, the main benefits  of the IODI are expected to be at the community level. Similarly, the support  to six finalists for WICT on its own is not expected to significantly impact  the gender balance in the clean tech sector. However, in both cases a knock-on  effect would be achieved if others are inspired to take action. The clean tech  sector as a whole should also ultimately benefit from increasing participation  of diverse groups (e.g., women, Indigenous peoples) and new solvers in clean  tech.
High  Degree of
Complementarity.
The  program was expected to prioritize focus areas that would have a high degree of  complementarity with existing government and non-government efforts in the  given problem space. We found that the focus areas selected meet this  criterion. Overall, we found that the design & delivery of the ICI-CTS  fills a perceived gap in dedicated support for high-risk, high-reward clean  tech solutions. The focus areas support priorities that are also addressed  through other clean tech programs, but each fills an identified gap without  creating duplication. While the identification of follow-on strategies is  outside the scope of the program, there is also evidence of viable pathways to  scale successes for each focus area (e.g., clearly identified opportunities for  handoff to other government programs, venture capital, etc.).
Ability  to Leverage Collaborators and Resources.
The program was expected to  prioritize focus areas with the ability to leverage collaborators and resources  to help design, deliver or promote participation in the prize or challenge,  including by acting as a conduit to important stakeholder groups, providing  technical expertise, or by contribution of additional resources (financial or  in-kind). There is evidence that the opportunities to leverage relevant  collaborators to support and accelerate results were an important consideration  incorporated into the design of each focus area. NRCan also expected the  ICI-CTS to encourage proactive engagement and collaboration with traditional  and non-traditional stakeholders to enhance Canada’s innovation ecosystem. The  challenges are thus designed to provide a unique platform for networking and forming  collaborative arrangements, highlight promising research, development and  demonstration (RD&D) ideas and help the ecosystem overcome barriers.
What We Found - Governance
Summary of Key Findings:
Overall, we found that governance structures, processes and mechanisms  for ICI-CTS were defined, established and operating effectively.
Roles,  responsibilities and accountabilities.
Roles, responsibilities and  accountabilities were clear in principle. The governance structure for the  Impact Canada Initiative of both NRCan (and the OERD team responsible for its  delivery) as well as the PCO’s Center of Expertise (COE), were found to be  adequately established, defined, and communicated across authoritative  documents. This included clear delineation between the responsibilities of PCO  and NRCan and outlined areas of complementary and overarching responsibilities.  However, in consideration of this unfamiliar policy context, difficulties were  faced in the initial stages of program design and development resulting from  differences in perspectives concerning the program’s interpretation of the ICI  Ts&Cs and associated authorities endorsed by PCO across key  intradepartmental players, including various corporate functions (i.e., NRCan’s  CoE on Gs&Cs, Legal and Procurement).
Internal Reporting.
Throughout  the design and development of the ICI, internal reporting mechanisms were found  to be established and functioning as intended at all levels of program  management. These reporting mechanisms (both formal and informal) enabled key  communication on the program’s progression to senior management at intervals  that supported timely reporting across all phases of design and implementation.
Roles, Responsibilities and Accountabilities within the  ICI-CTS
The  governance structure for the management of the ICI-CTS at NRCan has been  defined in authoritative documentation that describes the roles,  responsibilities and accountabilities of NRCan, a key federal partner for the  Impact Canada Initiative. The ICI-CTS is supported through the organizational  structure of ETS’ OERD, responsible for the Program’s delivery. The authoritative  document reviewed refers to a well-defined program framework that would  leverage OERD’s existing governance structure, given its experience with  transfer payment administration, and identifies resources for ensuring the  successful delivery of the Program, with defined roles and responsibilities.
The  complementary and overarching roles, responsibilities and authorities of PCO’s  COE on Impact Canada, as well as its interactions with federal partner  departments operating as part of this initiative were also described, with  clear delineation across the two governance structures. Documents recognize that  PCO’s authority would not extend to direct program management or funding but  instead, assist with overseeing and enabling the departments’ approach to  innovative programming. NRCan would operate using the Ts&Cs of PCO;  however, NRCan would remain the authority for the direct management and  implementation of the ICI-CTS. PCO would primarily be responsible for tracking  progress on the approach of the ICI from an overall perspective, as well as  general outcomes.
At  NRCan, key roles and responsibilities for Gs&Cs are shared at the corporate  and sectoral levels. The NRCan
Guide on  Transfer Payments
identifies key players for the administration and  management of Gs&Cs, including Program Staff, the Center of Expertise on  Grants and Contributions (CoE on Gs&Cs), Legal Services, the Finance and  Procurement Branch (FPB), Delegated Authorities, and the Transfer Payment  Review Committee (TPRC), which has since been replaced by the Finance and Real  Property Committee (FRPC). Overall, the roles, responsibilities and  accountabilities of key intradepartmental players for the management of Gs&Cs  programs were found to be defined and communicated through the departmental  intranet website and key guideline and procedural documents and well understood  within the Department.
Across  the organization, the governance structure and processes in place for the  management of Gs&Cs were found to facilitate the involvement of key  intradepartmental players in situations where required, or requested. In the  case of the ICI-CTS, and as with all new Gs&Cs programs at NRCan, these  structures necessitated the involvement of Legal Services and the CoE on Gs&Cs  in performing oversight and review activities of the development of Ts&Cs for  the ICI-CTS and subsequent funding agreements. We found that early engagement  involving NRCan’s key players for Gs&Cs had taken place, which played an  integral role throughout the program’s design and development.
Subsequently,  the program faced some difficulties during the initial stages of its design and  delivery attributed to systemic and departmental barriers. Specifically, it was  noted that there were often opposing perspectives in interactions between the program  and corporate functions. The ICI-CTS was looking to challenge status quo and  experiment with innovative ways of doing business, whereas NRCan’s corporate  functions are responsible for enforcing policies, providing guidance, and  identifying and containing areas of perceived risk or concern. Many of the  challenges faced were found to have resulted from a lack of communication of and  familiarization with the policy context and authorities offered through PCO’s  Ts&Cs. This led to fundamentally different views in the interpretation of  the program’s Ts&Cs, and the intersection of these viewpoints among  corporate colleagues and the program led to resistance during the earlier  phases of challenge design and development. However, since that time, the differences  between various key players have been addressed with an ongoing collaborative approach.
Internal Reporting Mechanisms
Through an examination of various reports  provided to senior management on the progress of the Impact Canada Initiative, we  found that formal reporting structures were in place at all levels of  management. The formats of these documents include briefing notes, presentation  decks, speaking points, and corresponding project documentation, provided to the  Director General (DG), Assistant Deputy Minister (ADM), Deputy Minister (DM), and  the Minister’s Office at NRCan, in addition to several other departmental executive-level  senior management committees, where relevant. The frequency of these internal  reports to senior management were found to take place at intervals that  supported timely and informed decision-making by executive management. Given  the high profile nature of the ICI, many of these internal reporting documents  were shared in order to provide updates, and to obtain Ministerial  endorsement/approval relating to the proposed challenge design, structure and  format for funding.
We reviewed reporting documentation  beginning as early as challenge design and development to challenge launch,  which spanned the period from April 2017 through to December 2018.
We also obtained reporting documentation  from the implementation phase of the challenges, in the form of Memorandums to  the ADM, which presented key project-related information. These reports provide  key information on applications received, assessed, eligibility, evaluation and  ultimately, a recommendation for approval. The interval of these reports varied  as they depended on the each of the challenges unique structure and timelines.
Through  the review of the documentation provided to senior executive management, we  found that the information provided contained sufficient detail to inform the  future phases of challenges that were, at this time, developed and launched.  Overall, the team concluded that information provided to senior management  contained sufficient detail to inform the future phases of challenges.
What We Found –  Design
Summary of Key Findings:
We found that the design of focus    areas under the ICI-CTS was consistent with principles of Impact Canada and    best practices in challenge models. This design incorporated numerous    experiments within an experiment. Our observations related to specific    elements important to the experimental design of the program are as follows:
Co-Design.
Co-design allowed NRCan to target key issues while scaling the challenge to    what would be achievable by solvers, including consideration of specific    barriers for the problem area. Stakeholder engagement in co-design prior to    launch was extensive and brought visibility to increase interest and    collaboration among players in the ecosystem. NRCan was responsive to    feedback in both design and delivery phases. Risks related to co-design (e.g.,    potential conflict of interest) were well managed.
Communications    and Outreach.
There was effort dedicated to the development of front-end    communication strategies. Regardless, program staff perceived that this could    have been more innovative and better resourced. Overall, communications    attracted “enough” of the “right people” to apply (based on number of quality    proposals). Proponents were less positive about communications on program    progress than for program launch noting that there was less opportunity or    emphasis on this than they expected when they decided to apply (in part due    to restrictions imposed by COVID-19).
Collaborative    Arrangements.
Collaborators played an important role in facilitating    and/or accelerating delivery of focus areas. There is evidence that the collaborators    selected were both appropriate and effective. Working with ICE and the    all-Indigenous jury on IODI was perceived as a positive move towards new    model of collaborative (rather than Crown-led) program delivery.
Financial    and Non-Financial Supports.
Funding flexibilities and proponent supports    were designed to facilitate participation from diverse solvers and address    barriers to participation, and were recognized to be effective in achieving    these objectives. Participation was motivated more so by financial supports,    with staged support noted by proponents to be more important than the    (uncertain) final prize. Perceptions of the effectiveness of non-financial    supports varied significantly across focus areas. For some focus areas,    non-financial supports may not have (fully) aligned with the specific cohort    of finalists’ perceived needs. Providing access to federal labs presented an    opportunity to mobilize new players in the clean tech ecosystem, as these    labs have more expertise and equipment than some smaller firms or consortia    may have access to on their own.  While    there is evidence of viable pathways to scale success for each focus area,    this requires dedicated efforts that extend beyond the scope and timelines of    the ICI-CTS but which may be accelerated as a result of the program.
Challenges have a set of inherent features meant to attract  new talent and new ideas, and accelerate progress towards solving problems that  matter to people. As a result, challenges are designed, promoted and delivered  differently than the types of funding programs that governments and their  stakeholders are accustomed to running and participating in. Overall, we found  that the design of focus areas under the ICI-CTS was consistent with principles  of Impact Canada and best practices in challenge models. Many focus areas also  incorporated numerous experiments within this broader experiment, for example,  testing new models of Indigenous participation (IODI) or new ways of working  with international partners (Power Forward). We examined how and for whom the  program’s experimental tools are effective in facilitating the achievement of  intended outputs and outcomes, with a focus on five elements common to all  focus areas, i.e.: inclusive innovation (co-design), communications and  outreach, collaborative arrangements, flexible funding mechanisms, and  additional (non-financial) proponent supports.
Inclusive Innovation (Co-Design)
The first key steps in any challenge are to understand,  identify and define the specific problem that the challenge will seek to  address and set the design parameters that will support its most effective  delivery. Literature supports the benefits of inclusive innovation (co-design) in  supporting this process. Co-design processes brings together experienced,  diverse groups of internal and external stakeholders to apply their collective  knowledge and form synergistic programming. Engaging with stakeholders is  critical for identifying and understanding the issue, and selecting and  defining a specific problem that will form the basis of the challenge.  Stakeholders can also confirm that a challenge model is feasible and  appropriate to seek solutions to the problem and that the financial and non-financial  supports to be used are designed to meet the needs of proponents and end-users,  thus helping to achieve outcomes faster and at lower total cost. Engagement of  diverse stakeholders during the co-design process also increases network connections  and strengthens problem-solving communities, creating further opportunities for  collaboration that can support long-term innovation.
We found that all focus areas undertook a co-design process.  NRCan used its own existing networks and those of its collaborators to reach  out to a wide range of stakeholders in the relevant ecosystems, including  traditional and non-traditional stakeholders. The timeline and specific  approach to co-design varied significantly by challenge, with mechanisms used  to engage stakeholders that included consultations, webinars, design workshops  and surveys. However, each followed an iterative process that allowed the  challenge concept to be validated more than once by groups of key stakeholders,  with final approval by NRCan senior management.
Interviewees familiar with the co-design process agreed this  was among the ICI-CTS’ main strengths. It allowed NRCan to refine the design to  target key issues but also scale the challenge based on given design parameters  (time and funds that could be allocated by NRCan) to what would be achievable  by solvers, including consideration of specific barriers and pathways for the  problem area. There is a risk in co-design of being so responsive to feedback  that people propose and vote on ideas that are not practical or feasible. NRCan  was perceived to have successfully managed stakeholder expectations in this  area. While consensus could not always be achieved, there is evidence that  NRCan shifted design of challenges as a result of co-design input. For example,  the IODI shifted its design from a “challenge” to an “initiative” with feedback  from Indigenous stakeholders that competition between communities as part of  the off-diesel program was not in line with their values. Extensive engagement  also shifted its design from a technology to a capacity building focus.
Co-design also brought visibility to the challenges, as an  early signal to key stakeholder groups that a challenge would be launched. For  most challenges, there is evidence that the co-design process also resulted in  furthering collaboration among players in the ecosystem. Given the  international nature of Power Forward, inclusion of high profile events in  co-design was important to not only collect stakeholders’ insights to support  challenge design but also to start building partnerships critical to challenge  delivery. By extension, given the small size of the nascent innovation  ecosystems, there is also a risk of unfairly advantaging stakeholders engaged  in co-design who may later also become proponents. There is evidence that NRCan  considered and mitigated this risk.
Interviewees did not perceive significant barriers to  participation in co-design. For IODI and WICT, there was a clear focus on  co-design on inclusivity – i.e., who benefits from the innovation, who  participates in the process of innovation, and who manages the outcomes of  innovation. This means that co-design did not stop at challenge launch. These  focus areas continue to be co-designed with input from finalists to ensure that  capacity building elements and other supports meet their specific needs.  Community engagement and support is critical to advance projects under the  IODI, ensuring that those participating have a say in the design of projects  that will impact their community. Both WICT and IODI also use an external jury  that reflects the participants in the challenge itself. For IODI, many  respondents viewed this co-design process as a positive step towards Indigenous  self-determination.
Communications and Outreach Strategies
Literature supports the importance of communications as a  core element in challenge design. Recognizing that this would be a key  determinant of the overall success of the program, NRCan’s program team  allocated about 12% of its initial operating (O&M) budget to  communications.
There is evidence that the ICI-CTS program worked closely  with NRCan’s Communications and Portfolio Sector (CPS) to develop and apply a  front-end communications and outreach strategy for each challenge and  initiative. The objectives of these communications were to promote visibility  of the focus areas to potential solvers, looking to attract more non-traditional  solvers and small-scale innovators than previous programs, and to gain exposure  for participants and collaborators. While the specific strategy varied by focus  area, there is evidence of a wide range of media and approaches used to achieve  communications objectives. Each challenge and initiative worked with  collaborators to promote awareness of the program. This external engagement was  important to maximize reach given the nascent or disperse nature of targeted  ecosystems and the objective to attract non-traditional solvers (who by  definition are not part of NRCan’s existing network). Participation in major  conferences and events helped garner interest, attracting attention with  high-profile participants like the Prime Minister of Canada and Margaret  Atwood. Focus areas also made use of PCO’s centralized website, with four of  the challenges using this as a key communications platform (WICT and IODI  relied more heavily on their collaborators’ websites).
Survey respondents most commonly reported hearing about an  Impact Canada challenge via either an innovation, clean tech or industry  network and/or from a friend, colleague or employer (see Figure 3). Similarly,  the majority of finalists interviewed stressed the importance of NRCan’s  collaborators and general word-of-mouth in notifying them of the opportunity to  participate. These results varied significantly by challenge. For example,  survey respondents for CTF were the only respondent group for whom the Impact  Canada website was identified as the most common means to learn about the  challenge (37.5%). WICT was the only challenge for which social media was  reported to be an important source of information (30%).
Figure 3: How did the ICI-CTS’ applicants and semi-finalists hear about Impact Canada?
Text Description
A chart with horizontal bars that  provides (in percentage) the value of each source through which surveyed  participants first heard about the challenge or initiative.
How did you or your organization first hear about this    challenge or initiative? Select all that apply.
Radio
0.0 %
Innovation, clean technology or industry events
4.1 %
Traditional news media
4.1 %
Other
8.2 %
Government organization
8.2 %
Academic organization
8.2 %
Impact Canada website
8.2 %
Referred by another funding program
10.2 %
NRCan website or communication
12.2 %
Contacted by an existing or potential partner
12.2 %
Social media
14.3 %
Website of a collaborator in program delivery
16.3 %
Friend, colleague or employer
20.4 %
Innovation, clean technology or industry network
20.4 %
Interviewees generally agreed that these communications were  effective in attracting “enough” of the “right people” to apply (based on the  number of quality proposals). Regardless, given its importance to challenge  delivery, program staff perceived that this could have been better resourced  (e.g., a dedicated communications resource within the OERD team and/or more  support from CPS). In their view, capacity within NRCan’s CPS following the  launch of focus areas was a major factor limiting the program’s delivery of  communication products and activities. Given the importance of community  support to the IODI, some Clean Energy Champions also suggested that culturally  appropriate (or translated) speaking points may have aided in explaining this  initiative to their community. Otherwise, NRCan’s approach to the IODI was  reported to be appropriately adjusted for Indigenous participants with  consideration for culturally appropriate communications.
We also examined the design and delivery of communications  that would give profile to the solvers and the issues addressed by their  solutions as they progress through the challenge, gaining exposure that could  help attract potential collaborators or investors. Survey responses suggest  that outreach and communications was a motivational factor in some respondents’  decision to participate in the ICI-CTS, though by far not the most important  (ranked 10 out of 15 choices). Again, there is variability among focus areas,  with the importance of exposure ranked lower as a motivation for participation  in the IODI.
There is evidence of some strategies in place for  communications to promote solvers. To date, participant-generated content  (e.g., presentations at pitch events and showcase videos to be shared on social  media) has been the most important feature. In 2020, a social media strategy  was also developed aimed at ramping up the promotion of finalists as challenges  move towards the selection of winners. However, with exception of WICT (where  communications are managed by MaRS), finalists were generally less positive  about communications on program progress than for program launch noting that  there was less opportunity or emphasis on this than they expected when they  first applied to participate. While noting that delivery of communications  benefitted from the collaboration of PCO, some interviewees perceived this to  have made the communications process more bureaucratic and less in line with  innovative communications observed in benchmark challenges. Interviewees also  suggested that the PCO platform could have been used more effectively and  updated more frequently to better promote the challenges.
From March 2020 to date, there have been limitations on  PCO’s communications and for publication on NRCan’s social media due to  COVID-19. Conference participation and other planned events have also been  reduced and shifted to a virtual context. Of the six focus areas, CTF was the  last to be launched in October 2019. COVID-19 was thus perceived to have the  greatest impact on communications for this challenge, delaying the announcement  of finalists for a couple of months. Finalists noted that this was not optimal  as it removed some of the “bang” from the announcement and impeded their  ability to advertise this information to attract collaborators and investors at  a critical stage.
Collaborative  Arrangements
Literature indicates that collaborating with various players  in the innovation ecosystem to co-develop and deliver activities in challenge  models can spark breakthrough innovation and solve difficult technical  challenges faster and at lower total cost. To this end, Impact Canada supports  the ability of federal organizations to collaborate with expert intermediaries  (and/or an international partner in the case of Power Forward) to build the  capacity of innovators and communities, to support challenge delivery, or to  deliver challenges (or specific components).
All of the ICI-CTS’ focus areas engaged collaborators,  either formally or informally, to co-develop and deliver activities. The number  and role of collaborators varied significantly by challenge and initiative, activities  supported can generally be broken into five broad categories:
Outreach.
All focus areas worked with  one or more collaborators to deliver strategies to increase NRCan’s reach in  attracting proponents. This was particularly important given the nascent and/or  fragmented nature of the related innovation ecosystems. Collaborators were  reported to play an important role in raising awareness of the challenges for  applicants. Overall, 16.3% of survey respondents identified “the website of a  collaborator in program delivery” as a key means by which they first heard  about the challenge.
Networking and Ecosystem Development.
Many  focus areas worked with one or more collaborators to facilitate proponents’  partnership building efforts, including where the development of consortiums  was required pre-application. This support was particularly important for Power  Forward given the tight timelines (5 months) available to build international  partnerships pre-application.
Facilitating  Scale-up of Solutions.
Many focus areas engaged collaborators to provide  services that would assist proponents in scaling-up their ideas by building  capacity for commercialization and business development and/or by identifying  and helping to remove related barriers. For example, NRCan engaged the Pembina  Institute on the IODI to provide policy support intended to address barriers to  community-driven clean energy projects both for participating communities and  others who may later face similar barriers. Similarly, NRCan engaged the Centre  for Mining Innovation (CEMI) on Crush It! to undertake outreach and engagement  that would enhance Canada’s mineral processing innovation ecosystem by  mobilizing new and existing solver communities, building new linkages across  the innovation landscape, and setting the stage for the commercialization and  adoption of emerging solutions. To enhance diversity of problem solvers, this  included offering commercialization and business development services to  support scaling-up the ideas of clean tech innovators in mineral processing to  clients that were not participants of Crush It!
Delivery  Agent.
Two focus areas used collaborators as agents in delivery. The IODI  is being delivered with the Indigenous Clean Energy (ICE) Social Enterprise  (see Box 2). NRCan engaged MaRS, a pioneering organization in the field of  business acceleration for innovators, as the lead delivery agent for WICT. NRCan  gave these two collaborators important roles in delivery of the application  process, including supporting development of evaluation criteria and  identification of jurors, and the development and delivery of capacity  building. Interviewees perceived the engagement of these non-government  collaborators as delivery agents as allowing challenges to be more nimble than  they otherwise may be if delivered by the federal government.
Co-Delivery  Agent (Partner).
NRCan established a formal international partnership for  co-delivery of Power Forward with the UK Department for Business, Energy and  Industrial Strategy (BEIS), with responsibility for funding of proponents and  provision of awards shared between the two jurisdictions.
There is evidence that NRCan selected  collaborators based on the alignment of their mandate, their expertise and  established credibility, and/or the reach of their existing networks. Overall,  program representatives and finalists perceived that the collaborators engaged  to support delivery were both appropriate and effective. In particular, working  with ICE and an all-Indigenous jury on the IODI was perceived as a positive  move towards new model of collaborative (rather than Crown-led) program  delivery.
Box 2: Indigenous Clean Energy Social Enterprise (ICE)
ICE is a pan-Canadian not-for-profit organization that advances Indigenous inclusion in Canada’s energy futures economy through Indigenous leadership, and broad-based collaboration with energy companies, utilities, governments, development firms, clean tech innovators, academic sector, and capital markets. Its support to the IODI includes access to its 20/20 Catalysts Program – a national clean energy capacity building program for Indigenous individuals from communities and organizations across Canada – and the ICE Network – a collaborative space for people working to advance Indigenous clean energy projects and Indigenous participation in the clean energy sector.
Flexible  Funding Mechanisms
The Impact Canada Initiative’s Terms and Conditions for  Grants and Contributions (Ts&Cs) are built in a flexible manner to support  departments in their experimentation with prizes, challenges, micro-funding,  and outcomes-based and innovative programming approaches using grants and/or  contributions. Under the ICI, challenges take place within the same basic  structures and rules as other funding mechanisms, but have distinct features  that differentiate them from traditional programs (see Table 4). This may  include instances where recipients are not known in advance and no agreement is  signed with a recipient in advance of achieving the outcomes set out in the  prize or challenge.
Literature indicates that there is no precise science to  setting the value of a financial prize, but it should be proportionate to the  investment innovators are asked to make in developing a solution as well as the  potential market value of the new product or service. The prize does not need  to cover the entire cost of the development but it does need to cover at least  some of the risks challenge participants assume. The amount and distribution of  funding devoted to the challenge model must be large and secure enough to shape  priorities and influence concrete action. A stage-gate approach, incorporating  shorter-term success milestones can facilitate interim progress and  collaboration between solvers to develop better quality prototypes or  solutions.
Table 4:  Comparing Challenges to Regular Government Funding Mechanisms
Traditional Funding Program
(Call for Proposals)
Impact Canada
(Challenge Model)
Principal Financial Instruments
Grants or Contributions.
Grants, Contributions,    or a blended mix of both.
Basis of Payments
Payments based on    estimated costs and activities incurred by recipients. Emphasis on paying for    eligible expenditures at lowest possible cost.
Awards are determined    based on the value of the prize or challenge and not related to eligible    expenditures or costs incurred by recipients. Emphasis on payments linked to    outcomes and/or milestones.
Approach to Assessing Potential Funding Recipients
Based on internal    assessments and scoring processes by government departments.
Blended methods,    including use of external juries of subject matter experts and judging    processes (with a high level of autonomy). Assessments based on    pre-determined and publicized outcomes criteria. Final prize may be based on    a pre-determined metric or comparative assessment (e.g., best in field).
Source:  Adapted from PCO,
Impact Canada Challenge Guide
(2021)
We found that the design and delivery of flexible funding  mechanisms under the ICI-CTS was consistent with these best practices and the  principles of flexible funding under Impact Canada. With a uniform emphasis on  payments based on outcomes, focus areas used a mix of micro-grants, grants and  contribution agreements. These funding decisions were informed by co-design and  through consultations with industry experts. For at least two challenges (PF  and WICT), there is evidence that the design of funding mechanisms was also  developed with consideration and comparison to other government-led funding  programs and/or inspiration from benchmark accelerator programs (e.g.,  Cyclotron Road fellowship program at the Lawrence Berkeley National Lab in  California) and signal checking against other prizes. Funding from NRCan was  not sufficient to fully advance technologies, nor was it intended to be. This  enhanced participants’ commitment to the success of the project as, with  exception of IODI, their organization(s) still had to assume some financial  risk. While projects needed to be scaled to the supports available, funding for  the ICI-CTS was generally perceived to be more generous than that available  from other government programs and/or to be well directed to fund a specific  gap not met by other programs.
STL’s Cross-Canada Flight Challenge was the only pure prize  challenge. Most other focus areas (including STL’s Green Aviation Fuels  Innovation Competition) used a stage-gated approach, with each stage building on  the previous and rewarding proponents for advancing their solution. Program  representatives perceived this to lower the risk related to each funding  agreement, as payments were split between milestones. Perhaps more importantly,  the design of this staged funding gave explicit consideration to how funding  could mitigate barriers to increase participation from diverse problem solvers  and help them advance in this problem space, regardless of the final outcomes  of each finalist. For example, the funding structure for Crush It! helped level  the playing field by awarding selected small-scale innovators $10K each to help  prepare and present their ideas to challenge jury. Similarly, NRCan and BEIS  offered support to small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) wishing to  participate in Power Forward to enable consortium-building and project  development activities, which could include feasibility studies. The WICT  challenge gave finalists an annual stipend and the IODI paid Clean Energy  Champions a salary to allow them to dedicate their time to their project. For  IODI, staged funding was also essential to address a need within communities for  up-front investment to reach the initiative’s objectives. Funding for the IODI  was also adjusted during implementation in response to feedback from Champions  and delivery collaborators, with a decision to issue micro-grants of $25K in  Phase 2 to address the issue of funding from Phase 1 contribution agreements  flowing more slowly than expected.
There is evidence that this design strategy was effective in  attracting solvers; participants across all focus areas perceived financial  supports as among the most important motivational factor in their decision to  participate.
7
This is particularly true for staged funding (including stipends and salaries),  with close to 94% of survey respondents identifying this as very important or  critical to their participation. By contrast, the final prize award was only  identified as an important motivation by 80% of respondents. This is consistent  with feedback during interviews, where finalists explained that their decision  to participate relied more on how far they believed their solution could  advance with the certainty of staged funding than a final prize that they were  uncertain to win.
The design and delivery of the financial supports was also  positively viewed by all interviewees, including finalists. In general,  interviewees appreciated the flexibility that the outcomes-focused funding  model gave to the proponents to determine how funds should be allocated  specific to their project. This approach was also perceived to lower the  reporting burden for proponents (compared to receipts-based reporting), which  allowed solvers to spend less time on administration and more time on advancing  their solution. However, milestone-based payments were also a new approach for  both NRCan and proponents, and respondents in both groups reported some  difficulty in determining how to define and report against relevant milestones.  This took additional up-front effort to resolve. While the majority of  interviewees were positive, there were also mixed views on the extent to which  in practice the timing of milestone-based payments more effectively supported  participation of SMEs; some final recipients noted that there could be more  flexibility in this area to meet the particular cash flow needs of each solver.  Some finalists also noted a possible barrier to participation from academia, as  the financial practices of most academic institutions do not allow for payments  based on milestones. The extent to which this is an issue would depend on the  nature of the specific challenge.
Across all focus areas, most finalists (particularly SMEs  and start-ups) noted that projects would likely not have been able to advance  or would not have advanced as rapidly without these funding supports. At the  same time, we found that the pathways to scale success in all problem areas  requires investment which exceeds the amounts that could be provided through  the ICI-CTS’ prize awards. This is consistent with the theory of  challenge-based models and program expectations, i.e., the funding provided by  the ICI-CTS was not expected to be sufficient to bring technology towards full  commercialization; it was intended to accelerate the process and help to  leverage follow-on investments. Given resources available, the development of  follow on strategies for participants to continue to build on their success  after the final prize award is outside the scope of the program. To date, only  WICT and IODI have secured and communicated a clear follow-on strategy. Even  so, while Champions for the IODI were clear that this is not meant to be a  competitive challenge, at the time of data collection there was still a lack of  clarity around how the final $9M would be allocated among communities. Some  interviewees perceived this to be increasing feelings of competitiveness as the  IODI moved closer to the final deadline.
Finalists across all focus areas perceived the absence of  clear follow-on strategies to be a gap. However, many proponents also perceived  the level of funding provided to advance their idea as a “stamp of approval” in  their solution by NRCan that they could use to entice further investment or  collaboration into their solution, thus accelerating results. The program is also  designed to increase intelligence (knowledge and application) of the state of  technology and of the innovation ecosystem. Moving forward, this intelligence  is available to inform perspectives for other programs and actors and may also accelerate  the design or implementation of parallel initiatives in related focus areas.
Proponent  Supports
Literature indicates that it is a best practice for  challenges to incorporate supports that build capacity within participating  organizations and mobilize further investment. A prize structure that offers  non-financial support such as support and advice from experts, access to  testing facilities, networking opportunities, and exposure to investors can be  particularly useful for challenges that require innovators to develop new  knowledge and capacities.
Similar to financial supports, we found that the design and  delivery of non-financial supports under the ICI-CTS was consistent with these  best practices and the broader principles of the Impact Canada Initiative. The  design of these supports was tailored to the needs of each focus area, as  informed by co-design and through consultations with industry experts. However,  perceptions of the effectiveness of non-financial proponent supports varied by  focus area (Table 5).
Survey results indicate that, where applicable,  non-financial proponent supports were much less important for motivating  participation than financial supports.
Across  all challenges, finalists indicated that the level of support required depended  on the existing maturity or experience of the proponent organization and the  Technology Readiness Level (TRL) of their solution (Box 3). Participants in WICT  and the IODI perceived non-financial supports to be somewhat more important in  motivating their participation, particularly access to experts, mentors and  capacity building (and in the case of WICT, business incubation support).
Box 3:  Technology Readiness Level (TRL)
Technology    Readiness Level (TRL) is a measure used to assess the maturity of evolving    technology during its development and in some cases during early operations.    The lowest level, TRL 1, indicates that information already learned from    basic scientific research is taking its first step towards a practical    application. A technology at the highest level, TRL 9, has been fully    incorporated into a larger system, has been proven to work smoothly, and is    considered operational.
Overall, there was also a significant difference in  perspective among finalists and semi-finalists; semi-finalists were generally  much less satisfied with non-financial supports.
8
Satisfaction in supports for networking and outreach was higher than satisfaction  for capacity building and technical support. However, no respondents identified  difficulties in accessing any of these non-financial proponent supports.
Table 5:  Perspectives on the Effectiveness of Non-Financial Proponent Supports
Proponent Supports
Perspectives on Effectiveness
Charging the Future
Limited to communications and outreach.
Plans for promotional content on challenge progress    were delayed by COVID-19. While not supporting challenge delivery, validation    of final solutions by an expert panel during final project evaluation    perceived as very valuable to leverage investment in solutions    post-challenge, regardless of whether participants win the final prize.
Crush It!
Networking and presentation of solutions at showcase    events.
Collaboration from CEMI to build the innovation    ecosystem and support commercialization.
Overall, finalists suggested that NRCan could have    better designed or delivered supports to align with their needs as a specific    cohort of solvers.
The majority of finalists reported that showcase    events underachieved; those who had existing networks in mining did not make    new connections and those who did not found networking at these events to be    a challenge. COVID-19 negatively impacted events hosted after March 2020.
Finalists also noted that they did not or could not    access commercialization support from CEMI. However, CEMI did provide support    to semi-finalists and other organizations within the mineral processing    innovation ecosystem to improve broader ecosystem outcomes (in accordance    with the aim of its contribution agreement). Perspectives of these organizations    were not captured by the joint engagement, and could have provided additional    insight into the effectiveness of CEMI’s support.
Sky’s the Limit
NRCan supported GARDN to create an online platform to    facilitate networking on SAF, including a dedicated space to discuss STL.
Networking opportunities for proponents were perceived    to be important to build consortia, particularly given the nascent nature of    the SAF ecosystem.
Networking during the co-design phase has also led to    better connections among federal players engaged in SAF. While not a direct    support to participation, the federal government is now looking to identify    its procurement needs for SAF, which could help incent investments and    advance the commercialization of solutions post-challenge.
Power Forward
Collaboration from UK BEIS and British High Commission,    MaRS, and Trade Commissioner Services (in Canada and UK) to support    international consortium-building (e.g., virtual matchmaking, trade missions,    market intelligence products).
Networking and presentation of solutions at showcase    events.
There is evidence that consortia-building supports    benefited a broad range of companies. While all agreed that supports for    international engagement were valuable to mitigate barriers to participation,    some finalists indicated that they did not make use of these supports.
Survey results indicate a potential gap between    successful and unsuccessful applicants. When asked about barriers to    participation, unsuccessful applicants indicated that they lacked awareness    of networking events and/or perceived that more were required to connect    companies with potential collaborators.
Women in Clean Tech
Collaboration from MaRS to provide expert advice,    capacity building, and business incubation support.
Networking and presentation of solutions at showcase    events.
Access to support from federal labs to test solutions.
Finalists for WICT were very positive about the    business incubation and networking supports provided by MaRS.
MaRS consulted with finalists to build a customized    series of skills training workshops, including technical and    business-specific knowledge. However, some finalists suggested a need for    more flexibility to self-select which training to attend based on    pre-existing knowledge.
Mechanics of agreements with federal labs were a    challenge. Finalists appreciated this support but some wanted more    flexibility in use of funds
Indigenous Off-Diesel Initiative
Clean Energy Champions participate in 20/20 Catalysts,    a hands-on training program.
Ongoing in-kind support from both NRCan and ICE (e.g.,    training and networking).
Opportunity to engage with mentors.
Work completed by the Pembina Institute to identify    and help resolve policy barriers to energy projects.
All interviewees indicated that capacity building was    critical, well designed and well delivered to support participation in the    IODI, especially from ICE.
In-kind support for navigating government processes    and networking was widely appreciated and generally perceived as effective.    Clean Energy Champions indicated that webinars and other information provided    to help them advance their projects was well designed and timed to proactively    address their needs. At the time of data collection, they had not yet all    engaged with their assigned mentors.
While the Pembina Institute’s support was positively    perceived by both NRCan representatives and collaborators in the IODI, a few IODI    finalists indicated that they were still not clear on this organization’s role.
As indicated in Table 5, one of the innovations being tested  by the ICI-CTS was the use of federal labs to support challenge delivery  (included as a support for WICT). Providing access to these resources presents  an opportunity to mobilize new players in the clean tech ecosystem as federal  labs have more expertise and equipment than some smaller firms or consortia may  have access to on their own. For WICT, the use of labs as a design feature  included implicit assumptions that: (1) finalists supported by the challenge  required the support of federal labs; and (2) there was a research centre whose  equipment and expertise would be a good match for each finalist. Overall,  interviewees agreed that there was value to finalists in accessing federal lab  support and that this helped speed up technology advancement. However, the  specific mechanism used to secure and fund this support federal lab support was  new for NRCan, i.e., Science and Technology Assistance for Cleantech (STAC)  model (Box 4). Finalists’ projects are also very diverse, addressing solutions  in very different clean tech sectors and stages of business development (TRL). Respondents  reported that it was thus difficult to match and negotiate agreements with each  distinct lab given Canada’s lack of centralized lab structure, with finalists  perceiving that there could have been better or more coordination between  program staff and federal labs in the lab matching process. There is also  evidence that it took time to resolve issues related to administrative  procedures and finalize funding agreements with each lab. As a result, some  STAC collaborations started early and ended early in the program; whereas,  others started late and will end late in the program (e.g., the finalists were  announced in September 2018, but one lab agreement was not signed until  February 2020).
Box 4:  Science and Technology Assistance for Cleantech (STAC)
Developed as part of NRCan’s Clean Growth Program    that launched in 2017, STAC is intended as a means by which the federal    government can further support and accelerate outcomes for Canada’s clean    tech sector. The STAC model is directed at SMEs, which typically face    capacity gaps impeding their ability to advance their technologies and    services to market, such as a lack of technical expertise, research    infrastructure, and cash flow. STAC helps to address these gaps by allowing    recipients (SMEs) to access the substantial and unique science and technology    resources that exist at federal research centres. Agreements made using this    collaboration model enable NRCan to transfer operational funding for the non-financial    contribution of science and technology services directly to the relevant    federal research centre, with the use of funds driven by the needs of the    recipient and expected to be mutually beneficial to the results of the    project.
We also found some evidence of a greater demand for access  to federal labs. In absence of this as part of challenge design, a small number  of proponents in STL and CTF independently engaged federal labs as partners to  support their work on a fee-for-services basis (not supported by money from  NRCan). While not an issue created by ICI-CTS, some indicated this as a  potential barrier to mobilization of new talent as private industry does not  always know how to access services from federal labs, or even what equipment or  expertise may be available.
What We Found –  Processes and Controls
Summary of Key Findings:
Overall, we found that processes and controls are in place    to support compliance with relevant departmental guidance and the TB
Policy on Transfer Payments
. We also    found that key financial operational controls have been designed and    implemented and are operating effectively most of the time.
Selection Process.
Across all focus areas, documentation was available to support proponent    assessment in alignment with the selection and evaluation criteria. For Crush    It! an opportunity was noted to improve the completeness of documentation    surrounding the decision-making process that takes place through consensus    meetings. In addition, there was an opportunity to improve the retention of    documentation available for focus areas that used a delivery agent as part of    the assessment process (i.e., WICT).
Compliance of    Funding Agreements.
The development of funding agreements were found to    satisfy TB and NRCan policy requirements, and aligned with the PCO Ts&Cs    for the ICI. The program consulted with corporate functions (i.e. Legal and NRCan’s    CoE on Gs&Cs) to assist with the review of select agreements and obtain    the necessary endorsement, where required.
Risk-based Accountability    Structure.
Impact Canada’s risk-based recipient audit plan was identified    as a component of the broader OERD-level plan. Program identification of    auditable agreements was found to align with NRCan policies and procedures on    the recipient-audit process, with consideration to the inherent risk ratings    of the agreements. The OERD risk-based audit plan identifies both active and    planned recipient audits. While it uses NRCan’s Agreements Module Interface    (AMI) to capture audit related information (i.e. status, findings and    recommendations), the program’s process for tracking, managing and resolving    issued recommendations is not clear, including how this information is shared    and communicated.
Payment Compliance.
We assessed whether payments    were made in accordance with their respective funding agreements and in    compliance with relevant sections of the
Financial    Administration Act
(FAA). All samples selected were noted to be signed by    the appropriate individual with a valid financial signing authority and    adhered to the required stacking provisions.
Proactive    Disclosures.
For all 25    sampled agreements examined, proactive disclosures were found to be verified    for accuracy prior to publishing, received approval for reporting, and were    publically disclosed. However, for 12 of 25 sampled agreements, the    publishing of the proactive disclosure information was not performed within    its respective reporting period, as required by the TB
Guideline on the Reporting of Grants and Contributions Awards
.
Conflict of Interest (COI)
. We found that across all focus areas,    considerations were made for COI among selection/evaluation committee members    and/or juries. This ranged in form, from individually signed and completed    COI attestation forms to the inclusion of COI consideration through Committee    or Jury Terms of Reference (TOR) documents.
Selection Process
Pre-determined assessment  criteria were generally found to have been finalized and communicated prior to  challenge launch across all focus areas. The criteria were found to contain  clear and detailed eligibility and assessment information, which was publically  communicated to interested parties in advance through online publication,  supported by Ministerial announcements. However, we did identify the following  opportunities for improvement for focus areas that used a delivery agent as  part of the assessment process:
For the IODI, the majority of the eligibility  and assessment criteria were developed in advance of challenge launch. Selection  criteria for the first phase of this Initiative, led by ICE, were found to have  been finalized after launch but prior to any selection/evaluation process. The  finalized assessment criteria did not deviate significantly from the  eligibility criteria previously developed. Further, consistent with co-design  principles, information on the nature of the eligibility criteria were shared  and discussed with potential applicants through engagement sessions before they  were finalized.
For WICT, where assessment criteria were  developed by MaRS, there was an opportunity to clarify how these criteria were  to be applied to applicant’s proposals as part of the assessment process.
For each focus area, we found an evaluation committee and/or  Jury was established to review and assess applications. However, a complete and  finalized listing of committee membership was not always available in  documentation provided. Although a listing of committee members is not a  requirement, it is an overall good practice as it helps to ensure information  is available, documented, and complete.
We also noted that documentation was generally sufficient to  satisfy selected proponent’s assessment against the selection criteria of the individual  challenge or initiative; however, there were a few instances where this documentation  was missing or incomplete. For Crush It!, an opportunity was noted to improve  the availability of documentation surrounding the decision-making process that  takes place through consensus meetings. For WICT, there was an opportunity for  NRCan to improve its retention of documentation related to the process  completed by MaRS as an external delivery agent.
Funding Agreement Compliance
The NRCan Center of Expertise (CoE) on Grants and  Contributions (Gs&Cs) is responsible for providing guidance and advice  related to Gs&Cs within the following areas: Treasury Board submissions,  program, risk, and agreement management, policy and procedures, service  standards, financial systems, and recipient audit and evaluation. In fulfilling  its mandate, the CoE’s roles and responsibilities extend to the development of  tools, guides, checklists and other sources of information to assist program  managers in administering their transfer payment program in addition to  providing training to all employees on the management of Gs&Cs.
NRCan has developed documentation, tools, templates and  processes to assist program managers when launching new programs and drafting  contribution agreements. The CoE established the NRCan
Guide on Grants and Contributions
, a resource that outlines policy  instruments, processes, templates and tools, on-line training and expert  advice. The CoE supports programs by ensuring staff have the tools, advice and direction  in the management of transfer payment programs and the use of public funds. The  NRCan
Guide on Grants and Contributions
contains  several resources to help guide program managers in their development of grant  and contribution agreements, including tools/templates for generating and  amending grant and contribution agreements. The contribution and grant agreement  generators, along with their schedules, provide users with a standard NRCan  approved template for use when drafting agreements.
A  sample of funding agreements were selected and reviewed in order to determine  whether they were developed in accordance with TB and NRCan policies,  directives and guidelines. The agreements examined included representation  across the six focus areas under the ICI-CTS, and included a selection of both  grant and contribution agreements. Overall, we found that the majority of selected  agreements reviewed satisfied the requirements for their development. The  program consulted with corporate functions (i.e. Legal and CoE) to assist with  the review of select agreements and obtain the necessary endorsement, where  required.
Risk-Based Accountability Structure
Recipient  audits serve as component of the continuum of activities that should be used  for ongoing monitoring activities by program staff. The CoE on Gs&Cs has  developed an NRCan
Guide on Recipient  Auditing
(last updated February 2020) to provide guidance to program  managers on their roles and responsibilities for recipient auditing and a Recipient  and Project Risk Management Model (RPRMM) in order to assess the risk of  projects. According to the RPRMM, recipients having an overall high-risk level  may be subject to mandatory recipient audits, with a random selection of  recipient audits for recipients that have low-to-medium risk levels.
Overall,  we determined that the OERD has developed and implemented a broad, branch-level  risk-based recipient audit plan, which incorporates the selection of projects  through the ICI-CTS and follows the CoE’s RPRMM. This plan is updated annually  through a call-out exercise, whereby project managers consider factors  throughout an agreement’s administration, including new or emerging risks,  perceived issues, or concerns that may arise, for possible inclusion. The  risk-based recipient audit plan was found to provide a snapshot of both active  and upcoming audits, and, includes a selection of recipients for audit  consideration identified as part of mandatory random probability sampling for  moderate-to-low risk recipients.
The  engagement team also confirmed that recipients selected for audit are captured  within NRCan’s Agreements Module Interface (AMI), a database containing  departmental information on Gs&Cs agreements. The AMI system allows users  to track recipients selected for audit, the status/completion of the audit,  findings, and lessons learned, however, the information captured is minimal in  nature. Given that completed audits and their recommendations do not appear to  be formally tracked and monitored as part of OERD’s recipient audit plan, or  through other developed mechanisms, it is not clear how recommendations are  managed and resolved. In the absence of a process to track and monitor audit  recommendations, the Program’s ability to consider the results of past audits  and apply lessons learned to future projects may be limited. In addition, while  the recipient audit plan considers recipients for mandatory random probability  sampling, we were not able to determine the methodology and selection process  to inform the random selection of these recipients.
Payment Compliance
The engagement team reviewed a sample of 25 funding  agreements across the six focus areas to determine whether funding agreements  comply with relevant FAA requirements. The findings of this examination are  outlined in Table 6.
Table 6:  Compliance of Payments with FAA Requirements
Examination     Results
Issues noted
Section 32
All 25 sampled agreements or amendments were signed by    an individual with the appropriate delegated financial authority.
N/A – No issues noted.
Section 34
All    25 sampled agreements or    amendments were signed by an individual with the appropriate delegated    financial authority.
For one instance tested, the Section 34 certificate    contained a signature that was not valid at the time of signing due to a    system error. This certificate was later signed by an individual with the    appropriate authority.
N/A – No issues noted.
Stacking    Provisions
All 25 sampled agreements or amendments met the    stacking provisions per the ICI Ts&Cs and their respective funding    agreements.
N/A – No issues noted.
Section 33
All 25 sampled agreements or amendments were signed by    an individual with the appropriate delegated financial authority.
One instance where Section 33 approval    occurred after payment release.
Two Section 33 QA Checklists were unavailable    for review due to office closures stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic.
General inconsistencies were noted between the    completion of the Section 33 QA Checklist across paper and electronic forms.
Management letter issued to CMSS with Section 33    related findings and areas for consideration.
General inconsistencies were noted between the    completion of the Section 33 Quality Assurance Checklist across paper and    electronic forms; however, the NRCAN Finance group is aware of this and    efforts are currently underway to enhance electronic forms.
Proactive Disclosure
The
Access to  Information Act
(ATIP) requires the  public disclosure of information related to grants and contributions with a  value over $25,000 (as well as those Gs&Cs under $25,000 that are amended  with a value exceeding $25,000) to be published in electronic form. The Treasury  Board of Canada Secretariat (TBS)
Guideline  on the Reporting of Grants and Contribution Awards
supports the proactive  disclosure information requirements under the ATIP and provides guidelines in the identification, collection,  publication and monitoring of Gs&Cs data.
Although the requirement for the Government of Canada to  proactively disclose the awarding of Gs&Cs information is not new, Bill  C-58, which received Royal Assent in 2019, included amendments to the ATIP  (Section  87) to require that Gs&Cs information be reported within 30 days after  the reporting quarter in which the funding agreement is entered into. For all  25 sampled Gs&Cs agreements examined, proactive disclosures were found  to be verified for accuracy prior to publishing, received approval for  reporting, and information related to these Gs&Cs agreements were all publically  disclosed. However, for 12 of 25 sampled agreements, the proactive  disclosure was not performed within its respective reporting period, as  required by TBS. The NRCan CoE on Gs&Cs monitors the status and timelines  of Gs&Cs information to be disclosed, and has implemented a call-out  process reminding Programs of upcoming cut-off dates. In instances where  information is not available by the quarterly due date, it is escalated and  reporting to senior management and posted in the following quarterly batch.
Conflict of Interest
The NRCan Guide to Transfer Payments contains high-level guidance related to the requirements for the selection of members responsible for the review and evaluation of applicants’ proposals. Required practices include ensuring the evaluation committee is established prior to reviewing applicant proposals, includes three or more persons, and that its members are separate and independent. The  onus is on Sectors to determine whether real or perceived conflict of interest (COI) considerations exist.
Through our review of documentation of the  selection/evaluation committees and jury members, evidence was available to  support program consideration for COI across all focus areas. We found COI  considerations were included and documented in various forms, including  individual COI attestation forms, or consideration for COI through the  selection/evaluation committees’ or juries’ terms of reference. Overall, it was  evident that the selection/evaluation committee and juries (where applicable)  included consideration for COI among its members.
What  We Found – Expected and Unexpected Outcomes
Summary of Key Findings:
It is too soon to indicate whether intermediate and    ultimate outcomes will be achieved. Finalists are progressing towards    outcomes specific to their project and are achieving progress milestones.    Semi-finalists also indicated that they continue to advance their projects at    or beyond the pace they expected when they decided to apply. Most    non-finalists indicated that they are continuing to advance their solutions;    however, the extent to which this can be attributed to Impact Canada is    unclear.
The design and delivery of all    focus areas considered and worked to increase collaboration and investment,    enhance public awareness, mobilize new talent, and address barriers to    participation of new and/or smaller players. Calculation of results against    most NRCan indicators was not possible given data available. Impact Canada    uses innovative approaches that necessitate new methods and strategies for    measuring program outcomes and impacts. While a notional performance    framework was included with program approvals, NRCan is still working on its    own and with PCO to enhance this framework and to develop challenge-specific    outcomes and related methodologies. Difficulties in the design and    application of performance metrics still need to be resolved. While these    gaps limit what the engagement can conclude related to progress on immediate    outcomes, available evidence suggests that progress has been made in each    area.
We examined the extent to which the ICI-CTS  is making progress towards program-level immediate outcomes identified in its  draft logic model (Figure 2). These include:
Increased  collaboration in key technology challenges and projects, as evidenced by the  development of collaborative networks and partnerships.
Increased  investment by stakeholders in the clean tech ecosystem, as evidenced by the  ratio of funding leveraged.
Increased  awareness and participation in clean tech, as evidenced by an increase in  non-traditional proponents and collaborators (i.e., mobilization of “new  talent”).
Increased public awareness of clean tech issues  among Canadians, as evidenced by the reach of communications.
As  described in earlier sections of this report, there is evidence that the design  and delivery of each focus area considered and worked to achieve these  immediate outcomes. While the calculation of results against most NRCan  indicators is not possible given data available to this engagement, evidence  suggests that the ICI-CTS is making progress in each area.
Performance Measurement
Impact Canada uses innovative approaches that necessitate  new methods and strategies for measuring program outcomes and impacts. Literature  indicates that key differences in the design of challenge-based models also  extend to performance measurement. By design, challenges are outcomes based  initiatives, wherein key performance indicators are the challenge assessment  criteria. As a result, some of the incremental and proxy indicators that are typically  used to assess progress of traditional programs are not necessary. If the  result is not achieved, the funding is not awarded.
This does not mean that additional performance metrics are  not required. Consistent with its broader objective to accelerate the use of  innovative and experimental approaches across the Government of Canada, the ICI  seeks to understand how the challenge approach itself adds value as a public  sector instrument (as compared to traditional ways of doing business).  According to PCO, there is a need to generate better evidence that the  perceived risks of running a challenge, and the level of investment that is  required to run them, is justified by the achievement of better outcomes.  Ongoing monitoring of performance against key metrics is also important to  accountability, ensuring that senior management receives comprehensive updates  of the program’s performance as it progresses.
In 2017, funding authorities outlined a notional performance  framework for the Impact Canada Initiative as a whole, as well as specific  outcomes and targets for the Clean Technology Stream. Each focus area was also  to have its own unique set of goals and performance targets, with performance  information to be collected on an ongoing challenge-by-challenge basis. Given  the broad range of possible pathways that challenges and individual projects  could take, OERD indicated that work on these methods could only start once it  had a clearer indication of the specific innovation pathways and solutions to  be pursued.
In 2019, PCO released a first set of guidelines for impact  measurement in support of its work under Impact Canada.
9
In  2020, PCO released a logic model that presents a basic theory of what Impact  Canada expects to achieve with its broad suite of challenges.
10
The outcomes in this logic model are consistent with the original framework  approved in 2017. These include:
Immediate outcomes related to the challenge  process – i.e., enhanced public awareness, mobilization of new talent, and  building of collaborative networks and collaborative arrangements;
Intermediate outcomes related to development of  sustainable business models – i.e., increased investment, enhanced skill and  capacity, and development of innovative products, services, or technologies;  and
Ultimate outcomes linked to socioeconomic and  environmental benefits for Canadians.
NRCan developed a draft logic model for the ICI-CTS in  2019-20 (Figure 2). In March 2021, OERD indicated that it still working  separately and with PCO to enhance the related performance measurement  strategy, including additional indicators, methods, data sources and potential  counterfactuals, with an emphasis on methods for tracking results post-program  (other than self-reports). OERD is also still working towards developing more  challenge- and solution- specific outcomes and methodologies that will allow  for more precise and sensitive monitoring of results following the announcement  of grand prize awards. Currently, OERD is working with others (e.g., PCO,  Statistics Canada, and the University of Alberta) to explore methodologies to  measure the outcome of programs, including use of quasi-experimental methods  that combine Impact Canada program data with administrative / statistical data  to assess key outcomes for challenge participants against comparator groups.  PCO is also collaborating with Statistics Canada to conduct a horizontal impact  assessment of challenges across the federal government, using quantitative and  qualitative data. However, program managers noted that overall progress in this  area has been delayed due to resource constraints and COVID-19, further complicated  by the lack of existing methods for effectively tracking and measuring  intermediate-and long-term effects of prize-based challenges.
Within this context, program managers for the ICI-CTS are  aware that numerous difficulties in the design and application of performance  metrics still need to be resolved. The engagement found that these include but  are not limited to:
Lack of  Program Comparators.
A key question for the ICI-CTS is whether the  challenge model worked better than known alternatives. However, for most focus  areas, there are no bundles of projects in core programming against which to  make a relevant comparison. Where comparison may be possible, results may be  skewed by the design of OERD’s core programs. For example, prior or concurrent  OERD funding calls often intentionally support the same technology or proponent  at different stages of innovation, and therefore may have higher results by  default. Other programs (e.g., NRCan’s Energy Innovation Program) often use  very targeted funding calls that may limit the pool of applicants, thus  limiting their relevance as comparators for proposed metrics such as the number  of applicants per dollar of NRCan funding. The ICI-CTS’ challenges also do not  have the same matched funding or (with exception of consortia-based challenges)  collaboration requirements as traditional programs, which could also skew  comparisons.
Definitional  Issues.
Performance metrics include some basic terms that still require  better definition. For example, who is included in the definition of “new  talent”? Does this include just the main applicant or all project partners? In  what ways does an organization need to collaborate in order to be considered a  “collaborator”? Do inputs from growing consortia count as leveraged  investments?
Expected  Results Expected to Evolve.
Metrics related to business model outcomes such  as investment and collaborative arrangements are expected to evolve over time  and are subject to increase or decrease. Baseline data on related metrics was  collected with applications, but progress towards outcomes requires frequent  updating throughout delivery and for an extended period post-challenge award. It  may take several years to be able to detect any changes in outcomes as compared  to counterfactuals. This makes it significantly more challenging to track and  benchmark progress.
Limitations  in Project Reporting.
There are  ongoing reporting obligations for semi-finalists and finalists designed by the  challenges. We observed that the templates for milestone reports were set up to  collect data that would track progress but, for reports that were on file, the  nature and quality of the information collected varied significantly – for some  focus areas, reports provided few details that could be used to support  performance measurement, with some sections left blank.
11
Project reports may also be insufficient for collecting data on longer-term  outcomes or spin-off results, particularly if these results come from solvers  that were not semi-finalists or finalists. The nature of the prize-based  challenges is such that OERD cannot mandate follow-on reporting as it can with  traditional funded projects. Quasi-experimental tracking methods do not rely on  project reports but will likely require access to business or charitable  registration numbers that were not consistently collected as part of  applications.
Gender-Based  Analysis Plus (GBA+).
There is no indication of gender specific metrics and  data collection in place (other than as it relates to challenge eligibility for  IODI and WICT). However, program staff indicated that both OERD and PCO are working  with Statistics Canada to collect gender, equity, diversity and inclusion data  at the firm level.
Measuring  the Effectiveness of Failure.
NRCan’s draft logic model for the ICI-CTS  focuses both on the results to be achieved by each focus area and the use of innovations  to develop solutions to specific problems. As with traditional programs, the  theory of change presented by this logic model is oriented towards the  achievement of outcomes (i.e., success). However, in a challenge model, failure  to arrive at a solution and award the final prize may also be a perfectly acceptable  experimental outcome. How can challenge-based models best capture the effectiveness  of this failure?
While NRCan  has collected some data as part of applications and project reports, as  noted above, the nature and level of detail of this data is inconsistent across  focus areas and contains information gaps. Raw data has not been subject to  analysis to date. These gaps limit what the engagement can conclude related to  progress on immediate outcomes.
Increased Collaboration
Literature suggests that a key benefit of challenge models  derives from strengthening the problem-solving community to encourage closer  collaboration and long-term innovation. The ability to increase collaborative  networks and partnerships in the program’s focus areas was identified as  critical given the nascent state of the related innovation ecosystems in  Canada, and the ICI-CTS created opportunities to build networks and  partnerships among their communities of solvers (and in some cases end users  such as commercial airlines) as an integral part of the process.
In the ICI-CTS’ notional performance framework (2017), NRCan  targeted year-over-year progressive increase in the number of partnerships  developed and an increase in the number of partners per dollar spent than  comparable bundles of projects under core programming for each challenge.  Calculation of results against these indicators is not possible given data  available. However, there is strong evidence to suggest that finalists are developing  their own formal and informal partnerships among diverse stakeholders. The  extent and scope of these collaborative arrangements varies by challenge and by  project.
Many finalists highlighted that they established new  relationships across the ecosystem that would not have occurred or would have  occurred more slowly in the absence of the ICI-CTS. Factors contributing to  their success in this outcome area included networking supports and increased  visibility. Finalists in consortia-based challenges (PF and STL) indicated that  the requirement to form collaborative arrangements was beneficial but also  presents some risks (e.g., ongoing partner commitment). Finalists in WICT and  the IODI also noted the importance of support for networking among peers in  their cohort.
NRCan also undertook significant efforts to identify, engage  and connect players during the co-design and application phases. For example,  data indicates that semi-finalists in Power Forward collectively established  approximately 186 new connections (prospective partners) as a result of  networking events in January 2019 and 70 new connections in June 2019. However,  in contrast to results for finalists, less than half of all non-finalists  surveyed indicated their collaborative networks or partnerships increased as a  result of participation (Figure 4). Of survey respondents who indicated that  they had formed new connections (n=28), only 13.2% indicated that NRCan or a  collaborator had played an important role in facilitating these connections.  These results were more or less consistent across focus areas.
Figure 4: Change in collaboration resulting from ICI-CTS reported by survey respondents
Text Description
Figure 4: Change in collaboration resulting from ICI-CTS reported by survey respondents
Strengthened existing partnership(s)
12.8 %
New partnership(s) within own sector
19.1 %
New partnership(s) with other sectors
10.6 %
Partnerhip(s) have not been affected
38.3 %
Strengthened existing network(s)
8.5 %
Expanded network(s) within sector
14.9 %
Expanded network(s) with other sectors
27.7 %
Collaborative network(s) have not been affected
42.6 %
For the purpose of performance measurement, NRCan defined  “partners” as project participants other than NRCan or the applicant  organization. However, many challenges also engaged collaborators to continue  to identify and build ecosystem connections throughout challenge  implementation. This includes NRCan’s support to GARDN to create an online  platform to facilitate networking on sustainable aviation fuel, and to CEMI to  build new linkages across Canada’s mineral processing innovation ecosystem. The  result is better mapping or networking of the innovation ecosystem for these  focus areas. There is also evidence that external collaborators and federal  players are now better connected. These connections can now be leveraged by  NRCan and other organizations to advance future initiatives.
Increased  Investment
As  noted earlier in this report, funding from NRCan through the ICI-CTS was not  sufficient to fully advance technologies, nor was it intended to be. Further  investment in clean tech solutions is required to continue to advance  solutions, regardless of the final prize. Literature indicates that challenges  should incorporate supports that mobilize further investment and generate new  opportunities for solvers. The design of the ICI-CTS’ focus areas incorporated  opportunities to connect and build relationships with investors (supports  varied by challenge).
In  the ICI-CTS’ notional performance framework (2017), NRCan expected NRCan  program funding for each challenge to be leveraged by participants at a ratio  of more than 1:1 (including financial and in-kind investments) and an overall  ratio of investments higher than that observed in core programming. However,  none of the focus areas included a requirement to obtain matched or leveraged  funding as a criterion for application. Rather, consistent with literature on  prize-based challenges, NRCan anticipates that participants will accrue  investments and in-kind support as projects advance, via networking and  collaboration events, increased publicity, etc. While still supportive of  Indigenous communities sourcing additional investments, NRCan has also  explicitly excluded the IODI from its targets in this area.
Again,  calculation of results against these indicators is not possible given data  available. However, there is evidence indicating that most finalists’ projects  have leveraged such investments, at least to some extent. For example, one  finalist reported having raised over $5M from government and private sector  sources since joining WICT. Evidence suggests that participants in PF and STL  had generally made the least progress in this area, with finalists indicating  that it was a challenge to attract investment in these areas at the  technology’s current level of maturity (TRL) or given other market and  regulatory barriers. However, further leveraging across all focus areas could  reasonably be expected as projects continue to advance.
The  nature of a challenge is also such that the majority will not win. Funding  under the ICI-CTS was available to support a limited number of participants.  Program representatives indicated that they forwarded the more promising  proposals of some non-finalists to other potential funders, such as via the  Clean Growth Hub.
12
Among all non-finalists and semi-finalists  surveyed, only 7.8% indicated that their proposal was referred to another  program or initiative. Nevertheless, among respondents indicating that they had  continued to advance their project, 55.2% indicated that they had secured new  sources of investment (financial or in-kind) since applying for the challenge.
Most  non-finalists and finalists could not directly attribute increased project  investment to Impact Canada (e.g., some had previously or concurrently applied  to other funding programs) but finalists acknowledged that their success in  this area was facilitated by the reputational “stamp of approval” gained by  participation in the program. Finalists perceived being selected among  finalists as validation of project potential that serves as a positive signal  for investors and customers, particularly for prospective investors that were  not familiar with the innovative technology being advanced by the project.
Mobilization of New Talent
Literature indicates challenges are strategically generally  run in an open and transparent manner to encourage broad participation among  diverse actors, in order to produce a wide range of potential solutions.  Inclusive innovation invites diverse groups of people outside the existing or  established innovation ecosystem to participate in solving public-facing  problems, on the assumption  that this will also bring new perspectives, skills, ideas, resources, etc.  Extra provisions are required to draw out and engage traditionally  underrepresented solvers. Challenges feature low barriers to entry to help  entice entrants with lower capacity or those who may otherwise be uninterested  in the burden of traditional application and reporting processes associated  with many government grant and contribution programs.
There is evidence that the design and delivery of all focus  areas considered and worked to attract new talent and address barriers to  participation of new and/or smaller players, including in some cases a specific  focus on underrepresented groups (e.g., women and Indigenous people). NRCan  engaged with collaborators to facilitate this outcome, many of whom were also  new to collaboration with NRCan or have taken on new or expanded roles in  supporting the innovation ecosystem as a result of the ICI-CTS.
Beyond involving a range of stakeholders in program design,  innovations in the application process were perceived by program  representatives and finalists as facilitating the participation of new talent.  Many smaller organizations and underrepresented groups can experience barriers  to application writing, such as a lack of experience or human resource capacity  given the time burden required to develop detailed proposals. Indigenous  communities may face additional barriers for applications such as internet  bandwidth (particularly in remote areas), language barriers, and competing  priorities during culturally important periods of the year (hunting, fishing,  and celebrations). Timing of application may also be important for some female  entrepreneurs, where intake periods can compete with priorities such as school  holidays. Overall, there was clear design consideration for how application  requirements could be streamlined to reduce burden for applicants, with the  application process tailored to the specific design and target audience of each  focus area. All applicants had access to information (e.g., process maps and  applicant guides) and support as they worked on their applications to ensure  project readiness. Selection processes for many focus areas also included  features such as applicant interviews and pitch events where semi-finalists or  a short-list of applicants had the opportunity to directly explain their  proposal to the jury or selection panel.
The majority of proponents reported a positive impression of  the application process, but satisfaction of finalists and non-finalists  differed for some aspects of the process (Table 7).
Table 7:  Comparison of Finalists’ and Non-Finalists’ Perspective on the Innovative Application  Process
Finalists’ Perspectives
Non-Finalists’ Perspectives
Clarity of Application Requirements
Vast majority    satisfied. General appreciation that the outcomes-focus was flexible to    accepting more innovative solutions and did not give preference to specific    technologies.
Majority satisfied but    a small number indicated that what to expect in the application process could    have been better communicated
Ease of Application Process
Majority found ease of    application easier or less burdensome than previous experiences with federal    funding.
Majority found the ease    of application to be “about the same” as previous experiences with federal    funding. Given the innovative nature of the new technologies being advanced,    some wanted more flexibility in the application form to fully explain their    idea.
Timing of Application Process
Majority satisfied that    they had adequate time to complete initial application but timelines to    develop pitch presentation were tight for some finalists.
Majority satisfied that    they had adequate time to complete initial application.
Supports for Application Process
Finalists across all    focus areas commended the support that was available from NRCan (or MaRS) to    complete the application.
Mostly neutral on the    utility of supports. Webinars and information sessions reported as most    useful for challenges; e-mail or telephone support reported as most useful    for the IODI.
Evaluation of Proposals
Majority satisfied.    Criteria drove some finalists to define aspects of their solution that had    not been previously considered.
Only 54.2% satisfied    with the clarity of evaluation criteria. Many wanted more feedback from the    evaluation committee or jury.
Both finalists and non-finalists noted that the cost to  putting together an application makes it important to ensure that the  application process is scaled to reflect (1) the value of each challenge’s  financial supports and (2) the likelihood of being selected as a semi-finalist  or finalist. While application was generally recognized to be less burdensome  than other funding programs, some respondents indicated that the level of  effort required to complete an application under the ICI-CTS (including pitch  presentation where applicable) may have still posed a barrier for applicants  who are unable to commit significant time or funding to the application  process. This may be a particular barrier for early stage applicants, i.e.,  those with less experience or a lower level of base funding. Three focus areas  did provide funds to help capacity stretched organizations (SMEs, small-scale  innovators and Indigenous communities) prepare their proposal. Respondents  suggested that this sort of support could have been extended to more challenges  or participants, or be made available earlier in the application process, but  this may not always be appropriate given types of solvers or feasible given  timelines. Some also suggested that the ICI-CTS could have mitigated barriers  by providing more information on what to expect in the application process,  e.g., improved application templates (including examples of information  required).
Respondents for the IODI (participants and non-participants)  did not perceive any significant barriers to the application process, other  than in some cases the availability of their own time. Interviewees identified  a capacity issue with not having enough qualified people in their communities  to focus or advise on completing applications, which means that they often have  to rely on external consultants to complete funding applications. They  perceived that these difficulties were largely addressed by the simplicity of  the application process and support from program staff for the IODI.
In the ICI-CTS’ notional performance framework (2017), NRCan  expected that increased awareness and participation in clean tech would be  demonstrated by a achieving a higher number of applicants per dollar of NRCan  funding and a higher proportion of “unconventional” applicants than for  comparable funding calls under core programming in the same technology areas.  Unlike increased collaboration and increased investment, the program did not  expect to achieve its targets for the mobilization of new talent until 2028.  Our engagement found early evidence that new talent has been mobilized by the  ICI-CTS but related results are currently difficult to quantify.
NRCan has defined “unconventional applicants” as those who  do not typically apply for NRCan clean tech programs. The vast  majority of finalists interviewed were able to compare the application against  their experience with other federal programming, which indicates that these  finalists are not new to federal funding programs. Similarly, only 16.7% of  surveys respondents applying on challenges indicated that they had not  previously applied for funding from the Government of Canada. However, that  they applied does not mean that they received funding. Previous funding  experience may have also been for a different solution or in a different  sector.
More importantly, we found the  ICI-CTS’ definition of new talent may be too narrow. There are many other ways  that “new talent” and “non-traditional proponents” can be defined. Interviews  and survey data provide some proxy indicators on the extent to which new talent  has been mobilized to date in other ways:
New Field  or Sector
. In total, 20.4% of survey respondents indicated that they had  applied to participate in a focus area that represented a new field or sector  for them or their organization. All of these responses were related to CI! and  WICT. By contrast, the majority of respondents for STL and PF indicated that  their organization was already working on a solution to the issue addressed by  the challenge at the time of application. These results are similar to  responses provided by finalists during interviews. However, while some  interviewees for STL had previous experience working with biofuels, they  clarified that the challenge has pushed them to consider more seriously SAF as  part of their business. Similarly, Power Forward had a focus on systems  integration, meaning that by definition the solutions would already need to be  in progress.
New /  Smaller Players
. A large number of finalist organizations were SMEs or  start-up businesses. Statistics Canada’s
Survey  on Financing and Growth of Small and Medium Enterprises
(2017) offers the  first-ever snapshot of the financing and growth activities of clean tech small  and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in Canada.
13
Results reveal that the profile of SMEs operating in the clean tech sector were  larger and older than all SMEs, were more likely to seek financing, and their  financing requests were generally approved. This may also explain why so many  applicants and finalists were not new to federal funding programs, and supports  the idea that this narrow definition of new talent may not be the best  indicator.
Underrepresented  Groups.
Two focus areas were specifically designed to support  outcomes for underrepresented groups; the processes and capacity support built  into WICT and IODI helped attract and maximize the participation of women and  Indigenous communities. Evidence indicates that they have both been successful  in mobilizing new talent. Efforts to spotlight these participants’ clean tech  and clean energy projects are designed to further inspire participation within  these target groups.
More generally, data from Statistics Canada’s survey indicates that ownership  of clean tech SMEs tended to be less diverse than that of all SMEs. In 2017,  this survey found that clean tech SMEs tended to be majority owned by men  (81%), compared with 64% of all SMEs. Clean tech SMEs were also less likely to  be majority owned by visible minorities, Indigenous peoples and people with a  disability. Similarly, 18% of clean tech SMEs had primary decision makers who  were born outside of Canada, compared with 25% of all SMEs. The flexible and  inclusive design of challenges under the ICI-CTS provide a greater opportunity  to address gaps from the broader lens of reconciliation, equity, diversity and  inclusion (REDI). However, as noted above the program has not systematically  collected data that would enable analysis of GBA+ consideration. Related data  collected by our engagement is also limited; it provides a profile for survey  and interview respondents but not the organization to which these individuals  belong.
Enhanced  Public Awareness
Enhanced awareness among communities of potential solvers is  a critical early success factor for challenges, important to both attracting  participants and influencing market demand. Over time, challenges can also have  the effect of communicating government priorities and better engaging the  general public on the broader policy issue(s) at hand. This can help generate  greater public demand or social licence for the challenge host to more  effectively deliver on its core mandate in the future.
Since 2017, the program’s social media strategy has focused  on the promotion of specific milestones in the challenges (e.g., challenge  launch, announcing finalists, challenge deadlines, etc.) and the ad hoc  amplification of challenge finalists’ content. Finalists have been invited to  proactively share links to online content showcasing relevant activities (e.g.,  project progress) that NRCan could echo on the PCO website and its own social  media platforms (Twitter, Facebook, and LinkedIn). Where applicable, videos  included in posts were also submitted separately as deliverables required by  the finalists’ contribution agreements (mid-project videos to report on  progress). In 2020, NRCan developed a further social media strategy aimed at  ramping up the promotion of challenges and finalists as they move towards the  selection of winners.
In the ICI-CTS’ notional performance framework (2017), NRCan  planned to measure increased public awareness of clean tech issues among  Canadians by the year-over-year progressive increase in social media by  channel. Program managers indicated that while this indicator may make sense at  the PCO level, this is not a realistic expectation for the ICI-CTS. This  program’s focus areas will have natural increases and decreases in attention  related to major announcements.
There was no data provided to the engagement that would  indicates a year-over-year trend in public awareness. However, there is some  evidence of data being collected. In 2020, NRCan’s CPS produced a social media  analytics report for the program, which indicates the reach of content across  focus areas and social media platforms. This analysis shows that posts related  the ICI-CTS performed relatively well in terms of both reach and engagement  rate, particularly when compared to the average for government content (Table 8).  The results specific to each focus area differ, with the highest engagement  rates for WICT and STL and the lowest engagement rates for Crush It! (perhaps  due to the very technical nature of solutions). However, the results provided  in the report do not cover communications beyond NRCan’s accounts, which may  have been extensive. While data is not available across all focus areas, data  reported by MaRS indicates significant reach for some communications (e.g.,  37,000 social media impressions related to posts for PF and 670,000 related to  WICT). One finalist for Power Forward also reported 7,000+ views on their  recent video post on Facebook.
Table 8:  Cumulative Reach of NRCan Social Media Communications, May 2018-April 2021 (All  Challenges)
Media
Number of Posts
Impressions per Post (Reach)
Engagement Rate (%)
Twitter
English
244
1,114,114
1.02
French
244
155,451
0.93
Facebook
English
40
630,229
0.16
French
37
142,393
0.03
LinkedIn
English
24
766
1.06
French
8
42
0.37
Note: Impressions per post    indicate the number of times a post is viewed. The engagement rate represents    the percent of people reached who found the post relevant enough to like,    share, comment, etc. An engagement rate above 0.9% is considered good for    organic government social media content.
Source:  Impact Canada Social Media Analytics Report (NRCan CPS)
There is also anecdotal evidence of traditional media  coverage and interest in NRCan’s challenges and finalists’ projects but a  detailed media analysis was not completed by the engagement.
Unexpected Outcomes
Our engagement also sought to identify whether any  additional or unexpected outcomes (positive or negative) have resulted from the  ICI-CTS. For the purposes of our engagement, this would include any results  other than those targeted in the performance framework. Our analysis in this  area is somewhat limited as it is challenging to identify unexpected outcomes  when the ICI-CTS’ performance measurement framework is still in development,  meaning that all expected outcomes have not been clearly identified and  documented.
Based on evidence available, the engagement did not identify  any negative unexpected results from the ICI-CTS. However, we did note a few  positive achievements. For example:
Across all focus areas, semi-finalists and  finalists indicated that their projects were generally advancing faster than  they expected when they decided to apply. While not entirely unexpected,  several non-finalists also indicated that the challenge had motivated them to  better organize or advance their proposed solution; two of these individuals  indicated that they had since received funding support through programs in  other jurisdictions.
For WICT, the “cohort effect” was highlighted  across interviews as a positive unexpected outcome. The cohort model of the  WICT challenge has helped the six finalists develop a mutually supportive  peer-to-peer network, despite being engaged in a prize competition. This  unexpected outcome was perceived to have accelerated the pace at which the  finalists’ projects are progressing.
Particularly for the IODI and WICT, interviewees  identified personal benefits of participation, e.g., that participation has  helped boost their confidence, leadership abilities, and provided new skills  that they can now expand to opportunities in other areas.
Lab representatives indicated having benefited from  the opportunity to learn about the current state of research across a range of  clean tech projects and where they are best placed to support further  development.
Our engagement was not designed to assess progress towards  intermediate and ultimate outcomes, as it is too soon to indicate whether these  will be achieved. Nevertheless, we found progress at least insofar as finalists  are progressing towards outcomes specific to their project; projects are  achieving expected project milestones. The key exception is STL’s Cross-Canada  Flight Challenge, where the challenge has closed without the pure prize being  awarded as no producer met all the criteria before the submission deadline  (January 1, 2021). However, this should be viewed as a lesson learned rather than  a failure on the part of the program (see Box 5). Across all focus areas,  finalists indicated that Impact Canada had contributed to the advancement of  their project. The majority indicated that they would not have been able to  move their solution forward without this support. While about 20% of finalists  interviewed for any given focus area indicated that they would still have  advanced their projects in the absence of the ICI-CTS, they nevertheless  believed that the pace of advancement would have been slower without this  support.
Box 5:  Lessons Learned from the STL Cross-Canada Flight Challenge
The STL Cross-Canada Flight Challenge was the only    challenge to use a pure prize. While the prize for this challenge was not    awarded, NRCan learned important lessons about how to design and deliver    challenges using this model.
NRCan was aware that there was a high risk it would    not award the final prize. The prize value of $1M was determined in co-design    to be substantive enough to incent participation while still limiting the    impact of failure on achievement of program outcomes (represents less than 2%    of the total budget for ICI-CTS). Impact on outcomes was also limited by    maintaining separation between the pure prize and STL’s Green Aviation Fuels    Innovation Competition.
The absence of a winner for this component also    confirmed that the SAF ecosystem was not ready at that time to support    production of “made-in Canada” sustainable aviation fuel (particularly given    impact of COVID-19). Success may have been achieved had the challenge left an    open end date for submissions, but NRCan’s parameters were bound by the    program’s time-limited funding profile.
Marking a key difference from traditional programs, the  results logic for the ICI-CTS suggests that progress towards outcomes should  also be observed in solvers who are not selected as finalists, albeit to a more  limited extent. The nature of a challenge is such that the majority will not  win the grand prize, however the challenge process might generate new  opportunities for the solvers that would not have otherwise transpired.  Non-winners may develop fruitful partnerships, promising prototypes, new business  processes, or attract other investments in their activities that all go on to  improve socioeconomic or environmental outcomes in their own ways. This is all  part of the impact of a well-designed challenge. In response to the  engagement’s survey, the majority of semi-finalists and unsuccessful applicants  indicated that they are continuing to advance their project (60.5%) or  different opportunities in a related area (19.8%). Semi-finalists in this group  indicated that they continue to advance at or beyond the pace they expected to  achieve when they decided to apply. The extent to which these results can be  attributed to Impact Canada is unclear given available evidence.
What We Found –  Factors Influencing Program Delivery
Summary of Key Findings:
There are a number of internal and external factors    influencing program delivery. Within its sphere of influence, the program has    been responsive to mitigate or address barriers to delivery.
We examined the extent to which the ICI-CTS  appropriately considers the internal and external factors that could impact its  ability to effectively or efficiently achieve its intended outputs and  outcomes. We found that the program has identified and  developed approaches to respond to internal and external factors that impact (or  are expected to impact) its delivery. These factors, together with  additional factors identified by our engagement, are outlined in Table 9. Some  of these factors, such as increased flexibility in decision-making, had a  positive influence on implementation. The use of a program stream (versus  individual challenges) enabled NRCan to build internal capacity, including a  team of dedicated human resources, and provided more flexibility to adapt along  the way. Other factors, such as COVID-19, had a more negative influence. We  found that within its sphere of influence, the program has been responsive to  mitigate or address barriers to delivery.
Table 9:  Factors Influencing Program Delivery
Internal    Factors
Novelty of Challenge Model.
NRCan (and PCO) learned    as it progressed in the implementation of this innovative program. As a    result, some key elements took longer than expected to design and deliver,    e.g., the negotiation of collaborative arrangements and milestones. Related    delays posed difficulties given the tight timelines for each focus area. This    was mitigated to the extent possible by early engagement with key internal    players (e.g., NRCan’s corporate services), as well as being informed by    lessons learned from benchmark challenge and business incubation models. Latter challenges such as CTF were able to    advance more quickly based on lessons learned from earlier challenges.
Complex Internal    Collaboration and Decision-making.
The ICI-CTS required broad involvement of decision    makers within NRCan and across central agencies. This led to some internal    challenges around interpretation, accountability and communication. For    example, as discussed under Governance, program representatives indicated that    the unfamiliar policy context resulted in fundamentally different interpretations    of the ICI-CTS Ts&Cs among key intradepartmental players. In addition, it    was not always clear whether corporate feedback was required for approvals or    was advice for consideration. The relationship with PCO under Impact Canada    umbrella was helpful to advance use of flexibilities but was also an added    layer of administration.
Cultural Barriers.
While OERD was advised by    PCO to interpret the Ts&Cs as needed, this was difficult in practice as    corporate services (e.g., legal, CoE) are inherently more risk averse. This    was mitigated by early engagement to ensure that corporate services understood    the program’s policy context and the expectations of executive management.    This resulted in some important learning by doing that can now be applied to    future programs (within NRCan and Government of Canada as a whole).
Flexibility in Design and    Delivery.
Flexibility in the program’s Ts&Cs allowed the ICI-CTS to work in ways    that would not be allowed in more traditional programs. Encouraged to be    innovative, OERD also looked for opportunities and took some calculated risks    that resulted in valuable mid-course corrections after the challenges had    already launched (e.g., by adding a sixth finalist for WICT and adding a    micro-grant for the IODI as a bridge between phases).
Relationship with    Collaborators.
Engagement of collaborators as the lead for planning and delivery on    large objectives helped accelerate results across focus areas. Use of collaborators    allowed NRCan to tap into their specialized support, skills and networks but    required NRCan to release some control of decision-making. Any related issues    were mitigated by good communications.
Internal Resourcing.
With plans to leverage    existing governance and program capacity, NRCan committed up to 10 FTEs to    the ICI-CTS, including a program manager responsible for delivery of the    program and one lead per challenge (a best practice). The actual allocation    varied by fiscal year, with the most FTEs allocated in 2019-20 (13.9 FTEs).    However, challenges take more time to develop and implement than a    traditional Gs&Cs program, and the administrative hurdles faced by the    ICI-CTS drew heavily on internal resources. In addition, some positions    envisioned in initial funding documents (e.g., dedicated communications and    evaluation support) were never resourced. These difficulties created a very    intensive staff workload that likely contributed to some of the gaps    identified by the joint engagement.
Quality of Staff.
Across all focus areas,    finalists acknowledged NRCan ICI-CTS team as being exceptionally responsive    and collaborative, actively looking for solutions rather than reiterating    program rules. This was perceived to be critical in facilitating the    challenge delivery process, helping to mitigate barriers to participation or    progress.
External    Factors
COVID-19.
Health restrictions,    economic turmoil and other uncertainty stemming from COVID-19 created    unexpected difficulties for proponents that impacted their progress – e.g.,    adjustments to remote work, unequal access to labs, issues with cash flow and    supply chains, loss of external partners or investment, cancellation or delay    of events and promotional communications, etc. NRCan (and MaRS) took steps to    understand the issues and identify the best possible mitigations. Box 1    identifies the concrete actions that were taken to support proponents, but    the ongoing engagement and support that program representatives provided (and    continue to provide) to each proponent to respond to their unique COVID-19    challenges is not easily captured. These decisions and changes to the program    were accompanied by hours of ongoing discussions with proponents to    understand the ever-changing dynamic of the pandemic. The supports, that    needed to be “right fitted”, were realized through professional and    compassionate engagement during a difficult time. While this support and    resulting flexibilities were welcomed, finalists perceived slow    decision-making to create uncertainties with impacts on project outcomes or    project costs.
Sector-specific barriers.
The nature of the    innovation ecosystem influences results for participation and investment by    stakeholders or ability to extend results. It is difficult for nascent    industries to align with market demands for the product (e.g., SAF and very    novel innovations), and there may be other technological, regulatory or    market barriers to overcome. For example, the battery industry, particularly    related to transportation, can be guarded on innovation to maintain    competitive advantage. The mining industry is relatively conservative and so    may favour known players. Though NRCan considered these barriers, not all    could be resolved by challenge design.
Decisions of External    Parties.
NRCan    can work to influence but cannot control the decisions of external parties.    For example, as a joint Canada-UK challenge, Power Forward required that    decision-making be shared to develop a challenge that would fit the needs and    capacities of both jurisdictions. Alberta Innovates launched a parallel SAF    challenge in 2019 that could have further accelerated results for STL, but this    was subsequently discontinued. The success of the IODI relies on ongoing    support from participating communities.
Motivation of Applicants.
Numerous external factors    influenced motivation to apply and participate in Impact Canada. Overall, besides access to financial    supports, the engagement’s survey results indicate that challenge proponents    were the most motivated to participate by the chance to advance their    technology, including its commercialization, followed by the alignment of the    challenge with personal or organizations interests. Most proponents indicated    that they would not have participated without these incentives. For the IODI,    all survey respondents indicated that they were    the most motivated by potential community benefits. Indirect community    benefits – e.g., job creation and health benefits – were reported to be more    important than energy security. The opportunity to improve environmental    outcomes was also ranked by most respondents as being very important.
14
This is consistent with feedback from finalists during interviews. The program responded by designing challenges in    outcome areas and with financial and non-financial supports that would be attractive    to applicants and mitigate barriers to participation.
What We Found –  Lessons Learned
Summary of Key Findings:
Perspectives on    challenge model.
Interviewees perceived the challenge model as effective    and appropriate, with the exception of IODI (where a competitive model was    found to be culturally inappropriate). There was no consensus on whether this    model should be replicated in the future. Decisions on when to use this model    should carefully consider the context and outcomes to be achieved.
Challenge    guidance.
At the outset, there was limited guidance from the Government    of Canada to inform design and implementation. NRCan has identified systemic    and departmental barriers to the use of flexible mechanisms. These lessons    learned have already fed into guidance released by PCO and should help    accelerate future use of related models by NRCan and bring new perspectives    to corporate practices.
Building on    progress.
The issues targeted by each challenge will not be fully    addressed by the ICI-CTS, nor are they intended to be. There is no one,    “silver bullet” solution to these complex problems. However, the ICI-CTS is    meant to help advance and accelerate solutions. Interviewees indicated    ongoing programming is necessary to maintain momentum and promote or    accelerate adoption of solutions. Specific proposals varied by challenge but    examples included further funding, support for market development, policy and    regulatory changes.
Replicating    success.
The challenge model may not be the only design element that    NRCan would want to replicate; NRCan has gained a lot of experimental    learning by testing additional innovations in each focus area. For example, the    co-design process added significant value to target key outcomes, including    consideration of specific barriers for the problem area. Programs and    supports for new talent are important to increase participation of new    solvers (e.g., SMEs) and remove barriers for underrepresented groups. Other    best practices are highlighted throughout this report. Future use of these    mechanisms need not be limited to challenge models.
What are the conditions required to  accelerate the use of the Impact Canada – Clean Technology Stream’s innovative  approaches to future interventions? Our engagement sought to identify best  practices and lessons learned through the design and delivery of the program’s  prize challenges and experimental design features that could support the  positive evolution of government systems to enable greater innovation. There  are various lessons learned highlighted throughout this report. This section  focuses on those lessons that are either overarching or not covered in previous  sections.
Perspectives on Challenge Model
Interviewees generally perceived the challenge model as  effective and appropriate given the objectives of the specific challenges that  were launched under the ICI-CTS, with the exception of the IODI (where design  ultimately recognized that a prize competition was inappropriate). Besides the  flexibility, visibility and capacity boost provided by financial and  non-financial supports, finalists expressed strong appreciation for the  accelerated timelines for decision-making that were a feature of challenge  delivery. However, there was no consensus on whether this model should be  replicated in the future. It is a new tool that provides an alternative to  traditional funding programs, but decisions on when it is appropriate to use  this model should be carefully considered in light of the context of the  outcomes to be achieved. PCO’s
Impact  Canada Challenge Guide
(2021) highlights that a challenge may not be the optimal  instrument choice if:
The solution to the problem is evident,  currently in the market, and/or the best choice for the solution provider is  clear;
The primary goal is to provide core funding or ongoing  support to build capacity to meet program objectives over a longer term;
The ultimate objective is to procure a solution exclusively  for the Government of Canada’s own use;
The subject matter is particularly sensitive for  stakeholders and an element of competition would detract from solving the  problem; or
There are regulatory or legislative barriers to  the uptake of solutions.
While the above are common examples, they are not hard  rules. For example, Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada (ISED)’s
Innovative Solutions  Canada
is a competitive, challenge-based research and development program  designed to solve internal departmental operational issues and/or to fill a gap  in the marketplace, with federal departments as the intended first (but not  necessarily only) customers.
It is also important to understand the needs and interests  of potential solvers. For example, WICT finalists gave more importance to  business incubation support than to the competitive aspects of the challenge  model. Respondents across challenges also noted that emerging clean tech is an  inherently risky field, and that the use of milestone payments may be best  suited to where there is a relatively high degree of certainty on how things  will roll out. Otherwise, flexibility is needed to ensure that emerging  developments (including technological developments or changes in international  standards) can be considered in (re)negotiation of the milestone schedule.
Challenge Guidance
While design of the ICI-CTS’ focus areas captured lessons  learned from benchmark challenges at the formative stage, at the outset of the  program there was limited guidance from the Government of Canada to draw from  to inform design and implementation. As a result, NRCan had to learn by doing,  which created some difficulties and delays. However, NRCan now has a number of  lessons learned that could help accelerate future use of related models by  NRCan (and other government departments) and bring new perspectives to  corporate practices. NRCan’s lessons learned have already fed into recent  guidance released by PCO as a resource to guide future programming. For  example, recognition of Indigenous innovation initiatives in PCO’s
Impact Canada Challenge Guide
(2021) emerged  as a result of NRCan and other federal departments’ engagement with Indigenous  peoples during delivery of the ICI.
Specific lessons learned (mostly compiled by NRCan program  representatives and supplemented by evaluation) include:
Ensuring  Early Engagement on Co-Design.
Co-creation is a foundational element to the  challenge model but two focus areas (support for SAF and to move Indigenous  communities off-diesel) were committed to in funding authorities before the  interventions were designed. As noted above, engagement with stakeholders in  the co-design phase led to the prize challenge model being deemed inappropriate  for the IODI. If possible, future interventions should undertake engagement  and/or consultation in advance of committing to a focus area.
Working  with the Fiscal Framework.
The Government of Canada’s fiscal framework is  not built for nimble programming. As shown in Figure 5, the program’s notional  funding allocation by fiscal year was determined in funding authorities at the  outset of the program, but the actual funding profile was designed with  subsequent stakeholder engagement in the co-design phase. Further amendments  were made in response to COVID-19. While there was relatively limited deficit  or lapse of funds in any given fiscal year, realignment of resources across  fiscal years required extensive use of the Annual Reference Level Update (ARLU)  reprofile mechanism, which was reported by program managers to be cumbersome  and resource-intensive. If possible, including a carry-forward provision in  funding authorities could simplify use of flexibilities in allocating funds  across fiscal years.
Figure 5: Evolution  of Expenditure Profile of ICI-CTS (Before and After Co-Design)
Text Description
Figure 5: Evolution of Expenditure Profile of ICI-CTS (Before and After Co-Design)
Infographic showing the evolution of  program expenditures before and after co-design in a five-year period, from FY  2017-2018 up to FY 2021-2022. The infographic encompasses four sets of data  that include for each FY, the Original Budget (Before Co-Design), Revised  Budget (After Co-Design), the Actual Expenditures and the Deficit / Lapse.
Budget original (avant    co-conception)
Budget révisé    (après coconception)
Dépenses réelles
Déficit/fonds    non utilisés
2017-18
1,314.0
1,110.0
1,109.9
0.1
2018-19
27,968.8
5,109.1
5,241.1
-132.0
2019-20
28,067.1
17,308.7
17,739.2
29.7
2020-21
15,953.4
25,908.4
21,859.0
3,597.3
2021-22 (YTD)
0.0
23,868.0
2,467.2
-5,047.3
Managing  Uncertainty.
NRCan experienced difficulties in managing uncertainty related  to the ICI-CTS’ innovative funding agreements. This includes uncertainty as to  whether the pure prize grant for STL would be issued, with the potential for a  resulting $1M in lapsed funds at end of program. This also includes the  difficulties in managing milestone-based contribution agreements where payments  are released once results are achieved. While the program must earmark these  funds in its budget as per the notional timelines in the agreement, this  creates a risk of lapsed funds if milestones are not achieved or are delayed  (the latter resulting in a need to find funds in the next fiscal year). Again,  if possible, including a carry-forward provision in funding authorities could  simplify use of flexibilities in allocating funds across fiscal years. The  accelerated timelines of a challenge model also provide less flexibility to  deal with unexpected events (e.g., COVID-19, replacement of participants). To  the extent possible, it is important to have contingency plans to deal with the  unexpected.
Overcoming  Cultural Resistance.
While encouraged by the principles of the Impact  Canada Initiative to implement innovative practices, the program was often met  with resistance when proposing to do things differently because it did not  align with conventional practices. This frame of thinking is common across the  government, and made it difficult for the program to reach a consensus with  corporate colleagues. A key lesson learned is that collaboration with corporate  services is crucial when implementing a new, innovative program. Corporate  services should be engaged early, as part of the program team, to enable them  to have the time to really understand the program and its objectives. Senior  management involvement is also required help manage expectations for the  program’s implementation, while ensuring that senior managers are also aware of  the limitations imposed by the broader policy framework. However, innovative  new mechanisms - e.g., flexible milestone agreements, use of contribution  agreements (vs. procurement) to develop collaborative arrangements, etc. – have  now been tested and demonstrated to facilitate solutions and build connections  in the innovation ecosystem in ways that advance the objectives of the  challenges. Experimental learnings from the ICI-CTS should be used to impart  new perspectives, modernize methods, and maximize efficiency in existing  corporate processes.
Understanding  Limits to Co-creation.
There are policies and directives in existing  frameworks (TB Policy and Directives) that limit the extent to which federal  programs can collaborate with external entities, including limitations in how  federal labs can collaborate with proponents. For example, the Government of  Canada cannot directly benefit or be seen to benefit from the outputs of a  contribution agreement or carry out any work that would suggest an  employee/employer relationship. This means that NRCan cannot work hand-in-hand  with co-creation organizations in the same way as may be done in external  challenge models; NRCan cannot receive direct advice from collaborators and  cannot direct collaborators in their activities. However, program  representatives for the ICI-CTS have found that with adjustments (e.g., by  using the term “collaborator” instead of “partner”, attending engagement  sessions hosted by collaborators that focus on broader context), the program  can achieve results similar to those intended in co-creation. While  collaborators should always be carefully selected through research and  engagement to determine who is best positioned to support results and benefits  to Canadians, small collaborators require funding since they do not have the  capacity to cover their resources but may also want ownership. Program  representatives perceive the ideal collaborator in this context as one who does  not need funds from the program to support the initiative (i.e., they see  enough value in it to use their own resources).
Staff  Skillsets.
Collectively, the ICI-CTS program team was perceived to have the  right mix of skillsets (e.g., project management, content expertise, etc.).  However, implementation has required OERD to rely on internal resources beyond  staff dedicated to the ICI-CTS; the level of resources necessary to deliver a  new program model should not be underestimated. Consideration should also be  given to ensuring that specialized skillsets are available to dedicated to aspects  of project management that pose greater complexities than in a traditional Gs&Cs  program, such as delivery on innovative communications objectives, and performance  measurement and impact assessment.
Building on Progress
For most focus areas under the ICI-CTS, one solution will  win the grand prize. However, the important issues targeted by each challenge  and initiative (Table 3) cannot be fully addressed by the challenge, nor are  they intended to be. There is no one, “silver bullet” solution to these complex  problems. The solutions stimulated by these challenges may not be sustainable  without further intervention. Interviewees indicated ongoing programming is  necessary to maintain momentum, promote and/or accelerate adoption of  solutions, both within and outside the Government of Canada. Suggestions varied  by challenge but finalists and collaborators did not necessarily think that  further funding was the answer – or at least not the only answer. Additional  proposals included support for market development, policy and regulatory  changes. Within OERD, it is understood that addressing barriers beyond  technology is often required. These barriers are identified in OERD by applying  its Innovation System Analysis Tool and associated methodology. We found that  NRCan has learned a lot about the ecosystems through delivery of the ICI-CTS –  how they work, where there are gaps, who the key players are – that can now be  used to build on success and make further progress in addressing these areas as  government priorities.
Replicating Success
NRCan has also learned a lot from its other design  experiments applied in each focus area (the “experiments within an  experiment”). The challenge model may not be the only design element that NRCan  would want to replicate. For example, the co-design process added significant  value to target key outcomes, including consideration of specific barriers for  the problem area. Federal research centres may have a larger role to play in  supporting RD&D. Programs and supports for new talent are important to  increase participation of new solvers (e.g., SMEs) and can remove barriers for  underrepresented groups. The testimonials from finalists illustrate the  importance of targeted opportunities like WICT and the IODI, specifically for  women and Indigenous peoples. Other elements we found to be best practices or  real strengths in the ICI-CTS are highlighted throughout this report.
Conclusion
We found that the ICI-CTS is relevant. The program aligns  with federal government and NRCan priorities, roles and responsibilities to  support innovations in clean technology, supports mandate commitments to  increase experimentation, and is structured to give more flexibility to proponents  to propose innovative solutions.
Overall, we found that governance structures, processes and  mechanisms for ICI-CTS were defined, established and operating effectively,  including internal reporting mechanisms. Processes and controls are also in place  to support compliance with relevant departmental guidance and the TB
Policy on Transfer Payments
, and are  operating effectively most of the time.
The ICI-CTS provided an opportunity to test innovative ways  to address problems for which solutions are not apparent, and generate evidence  of which efforts work best to create greater public value in areas of high  priority. Many of the ICI-CTS’ focus areas also incorporated numerous  experiments within this broader experiment, for example, testing new models of  Indigenous participation or new ways of working with international partners.
We found that the design of focus areas under the ICI-CTS  was consistent with principles of Impact Canada and best practices in challenge  models. Stakeholder engagement in co-design was recognized as a key strength  for the program. This allowed NRCan to target key issues while scaling the  challenge to what would be achievable by solvers, including consideration of  specific barriers for the problem area. The program was responsive to this  feedback and, while there was some room for improvement, the resulting funding  flexibilities and non-financial proponent supports built into the design of  each focus area facilitated participation from diverse solvers. While  communications could have been more innovative and better resourced, the  program attracted a sufficient number of quality proposals.
We examined the extent to which the ICI-CTS is making  progress towards program-level immediate outcomes identified in its draft logic  model, including increased collaboration and investment by stakeholders in the  clean tech ecosystem, increased awareness and participation in clean tech  (i.e., mobilization of “new talent”), and increased public awareness of clean  tech issues among Canadians. While available evidence suggests that progress  has been made in each area, the ICI-CTS uses innovative approaches that  necessitate new methods and strategies for measuring program outcomes and  impacts. A key difference in the design of challenge-based models is that if  the result is not achieved, the funding is not awarded. We found progress at  least insofar as finalists are progressing towards outcomes specific to their  project; projects are achieving expected project milestones. Regardless,  difficulties in the design and application of performance metrics still need to  be resolved. There is a need to generate better evidence that the perceived  risks of running a challenge, and the level of investment that is required to  run them, is justified by the achievement of better outcomes.
The issues targeted by each focus area will not be fully  addressed by the ICI-CTS, nor are they intended to be. There is no one, “silver  bullet” solution to these complex problems. While there is evidence of viable  pathways to scale success for each focus area, this requires dedicated efforts  that extend beyond the scope and timelines of the ICI-CTS. However, the program  is intended to help advance and accelerate solutions, both as a direct impact  of the solutions proposed in each focus area and by applying the intelligence  gained during implementation to inform other programs and actors, which may in  turn also accelerate the design or implementation of parallel initiatives in  related focus areas.
Overall, we found the challenge model to be a new tool that  provides an alternative to traditional funding programs, but decisions on when  it is appropriate to use this model should be carefully considered in light of  the context of the outcomes to be achieved. We expect NRCan to continue to apply  lessons learned from the ICI-CTS in its own design of future prize challenges  and other initiatives, whether under the umbrella of Impact Canada or as part  of a separate initiative. Future use of design elements that were found to be  strengths of the ICI-CTS (e.g., co-design) need not be limited to challenge  models.
Appendix A:  Engagement Sub-Objectives and Criteria
The objectives of this engagement are:
To  assess the extent to which the program’s design and delivery facilitates the  effective and efficient achievement of immediate results and complies with  relevant authorities.
To  identify and document lessons learned from the experimental approaches under  the Impact Canada – Clean Technology Stream that can be applied to future  interventions.
The following table identifies the questions addressed by the  engagement, as well as the sub-objectives and criteria used to conduct the  engagement:
Sub-Objectives
Criteria
Question 1:
Is the    Impact Canada – Clean Technology Stream relevant?
Sub-Objective 1:
To assess the extent to which the program is relevant.
1.1 The Impact Canada – Clean Technology Stream aligns with federal    government and NRCan priorities, roles and responsibilities.
1.2 The Impact Canada – Clean Technology Stream gave priority to the    selection of relevant challenges and initiatives, i.e., each challenge:
targets breakthrough solutions    that focus on transformative (i.e., not incremental), high-impact    improvements that break new pathways in clean technology;
demonstrates a high potential    for impact and significant benefits to Canadians;
demonstrates a high degree of    complementarity with existing government and non-government efforts in the    given problem space, including the viability of pathways to scale successes    (e.g., clearly identified opportunities for handoff to other government    programs, venture capital, etc.); and
demonstrates the ability to    leverage partners and resources to help design, deliver, or promote    participation in the prize or challenge, including via contributing resources    (e.g., additional prize funds, in-kind resources, etc.), acting as a conduit    to important stakeholder groups, or providing technical expertise.
Question 2:
Are    adequate and effective governance structures in place to support the Impact    Canada – Clean Technology Stream?
Sub-Objective 2:
To assess whether adequate and effective governance structures and    processes have been designed and implemented to support the achievement of    the Impact Canada – Clean Technology Stream’s outcomes.
2.1 NRCan roles,    responsibilities, and accountabilities are adequately defined and    communicated.
2.2 Program    progression is monitored and communicated to senior management and used to    inform future program phases.
Question 3:
To what    extent does the experimental design of the Impact Canada – Clean Stream    facilitate the achievement of intended outcomes?
Sub-Objective 3:
To assess how and for whom the Impact Canada – Clean Technology    Stream’s experimental tools are effective in facilitating the achievement of    intended outcomes.
3.1 The design and delivery of    inclusive innovation (co-design) facilitates the achievement of intended    outputs and outcomes.
3.2 The design and delivery of    communications and outreach strategies facilitates the achievement of    intended outputs and outcomes.
3.3 The design and delivery of    collaborator arrangements facilitates the achievement of intended outputs and    outcomes.
3.4 The design and delivery of    flexible funding mechanisms facilitates the achievement of intended outputs    and outcomes.
3.5 The design and delivery of    proponent supports (e.g., training, networking, etc.) facilitates the    achievement of intended outputs and outcomes.
Question 4:
Does the    delivery of program activities comply with relevant authorities?
Sub-Objective 4:
To assess whether adequate and effective processes and controls are    in place to support the Impact Canada – Clean Technology Stream’s compliance    with relevant departmental guidance and the TB Policy on Transfer Payments.
4.1 Selected    proponents meet the selection criteria of the Program.
4.2 Funding agreements have been    drafted in accordance with PCO-approved Program Terms and Conditions and the    Policy on Transfer Payments.
4.3 A risk-based accountability    structure has been designed and implemented to support monitoring and    reporting of funding agreements.
Sub-Objective 5:
To assess whether key financial and operational    controls have been designed and implemented, and are operating effectively.
5.1 Payments to    proponents have been made in accordance with funding mechanisms identified in    approved funding agreements and in accordance with the FAA.
5.2 Processes are in    place to ensure that appropriate disclosure of agreements is verified for    accuracy and approved prior to Web posting.
Question 5:
What have    been the outcomes (expected and unexpected) that the Impact Canada – Clean    Technology Stream has achieved to date?
Sub-Objective 6:
To assess whether the Impact Canada – Clean Technology Stream is    making progress towards its expected immediate outcomes.
6.1 There is    increased collaboration in key technology challenges and projects, as    evidenced by the development of collaborative arrangements and collaborative    networks.
6.2 New talent is    being mobilized to participate in clean technology, as evidenced by an    increase in non-traditional proponents and collaborators.
6.3 There is    increased investment by stakeholders in clean technology research,    development and demonstration (RD&D) projects.
6.4 There is    enhanced public awareness of clean technology problems or issues, as    evidenced by reach of communications.
6.5 There are    adequate performance measures and data collection procedures in place to    support the determination of effectiveness, efficiency and economy.
Sub-Objective 7:
To identify if any unexpected outcomes (positive or negative) have    resulted from the Impact Canada – Clean Technology Stream.
7.1 There is    evidence of additional (unexpected) outcomes.
Question 6:
To what    extent has the program been responsive to the internal and external factors    that (positively or negatively) influence its ability to achieve intended    outcomes and operate with efficiency?
Sub-Objective 8:
To assess the extent to which the Impact Canada – Clean Technology    Stream appropriately considers the internal and external factors that could    impact its ability to effectively or efficiently achieve its intended outputs    and outcomes.
8.1 The Impact Canada – Clean Technology    Stream has identified and developed approaches to respond to internal and    external factors that impact (or are expected to impact) its delivery.
Question 7:
What are    the conditions required to accelerate the use of the Impact Canada – Clean    Technology Stream’s innovative approaches to future interventions?
Sub-Objective 9:
To identify lessons learned that could support the positive evolution    of government systems to enable greater innovation.
9.1 There are best practices and lessons    learned through the design and delivery of the Impact Canada – Clean    Technology Stream’s prize challenges and experimental design features that    could be applied to future interventions.
Appendix B: Joint  Engagement Team
Chief Audit and  Evaluation Executive
Michel Gould
Evaluation Team
David Ash – Senior Advisor, Evaluation
Stephanie Kalt – Evaluation Manager
Christiane Ngo Manguelle, PhD – Senior Evaluator
Edmund Wolfe – Senior Evaluator
Harpreet Sahota – PARDP
Aishwarya Babu - PARDP
Audit Team
Linda Jones – Senior Director, Audit Operations
Katherine Venus – Audit Manager
Raj Brar – Senior Auditor
Nour Al Youssef - Auditor
Footnotes
1
. Note on Terminology: There are  important differences in the language used to describe Indigenous innovation  initiatives. Within this report, the joint engagement uses the term “focus  areas” to describe all of NRCan’s prize challenges and the Indigenous initiative  launched under the ICI-CTS. For simplicity, we also uses the term “finalists”  to describe proponents selected as final participants receiving funding to  advance solutions in these focus areas, including Clean Energy Champions and  their communities. However, we recognize that this term is normally not  applicable to the Indigenous Off-Diesel Initiative as it relies on a  collaborative rather than competitive model.
2
. This total does not include  additional funding provided by BEIS to their finalists.
3
. The use of the term ‘delivery agent’ throughout this report refers to ‘MaRS’ as  an intermediary; i.e., an initial recipient, redistributing funds to ‘ultimate  recipients.’ Initial recipients are defined as a recipients that are to further  distribute a contribution to one or more persons or entities, known as  ‘ultimate recipients’. The use of the term ‘agent’ does not infer any sort of  ‘agency’ arrangement between NRCan and MaRS.
4
. PCO’s Impact Canada Portal:
https://impact.canada.ca
5
. PCO
Logic model and narrative - Impact  assessment of challenges under Impact Canada
-
https://www.canada.ca/en/innovation-hub/services/reports-resources/logic-model-narrative.html
6
. One of six finalist teams from Crush It and  one of seven finalist teams from Power Forward declined to participate in an  interview. Interviews were only held with representatives of eight communities  participating in IODI. However, six additional communities opted to complete  the engagement’s survey. In all other focus areas, we interviewed one or more  finalists from each challenge or initiative.
7
. Only participants in the IODI did not rank this  as the primary motivation for participation. While they noted that funding was  critical to advancing their clean energy plans, most IODI participants  indicated that their primary motivation for participation was the potential  achievement of social and environmental benefits for their community.
8
. The engagement’s survey asked unsuccessful  applicants to provide input on the extent to which financial and non-financial  supports motivated them to apply to the ICI-CTS but did not ask them to comment  on the effectiveness of these mechanisms in supporting challenge delivery.
9
. PCO (2019).
Measuring Impact by Design: A Guide to Methods for Impact Measurement
.
https://www.canada.ca/en/innovation-hub/services/reports-resources/measuring-impact-design.html
10
. PCO (2020).
Logic Model and Narrative: Impact Assessment of Challenges under Impact  Canada
.
https://www.canada.ca/en/innovation-hub/services/reports-resources/logic-model-narrative.html
11
. It was not clear whether blank fields were a  reporting omission or an indication of no results to report.
12
. The Clean Growth Hub is a free service by the  Government of Canada that works with clean technology producers and adopters to  help find federal programs and services to advance clean tech projects.
13
. Statistics Canada (2017).
Survey on  Financing and Growth of Small and Medium Enterprises
.
14
. Respondents were not asked to provide additional  details. It is not clear if this importance was attributed to local  environmental impacts (e.g., air quality and mitigation of diesel spills),  global impacts (e.g., climate change), or both.
Report a problem on this page
Please select all that apply:
A link, button or video is not working
It has a spelling mistake
Information is missing
Information is outdated or wrong
I can't find what I'm looking for
Other issue not in this list
Submit
Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries,
contact us
.
Date modified:
2022-04-29