Summary of the Horizontal Evaluation of the of the Major Projects Management Office Initiative
Program Information
Established  in 2007, the Major Projects Management Office Initiative (MPMOI) is a federal  horizontal initiative involving 12 federal regulatory departments/ agencies and  led by Natural Resources Canada (NRCan). It consists of two main components:
Providing funding  to partner departments/ agencies to build their internal scientific, technical  and Indigenous consultation capacity to support timely and robust technical  analyses and Indigenous consultations; and
The Major Projects  Management Office (MPMO), housed within NRCan, which serves as a central  coordinating body for reviews of major projects across Canada.
Activity
NRCan (MPMO)
CEA Agency
ECCC
DFO
CIRNAC-ISC
TC
Scientific & technical expert capacity
-
Indigenous consultations
-
Proponent support & system integration
-
-
-
-
-
Policy and reporting
-
Legal support
-
-
Funded  activities of the MPMOI include, scientific and technical expert capacity,  Indigenous consultations, proponent support and system integration, policy and  reporting, and legal support. Five departments/agencies received funding to  deliver these five activities.
In  addition to examining the funded activities of the MPMOI, the evaluation  covered activities funded under the Interim Strategy for Pipelines and other  National Energy Board (NEB) Reviews (Interim Strategy). The objective of the  Interim Strategy was to support Government commitments to restore public  confidence in environmental and regulatory review processes while a broader  review of those processes took place. It consisted of specific  measures to ensure that reviews of major resource projects subject to NEB  review aligned with principles announced by the Government of Canada in January  2016. These principles were:
No  proponent would be asked to return to the starting line;
Decisions  would be based on science and traditional knowledge of Indigenous peoples;
The  views of the public and affected communities would be sought and considered;
Indigenous  peoples would be meaningfully consulted and where appropriate, impacts on their  rights and interests will be accommodated; and
Direct  and upstream greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions linked to the projects under review  would be assessed.
Resources:
Over this time period,  departments/agencies were allocated approximately $274.6 million (M), which  consisted of:
MPMOI.
$81.0M in new funding (in addition to  $164.9M in funding from existing departmental/ agency budgets); and
Interim Strategy.
$28.7M in new funding (in addition to  $13.0M in funding from existing departmental/agency budgets).
About the Evaluation
The evaluation covers the period from  2015-16 to 2017-18 and includes both the MPMOI and the Interim Strategy. Data  collection was conducted between July 2018 and February 2019.
Objective:
to assess the relevance,  effectiveness, and efficiency of the MPMOI, including the Interim Strategy. It  includes an assessment of the continued relevance and role of the MPMO.
Methods:
Document/data review and 52  stakeholder interviews with 68 individuals.
Evaluation Governance:
The  evaluation was supported by a Horizontal Evaluation Advisory Committee, chaired  by NRCan’s Audit and Evaluation Branch. It comprised representatives from the  evaluation functions at: Fisheries and Oceans Canada; Crown-Indigenous  Relations and Northern Affairs Canada-Indigenous Services Canada (CIRNAC-ISC);  Canadian Environmental Assessment Agency; Environment and Climate Change Canada  (ECCC); Transport Canada (TC); and the NEB. NRCan contracted PRA Inc. to  conduct the evaluation.
Legislative context:
Since the MPMOI was established in  2007, the legislative and regulatory regime for major resource projects in  Canada has evolved considerably.
Implementation  of
Canadian Environmental Assessment Act,  2012
(CEAA 2012) to improve the timeliness and predictability of the review  process, reduce duplication of project reviews, strengthen environmental  protection, and enhance Indigenous consultation. It also reduced the number of  responsible authorities from 40 to 3.
The  proposal for a new impact assessment and regulatory process, specifically Bill  C-69 and Bill C-68, fundamentally changing the legislation underpinning the  MPMOI (i.e., CEAA 2012).
What the Evaluation Found
Relevance
The MPMOI and Interim Strategy align  with:
Priorities  of the federal government, including those related to environmental protection, action on climate change, and reconciliation with Indigenous peoples; and
Priorities  and responsibilities of departments/agencies.
There is a continued need for  departments/agencies to provide scientific, technical, and Indigenous  consultation capacity to support major resource project reviews.
There is a continued need for  functions currently delivered by the MPMO, but disagreement about which entity  should be responsible for these in the future.
Effectiveness
No definitive conclusions on the  extent to which progress has been made towards outcomes due to a lack of  baseline and performance measurement data, and diverse perspectives from key  informants.
Nevertheless, there is some evidence  of progress related to the three outcomes assessed:
Coordination  of the regulatory review process for major resource projects;
Timeliness,  predictability, quality, transparency and accountability of regulatory reviews;  and
More  coordinated, consistent and meaningful Indigenous and public consultations.
Multiple factors, internal and  external to the Initiative, influence the ability of the Initiative to achieve  its expected outcomes: role of the MPMO; capacity and resources; public  expectations; economic/market conditions; and government priorities.
Efficiency
To the extent it provided support to  federal departments/agencies to fulfill their statutory obligations related to  major project reviews, the design was appropriate. However, given the  evaluation could not conclusively determine progress towards expected outcomes,  the design may not be optimal.
Due to limited objective information  on resource use, outputs and expected outcomes, the evaluation cannot conclude  on whether it is operating efficiently. However, there is no evidence to  suggest an alternative design would be more efficient or effective.
Deputy Minister and Assistant Deputy  Minister (ADM) committees, the key elements of the governance structure, are  seen as a main strength of the Initiative. However, there may be a need to  clarify the roles and responsibilities of these committees, their involvement  in issues resolution, and the nature of NRCan participation.
Some performance measurement  information is often insufficient to demonstrated effectiveness and efficiency.
Recommendation 1
NRCan should  work with participating departments and agencies to ensure continuation of  relevant activities currently performed by the MPMO. This process should be informed  by a comprehensive review of the Office’s mandate, roles and responsibilities  relative to the roles of other participating departments and agencies and/or  external stakeholders, and should include the following task:
Determine what entity or entities (including the  MPMO itself) should carry out roles and responsibilities currently performed by  MPMO going forward, with explicit reference to any pertinent legislative (i.e.,  Bill C-69) or other developments occurring or anticipated to occur at the time  the determination is made, and update the mandate as required.
Management Response and Action Plan
NRCan management agrees.
With the  coming-into-force of Bill C-69 and introduction of the new
Impact Assessment Act
(IA Act), many of the Office’s roles and responsibilities  related to coordination of the federal regulatory process for major projects  now reside with the Impact Assessment Agency of Canada (IAAC). Other roles, for  example, with respect to coordination of crown consultation, now lie with IAAC,  lifecycle regulators, or regulators.
Regarding  responsibility for horizontal policy issues, the mandate and authorities of IAAC  as set out in the IA Act, is to administer, coordinate, and develop policy  directly related to the IA Act.
NRCan has undertaken  a comprehensive review of the Office’s former functions and horizontal  coordination requirements and identified which entity or entities have  responsibility for these roles in the new legislative and regulatory  context.
NRCan,  working with participating departments and agencies, is pursuing a revised  mandate for the Office, which takes into consideration the new legislation, the  results of the review, as well as the broader context of Government priorities  related to Canada’s natural resource sector.
Responsible Manager – ADM, MPMO
Due Date – September 30, 2020
Recommendation 2
NRCan should  collaborate with participating departments and agencies to improve performance  measurement for the MPMOI. To ensure responsible departments and agencies can  demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of the MPMOI and Impact Assessment  and Regulatory Processes (IARP) the following steps should be taken (at a  minimum):
Revise  the logic model for the Initiative
to ensure that it clearly articulates  activities, outputs and expected outcomes (immediate, intermediate, and  long-term). This may include revising, removing, or adding activities, outputs  and expected outcomes to ensure clarity and avoid repetition.
Develop  and implement a set of performance measures
corresponding to the outcomes identified in the revised logic model.
The performance measures should enable monitoring of progress towards outcome  achievement; process indicators should not be relied upon as evidence of  outcome achievement, and indicators should be meaningful and relevant to  Initiative stakeholders and partners.
Strengthen  monitoring and reporting tools or practices
, to facilitate consistent  collection of performance information across departments and agencies, and enable  a clear understanding of progress towards outcomes or enable course correction  if the desired change is not seen. This should include establishing baselines  or benchmarks for expected outcomes, and identifying clear targets and dates to  achieve these targets.
Improve  tracking of financial and human resource information
. This should include:
Actual resource use from new and existing  department and agency budgets for major resource project reviews (including  trends over time); and
Allocation of financial and human resources to  various activities, corresponding to the activities identified in the revised  logic model.
Improve  public-facing project monitoring systems
to ensure that stakeholders and  interested members of the public can obtain and understand information about  major resource projects under federal review. This should include providing  easier access to information about project assessments (including the rationale  behind review decisions), as well as improving the functionality and timeliness  of public-facing monitoring systems to ensure accessibility of project-level  and aggregated information about major resource projects progressing through  the federal review system.
With the passing of Bill C-69 and  the implementation of the IARP, IAAC should also consider these improvements to  performance measurement and collaborate with participating departments and  agencies to ensure they are addressed for this new horizontal initiative.
Management  Response and Action Plan
NRCan  management agrees.
NRCan acknowledges the importance of  quality performance measurement to inform program management, improve  performance and provide transparent, clear and useful information on results  achieved.
As the horizontal MPMO Initiative  led by NRCan sunsetted at the end of FY 2019-20, it is no longer relevant to  make revisions to the performance measurement for the existing MPMOI.
NRCan will ensure that measures to  support the evaluation of effectiveness and efficiency are a key component of  any new program proposal put forward.
With the coming into force of Bill  C-69, IAAC has assumed responsibility for horizontal results tracking and  reporting on the new impact assessment and regulatory processes, including  monitoring and reporting on performance measures, and tracking of financial and  human resources.
Responsible  Manager – ADM, MPMO
Due  Date – Not applicable
Impact  Assessment Agency management agrees.
In 2018, IAAC (previously the  Canadian Environmental Assessment Agency) collaborated with eight other federal  departments and agencies to develop a Horizontal Results Framework (HRF) for  the IARP horizontal initiative. This HRF was approved by Deputy Heads from each  of the nine federal departments and agencies, including: IAAC, Canada Energy  Regulator (previously the NEB), NRCan, ECCC, CIRNAC, ISC, Health Canada, TC and  Fisheries and Oceans Canada. The HRF was approved by the Treasury Board of  Canada Secretariat in December 2018.
The Agency collects financial and  non-financial performance information bi-annually, to be published on the  Agency’s website as part of the Departmental Results Report (DRR) and  Departmental Plan (DP) processes. The first publication of performance  information will be with the 2018-19 DRR.
In fiscal year 2019-20, with the  coming-into-force of the IAA on August 28, 2019, the Agency further collaborated with the  above-mentioned departments and agencies to review targets, dates to achieve  targets, and where necessary, to strengthen performance indicators. These  updates will be published with the 2020-21 DP.
Moving forward, the Agency will  continue to collaborate with partner organizations to ensure ongoing monitoring  of performance of the horizontal initiative, and the availability of financial  and non-financial performance information to support annual reporting in the  DRR and DP, as well as to support future evaluations.
The Agency also continues to update  the Canadian Impact Assessment Registry (previously the Canadian Environmental  Assessment Registry) to: ensure the public has access to scientific and impact  assessment information; provide greater transparency in the decision-making  process; and provide public access to compliance and enforcement actions taken.
Responsible Manager - Vice-president, Operations, Vice-president, External Relations and Strategic Policy Sector, Vice-president - Corporate Services Sector
Due Date – March  31, 2020
Report a problem on this page
Please select all that apply:
A link, button or video is not working
It has a spelling mistake
Information is missing
Information is outdated or wrong
I can't find what I'm looking for
Other issue not in this list
Submit
Thank you for your help!
You will not receive a reply. For enquiries,
contact us
.
Date modified:
2021-03-29